THE Complete Herbal OF PHYSICAL PLANTS. CONTAINING All such English and
Foreign Herbs, Shrubs and Trees, as are used in Physic and Surgery. And to the
Virtues of those that are now in use, is added one Receipt, or more, of some
Learned Physician. The Doses or Quantities of such as are prescribed by the
London-Physicians, and others, are proportioned. ALSO Directions for Making
Compound-Waters, Syrups Simple and Compound, Electuaries, Pills, Powders, and
other Sorts of Medicines. MOREOVER, The Gums, Balsams, Oils, Juices, and the
like, which are sold by Apothecaries and Druggists, are added to this Herbal;
and their Virtues and Uses are fully described. By JOHN PECHEY, Of the College
of Physicians, in London.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1694.

THE PREFACE.
IN Compiling this English Herbal of Physical Plants, I have chiefly followed
Mr. Ray, both for the Descriptions and Virtues, who is an excellent Botanist,
and a candid Author; and though he be not professedly a Physician, it may appear
by his Writings, he has perused the best Authors in Physic, and well digested
them: And yet the good Man would not rely on his own Judgment, or Reading, but
took to his Assistance several worthy Practitioners in Physic, who all along
suggested the most probable Virtues of Plants, and their Success in Practice;
and ascertained the Doses of many of them, and added some Forms of Medicines.

What I have contributed to this Work, I confess, is the least Part: Some
Virtues, indeed, I have added, and many good Medicines; but those I borrowed
too. So that, upon a Review, I find little or nothing belongs to me, save only
the Collection, and Translation; and for that I expect Censure.

And therefore, in hope I may, at least, extenuate my Crime, I take Leave to
expostulate with my Adversaries. It Is well known, many are, with good Reason,
Authorized by the Spiritual Lords to practice Physic, who are only skilled in
their Mother Tongue, there being not learned Physicians enough to attend on the
Sick in these populous Kingdoms; for if there were, to be sure the Right
Reverend Bishops, who are eminent for Learning, as well as Piety, would of
Choice prefer the Learned.

Now, I say, it being evident that many Practitioners do not understand Foreign
Languages, and so, by Consequence, cannot partake of those Improvements that
are made abroad, or concealed at home, in a Language to them unknown, I suppose
no sober Man will blame me, or any other, for Writing or Rendering into English
such things as may be more generally conducive to the Health or Welfare of our
Country.

But it is to little purpose to appeal to sober Men, they being nowadays the
weakest and most contemptible Party, and so can yield no Protection: He
therefore that dares advance any thing for public Good, must expect public
Hatred. But, be it so; it is better to be beneficial to Men, than to be beloved
by them: And the solid Comfort of Well-doing infinitely surpasses the fleeting
Praises of the giddy Multitude: And no other Reward can the best Men receive,
as long as Men are encouraged in their Vices, by great and bad Examples. Yet it
must be owned, there is a Semblance of Virtue still remaining amongst us: Many
take care to give their Children good Education; the tender Infant, before he
can speak plain, lisps the Praises of his Maker: And he that should look into
public Schools, or Universities, and observe there these excellent Precepts
that are daily instilled into Youth, would believe that their Lives must be
ever after unavoidably influenced thereby; but then ('it is a sad Truth) many
vicious Parents, by their ill Examples, soon poison those wholesome Instructions;
and the Striplings are forced to abandon their Morals, to prove themselves
Legitimate.

So that he that should consider the strict Rules of Education, and the
Incongruity of Practice thereunto, would be induced to believe, that Men
successively banter one another, by proposing such Rules as they think are
either impracticable, or not worth the minding: And if so, Why does Man alone,
of all the Creatures on God's Earth, impose upon his Offspring? Why does he
not, with the milder Tiger, early instruct his Young Ones in the Art of Rapine,
and infuse such savage Principles as are more peculiarly agreeable to the
Humane Nature, that in due time they may exert them and act like Men? But if,
at first View, Men dread the fatal Consequences of an entailed War, and would
fain promote the Happiness of their Children, and the Peace of the World, let
them establish, by an agreeable Conversation, those Rules of Civil Life our
good Forefathers enjoined; for, after all, good Example, is more prevalent,
and more instructive than Precept; and the general Neglect of it is really the
Source of all our Miseries.

In the First Part of the following Herbal, I have only described such Plants
as grow in England, and are not commonly known; for I thought it needless to
trouble the Reader with the Description of those that every Woman knows, or
keeps in her Garden. And, because this Treatise is designed for general Use,
and, I hope, may be serviceable to Families in the Country, that are far
distant from Physicians, I have added an Explanatory Table, containing the
Terms of Art, and the Explication of them. But here the Reader is to be
admonished, that the Constitutions of Men are so various, and the Signs and
Symptoms of Diseases so abstruse, that it is very hazardous, in many Cases, to
administer Physic without the Advice of a Physician.

In the Second Part of this Book, which treats of Foreign Plants, I have made
no Descriptions of the Herbs, or Trees; for I account it unnecessary to
describe the Form or Shape of that, which most of us are never like to see.

The Gums, Balsams, Juices, and the like, that are particularly treated of in
this Part, contain the most eminent Virtues of the Plants or Trees from whence
they proceed; and are imported apart, and sold so by the Druggist, and make up
a good part of the Materia Medica; and therefore may well deserve to be handled
separately.

To be plain, There is little or no Curiosity in this Work; but I believe there
will be found more Practice in it, than in any English Herbal yet published.
The Virtues are faithfully delivered, and not so promiscuously as is customary
in Treatises of this kind: And the Medicines inserted were collected from the
best Authors, many of which I have found by Experience very successful.

To conclude, The Reader is desired to take notice, that some English Plants
being omitted in the First Part, were added in the Second; but the Index will
set all right, to which I refer him.

Reader, Farewell. John Pechey.
From the Angel and Crown in Basing-Lane, London, February the 2d. 1694.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Observations about Gathering Plants from the various Positions of the
Heavens, or Seasons of the Moon, are superstitious and vain. But I suppose, in
general, it is best to gather them when they are full of Juice that is well
concocted, and before the Fibers grow woody -- Choose a clear Day; and do not
gather them till the Dew is gone off. Flowers are best gathered when they are
full blown: Seeds, when they are ripe, and begin to dry. Fruits should not be
gathered till they are quite ripe. Roots are best gathered in the Spring, just
before they begin to spring. It Is best to dry Herbs in the Sun, though Physicians
generally order that they should be dried in the Shade.

The Explanatory Table.
A.
ACid, Sharp. Acrimony is a Quality that bites the Tongue, and heats it, as
Pepper does. Agglutinate, Glue together. Alexipharmick, Resisting Poison
Alternately, By Turns. Anodine. Gives Ease. Aperetive, Opening. Apozem, A
Decoction. Aqueous, Watery. Aromatic, Odoriferous, having a Spicy Smell.
Asthma, Difficulty of Breathing. Astringent, Binding. Attenuate, To thin.
B.
BItuminous, Of the nature of Pitch. B. M. Hot Water. Bulbous, Round-rooted.
C.
CApiliary, Hairy. Cardiack, Cordial. Caries, Rottenness. Carminative,
Expelling Wind. Cataplasm, Pultis. Cephalic, Proper for the Head. Cicatrices,
Skins. Cholera, A plentiful Evacuation of Choler, upward and downward.
Concreted, Thickened. Consolidates, Makes sound. Cosmetick, Beautifying.
D.
DEcant, To pour gently off, leaving the Settling behind. Diabetes, A vast
Evacuation of Urine. Diaphoretick, Sweating. Dilute, Made thin. Discuss, Drive
away. Diuretic, Force Urine.
E.
EBullition, Boiling. Effervency, Working. Emollient, Softening. Empyema, A
Collection of Matter in the Breast. Epatick, Proper for the Liver. Epithem, An
outward Application to the more noble Parts of the Body. Erotions, A Gnawing.
Errhine, A Medicine drawn up the Nostrils. Expectorate, Bring up Matter from
the Lungs.
F.
Faeces, Dregs, Fiber, String. Filtrate, To strain through a Paper. Flegmagoges,
Things that purge Phlegm. Frontals, An Application to the Forehead. Fungous,
Resembling a Sponge.
H.
Hysteric, Vaporous.
I.
INcide, To cut. Incarnes, Breeds Flesh. Inspissated, Thickened.
L.
LIthontriptick, Breaking the Stone. Linctus, A Medicine for the Lungs Lotion,
A particular Bath. Lubricating, Smoothening. Luxations, Members out of joint.
M.
A Mascatory, To provoke Spitting. Membranaceous, Fibrous. Millepedes, Hog
Lice. Mucilaginous, Slimy.
N.
NArcotick, Occasioning Sleep Nephritick, Belonging to the Reins. Nerve, A
porous Substance, like an Indian Ca^e.
O.
OBlong, Longer than it is broad. Obtuse, Blunt. Oedematous, Phlegmatic.
P.
PAlpitation, Beating of the Heart. Paralitick, Subject to the Palsy.
Paregorick, Disposing to Sleep. Perennial, Lasting. Pugil, As much as may be
held between the Thumb and two Fingers. Pulmonick, Proper for the Lungs.
R.
REsinous, Of the nature of Rosin. Rupture, Bursten Belly.
S.
SCirrhus, Hard Tumors. Sextary, Somewhat more than a Pint. Siccity, Dryness.
Soporifick, Gives Rest. Specific, A peculiar Remedy for some Disease.
Splenetick, Proper for the Spleen Spontaneously, Of its own accord Stagnate,
Stand. Stomachick, Proper for the Stomach. Styptick, Astringent. Sublimed,
Raised to the Neck of the Vessel. Succulent, Juicy. Sudorifick, Procuring
Sweat. Suppurating, Bringing to Matter.
T.
TAblets, The same with Lozenges. Thoracick, Proper for the Breast.
Torrification, Roasting. Triangular, Three-corner'd. Tumor, A Swelling.
V.
VEgetable, An Herb. Vehicle, Some proper Water. Viscous, Slimy. Umbels, Tufts.
Uterine, Proper for the Womb. Vulnerary, Healing.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 16. read Lamium, p. 28. l. 9. d. Vterine. p. 39. l. 12. r.
Officinarum. p. 96 r. Gromwel. p. 106. l. 16. r. Mi^us. p. 171. r. Polygonatum.
p. 203. l. 30. r. Gum Ammonia^um. p. 278. l. 24. r. Tacamahaca. p. 284. l. 36.
r. Use. p. 310. l. 1. r. Opium, see White Poppies. p. 315. l. 2. r. Pyrethrum.

THE English Herbal OF PHYSICAL PLANTS.
A
ABele-tree.
See Poplar.

Adders-tongue, in Latin Ophioglosum.
The Root has many thick Fibers, bound together; especially if it grows in good
Ground. It tastes at first sweet, but leaves an Acrimony and Bitterness on the
Palate. It has a tender Stalk, about an Hand high, which sustains one Leaf,
that is Oily, and without Nerves; sometimes narrow and somewhat long, sometimes
broad somewhat round and erect; of a sweetish and clammy taste. A two-fork'd
Tongue rises from the Leaf where it is joined to the Stalk, which grows sharp by
degrees, and is a little indented. It Is common in Meadows, and moist Pastures.
It springs in April, and fades in July.

It Is an excellent Wound-Herb, either taken inwardly, or outwardly applied. For
Ruptures, or Bursten Bellies, Take as much of the Powder of the dried Leaves as
will lie on a Sixpence, or less, according to the Age of the Party, in two
Ounces of Horse-tail, or Oak-bud-water, sweetened with Syrup of Quinces. Use it
every Morning for the space of fifteen Days. But before you enter upon the Use
of this, or any other Medicine, the Gut, if it fall into the Cod, must be
reduced by a Surgeon, and a Truss must be worn to keep it up, and the Party
must avoid all violent Motions, and lie as much as may be in Bed, or on a
Couch. Fabritius Hildanus says, That some have been cured of great Ruptures by
lying in Bed, when they could be cured no other way.

The Oil of it, made in the following manner, is full as good for Wounds and
Ulcers as that of St. John's-wort: Take one handful of the Leaves, pound them
in a Stone-Mortar, and boil them in a Pint of Oil of Olives 'till they are dry;
strain it, and keep it for use.

Common Agrimony, in Latin Agrimonia.
Most commonly it has but one Stalk, two or three Foot high, and sometimes much
higher. It Is round, hairy, full of Pith, surrounded with Leaves placed at a
distance alternately, above an Hand in length. The Leaves consist, for the most
part, of four little Leaves, winged on both sides, and much indented all about;
they have Veins, and are hairy, but the Down is not very conspicuous; they
taste a little acrid, and are somewhat styptick. The Flowers smell sweet; they
grow alternately to the Shaft, in a long Series; and upon the Top-branches,
like an Ear of Corn. They are of a Saffron-colour, and are composed of five
Leaves; at the Basis of every Leaf there are two Ears that embrace the Stalk.
The Root is blackish, thick, and of an astringent Taste.

It cleanses and strengthens the Blood, and opens Obstructions of the Liver;
wherefore it is good in Dropsies, for an ill Habit of Body, and the Jaundice.
Let those that are afflicted with these Diseases use for their ordinary Drink,
Ale or Beer wherein the Leaves of Agrimony have been infused. For instance; Put
eight handfuls of the Leaves into a Vessel containing four Gallons, drink of it
when it is clear. It Is used outwardly in Baths and Lotions.

The Powder of the dried Leaves is much commended by Riverius to prevent
involuntary Urine. Take of the Powder half a Dram, of Conserve of Roses a
sufficient quantity; make a Bolus to be taken at Bedtime, for the space of
three Weeks.

Alder-tree, in Latin Alnus.
It Is large, and spreads much if it like the place it grows in: The Bark is
brown, and the Wood redder than Elm or Yew; the Branches are very easily
broken; the Bark of the Branches is of a brownish Color and spotted, and
yellowish within, and tastes bitter and unpleasant: The Wood is white, and full
of Pith: The Leaves are broad, round, and nervous, and somewhat like the Leaves
of the Hasel-tree; they are indented, green, shining, and clammy. It bears
short, brown Aglets, like the Beech or Birch-tree. It grows near Water.

The green Leaves of this Tree applied to Tumors, discusses them, and takes
off Inflammations. Being put into Travelers Shoes, they ease Pain, and remove
Weariness. A black Color, like Ink, is made with the Bark of Alder, rubbed off
with a rusty Iron, and infused in Water for some Days. Some use it to dye.

Black Alder, in Latin Alnus nigra baccifera.
It Is a small Tree, which sends forth many straight Twigs from the Roots, about
three Yards high, of the thickness of the Thumb, divided into tender Branches.
The outward Bark is brown, but sprinkled with Sky-colour'd Spots; which being
taken off, another appears of a Saffron-colour. The Substance of the Wood is
clear, and easily broken; nigh the middle it is brownish, and has a great deal
of Pith. The Leaves are somewhat round, and end in an obtuse Point, and are of
a shining dark-green Color. The Flowers are small and palish. The Berries are
first green, then red, and at last black, and of an unpleasant Taste. It Is
often found in moist, woody Places.

The yellow and middle Bark, beaten with Vinegar, cures the Itch in a few Days.

The inward Bark, especially of the Root, purges Watery Humors; for which
Reason it is good in a Dropsy: But it ought to be dried in the Shade, because
when it is green it occasions Vomiting: And the Decoction of it ought to stand
two or three Days before it is used.

Alexanders, in Latin Hippocelinum.
It has a thick Root that is white within; it smells sweet, and tastes acrid,
and somewhat bitter. The Stalk is above a Yard high, full, branchy, channell'd,
and somewhat red. The Leaves are larger than the Leaves of Marsh-Smallage, and
the Pieces rounder: They are of a deep Green; they taste sweetish, and like
Garden-Smallage. It has Tufts or Umbels of white Flowers. The Seed is thick,
black, and channell'd.

It Is frequently used in Broths in the Springtime, to cleanse the Blood, and
strengthen the Stomach. The Root pickled is a good Sauce. Half a Dram of the
Seeds powdered, and taken in White Wind, provokes Urine.

Angelica, in Latin Angelica.
The Herb it self, but especially the Root and Seed, are hot and dry. It opens
and attenuates, and is Sudorifick and Vulnerary. It moves the Courses, hastens
Delivery, is good for Mother-fits, and in malignant Diseases, and for the
Plague; and it expels Poison. The Root of it is allowed by all Physicians to be
very cordial and Alexipharmick.

For Preservation against the Plague, the Root, infused in Vinegar, is to be
held frequently to the Nose, or chewed in the Mouth: For the Cure, Take one
Dram of the Powder of the Root alone, or half a Dram mixed with a Dram of
Venice-Treacle, every sixth Hour, to provoke Sweat.

The Root or the Stalks candied, are reckoned very good, being eaten in a
Morning, to prevent Infection. They are also useful in cold Diseases of the
Lungs, and take off a stinking Breath.

Lozenges to be held in the Mouth in the Plague-time.
Take of the Extract of the Roots of Angelica and Contra-yerva, each one Ounce;
of Extract of Liquorish three Drams; of Flowers of Sulphur, sublimed with
Mirrh, five Drams; of Oil of Cinnamon eight Drops; of fine Sugar twice the
weight of all the Ingredients; with the Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth, made in
Scordium. water, make Lozenges See Dr. Hodges, for the Prevention of the
Plague, in his Book of the London-Pestilence, p. 231.

Apple Tree, in Latin Malus.
The English Apples being accounted the best in Europe, I will mention
particularly those that are most esteemed amongst us.

First, Those that are soon ripe, and soon decay.
The Gineting, the Margaret or Magdalene, the King-Apple, the Aromatic or
Golden-Russeting, the Flax-Apple, the Spice-Apple, the Summer-Queening, the
Gono-farther or Cat's-head, the Good-Housewife or Bontradue, the Giant-Apple,
the Pome-water, the Summer-Pearmain, the Kirton-Pippin or Holland-Pippin, it is
called Broad-eye in Sussex; the Orange-Apple, the Summer-Belleboon, the
Paradise-Apple, the Famagusta, the Codling, the Costard-Apple, the Sops-in-Wine.

Secondly, Winter-Apples, and such as last long.
The Winter-Queening, the Quince-Apple, the Winter-Pearmain, the Nonesuch, the
the Pealing, the Leather-Coat, the Winter-John, the Pome-Roy, the Lording, the
Julyflower-Apple, the Pear-Apple, the Greening, Lones-Pearmain, the
Green-Russeting, the Red-Russeting, the Winter-Fillet or Violet, the
Winter-Belle or Bonne, the Oaken-Pin, the John-Apple or Deux Ans, the Westbury,
the Winter-Reed, the Flower of Kent, the Winter-Chesnut, the Maligar-Apple, the
Short-Tart, the Pelmell, the Thrift, the Winter-Clary, the Fig-Apple.

Thirdly, The Apples that are best for making Cider.
The Redstreak, the Bromsberry-Crab, the Golden-Pippin, the Gennet-moil, the
Westbury-Apple, the White and Red Mast-Apples, the John-Apple, the Vnder-Leaf
the Winter-Fillet, Elliots, Stocken-Apple, Bitter-Scale, Claret-Wine-Apple,
Arrier-Apple, Richards or Grange-Apple, Coling-Apple, Olive-Apple, Fox-Whelp,
Pippins and Pearmains mixed, the Gilliflower.

The Virtues of Apples are various, according to the different Tastes of them.
Those that are sour and harsh are astringent, and therefore are good in Fluxes
of the Belly: And when they are roasted they are proper Food for those that
have Fevers. Sweet Apples are somewhat hot, and loosening. Such as are a little
acid, are agreeable to the Stomach, and cheer the Heart. Rotten Apples take off
Inflammations and Swellings of the Eyes. The Core of an Apple cut out, and a
Dram of Frankincense put in, and roasted with the Apple, and eaten, opens
Obstructions of the Lungs, and is good for Difficulty of Breathing. The same
applied outwardly to the Side, eases the Pain of it. It Is best to eat Apples
two or three Hours after Meals.

The Altering Syrup of Apples.
Take of the Juice of fragrant Pippins two Quarts, of the Leaves of Garden and
Wild-Bugloss, of the Flowers of Violets, each one Pound; boil them in B. M. and
clarify them; add seven Pounds of fine Sugar, and a Pint of Rose Water; boil
them to a Syrup. One Ounce of this Syrup, taken Morning and Evening, is good
for melancholy People.

The Purging Syrup of Apples.
Take of the Juice and Water of fragrant Pippins, each one Pint and an half; of
the Juice and Water of Borage and Bugloss, each nine Ounces; of the Leaves of
Oriental Sena half a Pound; of Anise and Fennel-seeds, each three Drams; of
Dodder of Crete two Ounces; of White Agarick, and the best Rubarb* each half an
Ounce; of Ginger and Mace, each four Scruples; of Cinnamon two Scruples; of
Saffron half a Dram: Infuse the Rubarb with the Cinnamon apart, in White Wind
and Juice of Apples, each two Ounces: Infuse the rest of the Ingredients,
except the Saffron, in the Waters abovementioned; the next Day pour on the
Juices, and put them on a gentle Fire; take off the Scum, and strain it; then
add four Pounds of White Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup, the Infusion of Rubarb
being put to it, and the Saffron being tied up in a Rag, and dipped often in
it, and squeezed out. This Syrup is a very proper Purge for melancholy People,
but will scarce purge enough by it self; wherefore take two Ounces of it in
three Ounces of the Decoction of Dodder; which see among the Virtues of Dodder.
The Confection of Alkermes is made with Juice of Apples, and the Ointment
called Pomatum. Cider is good for the Scurvy.

Apricock-tree, in Latin Malus Armeniaca.
The English Apricocks are better than the French or Italian, and more wholesome
than the Peach. The Oil of the Kernels is excellent for Inflammations, and
Swellings of the Hemorrhoids; and for Pains of the Ears. The Kernels eaten,
cure the Heart-burning.

White Archangel, in Latin Laminum album.
It has many fibrous Roots, it creeps awry in the Earth like Mint; the Stalks
are a Foot or two Foot high, apiece, and pretty large; but they are
smaller near the Earth, and weak, so that they can scarce stand alone: They are
empty, pretty hairy and branchy, and have a few Joints, and near the Earth seem
of a Purple Color when the Sun shines on them. The Leaves are placed by Pairs,
opposite to one another, like Nettles; those on the Bottom-stalks are placed on
long Footstalk, those on the Top-stalks on short Footstalk, and have a
short soft Down. The Flowers encompass the Stalks at the Joints; they are
white, large, and hooded, without rather pale than white. It flowers at the
Latter End of April, or the Beginning of May.

One handful of the Herb, beaten up with Hog's Lard, and applied to
King's-Evil-Swellings in the Neck or Throat, discusses them. A Conserve of the
Flowers is much commended in the Whites: But the Cure of them by the following
Method is much safer and surer.

Bleed once, and purge thrice with two Scruples of Pill Coch. Major. Then take
of Venice-Treacle one Ounce and an half, of the Conserve of the yellow Pill of
Oranges one Ounce, of Diascordium half an Ounce, of Candied Ginger and Nutmegs,
each three Drams; of the Compound Powder of Crab's-eyes one Dram and an half; of
the outward Bark of the Pomegranate, of the Root of Spanish Angelica, of Red
Coral prepared, of the Trochisc, de Terra Lemnia, each one Dram; of
Bole-Armenick two Scruples, of Gum-Arabick half a Dram, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of dried Roses: Make an Electuary. Take the quantity of a
large Nutmeg in the Morning, at Five in the Afternoon, and at Bedtime;
drinking upon it six Spoonfuls of the following Infusion.

Take of the Roots Elecampane, Master-Wort, Angelica and Gentian, each half an
Ounce; of the Leaves of Roman-Wormwood, of White Archangel, and the lesser
Centory, and Calamint, each one handful; of Juniper Berries one Ounce: Cut them
small, and infuse them in five Pints of Canary: Let them stand in Infusion, and
strain it only as you use it.

Stinking Arrach, or Orrach, in Latin Atriplex Olida.
It Is easily known by its stinking Smell, which is exactly like Old Ling. It
grows in Places where there is Rubbish, but it is not common. A Conserve of the
Leaves, or Syrup made of the Juice, is good for Mother-fits, and Women's
Obstructions, the quantity of a Nutmeg of the Conserve being taken Morning and
Evening, or two Spoonfuls of the Syrup at the same Times. But the following
Plaster must be applied to the Woman's Navel.

Take of Galbanum, dissolved in Tincture of Castor, and strained, three Drams;
of Tacamahaca two Drams: Mingle them, and make a Plaster, and spread it on
Leather, having an Hole cut in the middle.

The Woman must be also purged three or four times with the Pill Coch. Major,
viz. Take of the Pill Coch. Major two Scruples, of Castor powdered two Grains,
of the Peruvian Balsam four Drops: Make four Pills, to be taken at Five in the
Morning, and let her sleep after them.

After purging as above directed, let the Woman take of the Conserve or Syrup,
as before mentioned, thirty Days, drinking presently after a Draught of
Wormwood-Beer or Wine. Or, if she do not like the Conserve or Syrup, let her
take the following Pills for the space of a Month. Take of the Filings of Steel
eight Grains, of Extract of Wormwood a sufficient quantity: Make two Pills; let
her take them in the Morning, and repeat them in the Evening; and so Morning
and Evening, drinking a small Draught of Wormwood-Beer presently after.

Common Arsmart, in Latin Persicaria.
It has a single, small, woody, white Root, with many Fibers. It has many
Stalks, a Foot or two Foot high, solid, round and smooth, branchy and jointed:
When the Sun shines on them they are of a reddish Color, otherwise of a yellow
Green. The Leaves embrace the Stalks at the Joints, and are placed on short
Footstalk: They are of a pale Green, not spotted, smooth: They are like
Peach-leaves. The Flowers grow upon the upper Stalks and Branches, in spiky
Heads, and are very small. Some of them are useless, no Seed succeeding them;
these consist of four Leaves. Others are always shut, and contain a pretty
large, three-square, shining Seed that is black when it is ripe; and these are
red without. This Plant has an acrid and biting Taste: It grows in watery
Places, and Ditches.

It Is plainly hot and dry: It Is chiefly used outwardly in Wounds, hard
Swellings, and old Sores.

The Water of Arsmart is of great use in the Stone of the Kidneys or Bladder, a
Draught of it being taken every Morning for two or three Months together. A
Country-Gentleman used a Load of this Herb in a Year to make the Water,
wherewith he cured many of the Stone. The Root or Seed put into an aching
hollow Tooth, takes off the Pain. There is scarce any thing more effectual to
drive away Flies: For, whatever Wounds or Ulcers Cattle have, if they are
anointed with the Juice of Arsmart, the Flies will not come near, tho it is the
Heat of Summer.

Artichoke, in Latin Cinara.
The Germans and French eat the tender Stalks boiled, with Vinegar and Butter:
And the Italians seldom boil the Heads, but eat them raw, with Salt, Oil and
Pepper. They are said to provoke Venery, to restore Nature, and strengthen the
Stomach. A Decoction of the Buds provokes Urine.

Asarabacca, in Latin Asarum.
It has many Heads shooting from the Roots, whereon are many smooth Leaves,
every one upon a Foot-stalk by it self: They are rounder and bigger than the
Leaves of Violets, and thicker; and of a darker green shining Color on the
upper side, and of a paler Green underneath. Among the Leaves near the Earth
are six-angled purplish Husks, that are hairy, and placed on short Footstalk;
these contain the Seeds, that are like the Stones of Grapes. They have within a
white Marrow, that tastes somewhat acrid.

It purges violently, upwards and downwards, Phlegm and Choler. It Is Diuretic
also, and forces the Courses: Wherefore Wenches use the Decoction of it too
frequently, when they think they are with Child. It Is good in the Dropsy and
Jaundice.

Take of the Leaves of Asarabacca six, seven, eight, or nine; bruise them, and
pour upon them three Ounces of White Wind; strain it. Take it in the Morning,
or at Four in the Afternoon: Drink large Draughts of Posset Drink after every
time it vomits. Or,

Take of the Powder of the Root one Dram, or four Scruples; Oxymel of Squils
one Ounce and an half; mingle them, and take it in a draught of Posset Drink.
Use Posset Drink in the Working of it, as above-directed.

The Ash-tree, in Latin Fraxinus.
The Seed of the Ash powdered, and taken in Wine, forces Urine. The Juice of
three or four Leaves taken every Morning, makes those lean that are fat. The
Bark and the Wood dry and attenuate, and are supposed to soften the hardness of
the Spleen by a Specific Quality. The Juice of the Leaves and tender Twigs,
taken in the Morning daily, in a small quantity, is said to do good in
Dropsies. One Dram of the Seeds powdered, and taken in Wine, is also beneficial
in the Dropsy. The Salt of it provokes Sweat and Urine.

Avens, in Latin Cariophillata.
The Root grows oblique, sending down sometimes thick Fibers into the Earth.
It Is of an Aromatic taste and Smell, like July-flowers. Several Stalks rise
from the same Root, two Foot high, or higher, round, hairy, small, and full of
Pith, garnished with Leaves placed alternately; they are branchy at the top.
The Leaves that come from the Root are hairy and winged, small Wings being here
and there joined to the Middle-rib. The Extremity of the Leaf is cut in deep.
The Leaves that are on the Stalks consist of two Wings that are pretty large,
which adhere to the Stalk at the Basis of the Foot-stalk, as if they were Ears;
and they have three Jags at the End, almost like a Bramble. The Flower does not
come from the Bosom of the Leaf, but grows opposite to it, and has long
Footstalk, and five yellow Leaves, like Tormentil. The Cup is composed of ten
Leaves; five large, five small. Many yellow Threads stand round the Head, which
grows into a roundish Bur, composed of a great many Seeds, placed thick
together; each of them has a Tail that turns back at the End, whereby they
stick to Clothes. It grows in Hedges and Bushes, and flowers in May or June.

It Is somewhat astringent; it strengthens, and discusses; it is Cephalic and
Cordial, and resists Poisons. It Is chiefly used inwardly to cure Catarrhs, and
for quickening the Blood when it is coagulated. Wine wherein the Root has been
infused has a fine pleasant Taste and Smell: It chears the Heart, and opens
Obstructions. The Root infused in Beer is excellent for strengthening the
Joints and Bowels. Two Ounces of the Root, or an Handful of the Herb, boiled in
a Quart of Water or Posset Drink, to the Consumption of a fourth Part, has been
used successfully in curing Agues, especially Tertians, being taken two Hours
before the Fit, or in the Fit.

B.
BArbery-tree, in Latin Berberis.
The Berries cool, and are astringent; they provoke Appetite, and strengthen
the Stomach; and therefore the Conserve of them is frequently used in Fevers, a
Looseness, and the Bloody Flux. The inward Bark of the Branches and Root,
infused in Whitewine, is an excellent Remedy for the Jaundice. The Juice of the
Berries, a Decoction of the Bark, or the Juice of the Leaves, mixed with
Vinegar, cure the Pain of the Teeth occasioned by Fluxion. The Conserve of it
frequently taken, cures Inflammations of the Mouth and Throat; or the Mouth
being gargled with some of the Conserve, dissolved in Water and Vinegar.

Barley, in Latin Hordeum.
The French-Barley is much used in Fevers, and for Diseases of the Breast, and
for Heat of Urine. A Pultis of Barley-meal and Butter is very Anodine, and
eases painful Tumors.

Barley-water.
Boil two Ounces of French-Barley in Fountain Water, change the Water twice;
boil it the third time in a Quart of Water, to a Pint and an half; adding
Liquorish half an Ounce, Violet-leaves and Strawberry-leaves, each one handful;
sweeten it with Sugar, or Syrup of Violets.

The Cinnamon Water with Barley.
Infuse twelve Ounces of Cinnamon in four Quarts of Barley-water prepared by it
self, without the Liquorish and other Ingredients; distill them in B. M.

Garden- Basil, in Latin Ocymum.
It Is about nine Inches high, and has many apiece Branches that are
somewhat red, and a little hairy, The Leaves are like Pellitory-Leaves, they
are smooth; some are indented, some not: They have a fragrant Smell, but do not
taste very well. The Flowers are white, or of a purplish Color; they smell
sweet, and are placed on long Spikes, in Whirls. The Seed is small, and black.
The Root is woody, black and fibrous. It grows only in Gardens.

It comforts the Heart, and expels Melancholy: It cleanses the Lungs, and moves
the Courses. It Is an Ingredient of three Compound-Waters in the
London-Dispensatory, viz. Gilberts-water, Briony-water, and the Celestial-water.

Wild- Basil, in Latin Acinos.
It has but one thin Root, with but a few Fibers. The Stalks are one Hand high,
hairy, red, apiece, branchy, though near the Earth they seem round. There
are two Leaves at each Joint, and their Footstalk are contrary one to
another; they are like wild Thyme, but larger; they are indented about the
Edges, are green above, underneath whitish: Their Nerves are conspicuous, they
are placed upon short Footstalk. The Flowers are disposed like a Whirl at the
top of the Stalks and Branches, and show themselves of a purple Color. The Cup
is oblong, channell'd, big-bellied, but narrow at the Neck. It grows of its own
accord upon chalky Hills, and on dry and gravelly Ground. It flowers in June.

The Virtue of it is not certainly known; and, indeed, one would judge by the
Smell and Taste, that it had no great Virtue, though Schwenckfeld says that it is
hot and dry, and that it forces the Courses, and the Birth, and removes
Melancholy.

Baulm, in Latin Melissa.
It Is reckoned among the Cordial-Herbs. It removes Melancholy, and cheers the
Heart. It Is much commended for Fainting and Beating of the Heart, and for the
Palsy and Falling Sickness, and for other cold Diseases of the Brain. Put the
green Leaves into Canary-wine, and drink a Glass or two at Meals, it provokes
the Courses, and Child-bed-Purgations; and is good for Mother-fits, and cures a
Stinking Breath. For Madness, Take one Handful of the Leaves, cut them small,
and infuse them in four Ounces of Brandy; add of prepared Pearl half a Dram;
the Dose is two Spoonfuls Morning and Evening. This was counted a great Secret
at Montpelier. For Melancholy, Take of the Conserve of Balm one Ounce, of the
Conserve of Bugloss and Borage-flowers, each half an Ounce; of Confection of
Alkermes one Dram; make an Electuary with the Syrup of the five opening Roots:
Take the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning and Evening for the space of a Month,
being first purged once or twice. A Maid was cured of deep Melancholy, and the
Green Sickness, by the use of this Medicine. It Is used in Baths to comfort the
Joints and Sinews; and for Diseases of the Womb. It flowers in June, July and
August.

Bay Tree, in Latin Laurus.
A Decoction of the Bark, Berries and Leaves makes a good Bath for the Diseases
of the Womb and Bladder. The Berries are very effectual against all Poison of
venomous Creatures, and the stinging of Wasps and Bees, and also in the Plague,
and infectious Diseases; and therefore are an Ingredient in the London-Treacle.
They procure the Courses; and it is said that seven of the Berries taken
inwardly, will hasten Delivery, and expel the Afterbirth. Being made into an
Electuary with Honey, they cure old Coughs, and Shortness of Breath, and stop
Rheums; they expel Wind, and provoke Urine, and comfort the Stomach. The Oil
which is made of the Berries is very useful in cold Diseases of the Joints and
Nerves. The Electuary of it is frequently used in Clysters, to expel Wind, and
to ease the Pain of the Cholick. So do the Berries themselves.

A Clyster for the Cholick.
Take of the Leaves of Mercury, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, each one
Handful; of the Flowers of Camomil one Dram; of the Seed of Caraways, Cumin, of
Bay Berries powdered, each one Ounce; boil them in clear Posset Drink, to three
quarters of a Pint of the Liquor strained: Add three Ounces of Mercurial Honey,
(which see among the Virtues of Mercury) of Hiera Picra two Drams. Make a
Clyster.

Beans, in Latin Faba.
They are the chief Diet all the Summertime in some Places, and are certainly
very nourishing. A poor Countryman, when Corn was dear, dieted his Children
only with Beans dried; and they were better colored, and fatter, than other
Children.

The Distilled Water of the Flowers provokes Urine; and is much used for
beautifying the Face, and taking Spots from thence. For the Gravel, make a Lee
of the Ashes, strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar: Take six Ounces, with
twenty Drops of Tincture of Cinnamon in it. One that voided Blood by Stool
three or four Months, was cured by eating Red Beans boiled in Milk, Morning and
Evening, when other Medicines would do no good. They provoke Venery; but they
are windy, and occasion troublesome Dreams.

Bears-foot, in Latin Helleboraster.
It grows only in Gardens. The Powder of the Leaves kills Worms in Children:
But it is a churlish Medicine.

Beech-tree, in Latin Fagus.
The Leaves of the Beech-tree bruised, and applied to hot Swellings, discusses
them. The Water contained in old and hollow Oaks and Beech-trees, cures the
Itch in Men, and Cattle when they are mangy.

White-Beet, in Latin Beta alba.
It has a woody Root, of the thickness of the Little Finger, pretty long, and
white. The Leaves are of a light green Color, thick, and succulent; of a
nitrous Taste. The Stalk is four Foot high, or higher, small, and channell'd;
and has many Wings, wherein are the little Flowers, in a long Series,
consisting of yellow Tufts. The Seed is round, rough and brown.

Sea-Beet, in Latin Beta Maris.
It Is like the White-Beet, but the Leaves are smaller and greener. They are
plain and equal; and have sometimes red Veins, and sometimes not. The Stalk is
also less. It Is common in salt Marshes, and on the Seashore.

Beet is hot and dry, and loosens the Belly by reason of its Nitrosity. It Is an
Errhine, especially the Root; for the Juice of it, received into the Nostrils,
occasions Neezing. The young Plants, with their Roots, gently boiled, and eaten
with Vinegar, procure an Appetite, extinguish Thirst, and suppress Choler in
the Stomach. Beet, amongst the Ancients, was much taken notice of for its
insipid Taste, Martial reproaches it in the following Distick.

Ut sapiant fatuae fabrorum prandia Betae,
O quam saepe petet vina piperque coquus?
The Juice of this Herb, drawn up into the Nostrils, powerfully evacuates
Phlegmatic Humors from the Brain, and cures inveterate Headaches. This is
counted a great Secret by some.

Wood- Betony, in Latin Betonica.
It grows in Bushes and Woods. The Flower is commonly purple, sometimes white.

Many Virtues are attributed to this Plant, taken any way. Scroder describes
the Virtues, in short, thus. It Is hot and dry, acrid and bitter. It discusses,
attenuates, opens and cleanses. It Is Cephalic, Epatick, Splenetick, Thoracick,
Uterine, Vulnerary, and Diuretic. It Is used frequently, inwardly and
outwardly, especially in Diseases of the Head. It Is observed, that the
Faculties of the Root are quite different from the Virtues of the Leaves and
Flowers; for, it is very nauseous in the Mouth and Stomach, and occasions
Nauseousness, Belching and Vomiting: The Leaves, on the contrary, are
Aromatic, and of a pleasant Taste, and agreeable to Nature in Food and
Physic. Counterfeit Tea, made of Sage, Betony and Ground Pine, sweetened, and
drank hot, is very good for the Gout, Headache, and Diseases of the Nerves; and
eases Pain, occasioned by these Diseases.

Common- Bilberries, in Latin Vaccinia nigra vulgaris.
This small Bush has many green, angled Sprigs, a Foot, or two Foot high, which
are hard to break. They are divided into many Branches, whereon there are many
tender, green Leaves; about an Inch long, and half an Inch broad. They are
sharp-pointed, smooth, and curiously indented about the Edges, They taste
partly acid, and partly harsh. The Flowers are placed, each on a Foot-stalk,
among the Leaves: They are of a pale-red Color, with a Saffron-colour'd Thread
in the middle; and, in form, are like a Water-Pitcher. To each Flower succeeds
one Berry, like to a Juniper-berry; which is rather of a Violet-colour when it
is ripe, than black. At first tasting of the Berries they seem pleasantly acid,
but they leave somewhat that is nauseous upon the Palate. It flowers in May:
The Fruit is ripe in August, and sometimes in July.

The Berries are cooling, and astringent. They are very agreeable to an hot
Stomach, and quench Thirst. They cure a Looseness, and the Bloody Flux,
occasioned by Choler: And are good in the Disease called Cholera morbus. They
stop Vomiting, and take off Feverish Heats. A Syrup made of the Juice of the
Berries, is most agreeable: viz. Take of the Juice strained, one Pint; Fine
Sugar, one Pound and an half: Boil it to a Syrup with a gentle Fire. Take one
Spoonful at a time, or mix it with three Ounces of some proper Water.

Birch-tree, in Latin, Betula.
The Branches of this Tree are small and flexible, and most of them hang
downwards. The Bark is very various; when the Tree is young it is yellow, or
brown; afterward it grows lighter. It bears long Buds, like Long-Pepper. It
grows frequently in cold and watery Places, and on moist Heaths. The slender
Twigs of it were formerly used for the Magistrates Verge: Now they serve to
discipline Boys, and to tame wild Horses, and to make Brooms, and to catch
Birds with Bird-Lime, and Bands for Fagots. Fishermen in Northumberland fish
a-nights by the Light of this Bark: They put it into a cleft Stick, which
serves for a Candle-stick* and so they see how to use their Three-teeth'd Spear
for killing Fish. In Alsatia the best Hoops are made of Birch.

The Leaves are hot and dry, cleansing, resolving, opening, and bitter: For
which Reason they are of no small use in a Dropsy, and the Itch, and the like.
The Bark is Bituminous, and is therefore mixed with Perfumes that are to
correct the Air. The Fungus of it has an astringent Quality; upon which Account
it stops Blood miraculously.

This Tree, in the Beginning of Spring, before the Leaves come forth, being
pierced, yields plentifully a sweet and potulent Juice, which Shepherds, when
they are thirsty, often drink in the Woods. Tragus, Helmont, Charleton, and
others, commend the Virtue and Efficacy of this Liquor, and not undeservedly
for the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, for Bloody Urine and the Strangury.
This Tree begins to yield its Juice about the Middle of February, and sometimes
not till the Beginning of March. Tragus also commends it for the Jaundice. Some
wash their Faces with it, to take off Spots, and to beautify. Dr. Needham
cured Scorbutic Consumptions with it: He used to mix with it good Wine and
Honey. Rennet infused in the Juice, preserves the Cheese from Worms, says
Tragus. The Juice of Birch cures Warts, and Pimples in the Face, if it be
washed with it in the Day time, Morning and Evening, and permitted to dry on.

The Greater Bistort, or Snake-weed, in Latin Bistorta major.
The Stalks are sometimes more than two Foot high, small, smooth, and jointed
at the Top; whereon are Ears of Flowers of a Flesh-colors; and being unfolded,
they consist of five small Leaves, with Tufts of the same Color in the middle.
The Seed is brown, or almost black, and triangular. The Leaves are smaller than
those of sharp-pointed Dock; above of a dark-green Color, below gray. The Root
represents a crooked Finger, is red, and very astringent. It Is common in the
Meadows and Pastures about Sheffeild in Yorkshire, and in several other Places
of that County. It grows also plentifully in some Meadows about Tamworth and
Fasely in Warwickshire.

It cools and dries. The Root of it is very astringent, harsh, alexipharmick,
and Sudorifick. It Is chiefly used to take off Vomiting, and to prevent
Abortion, and the like. The Powder of the Root, mixed with Conserve of Roses,
does wonderfully stop Spitting of Blood, and the Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes.
It stops the Courses when they are immoderate. The Powder sprinkled upon
Wounds, stops the Blood.

Take of the Roots of Bistort and Tormentil, each one Ounce; of the Leaves of
Meadow-sweet, Burnet, Wood Sorrel, each one handful; of Burnt Hartshorn two
Drams; of Shavings of Hartshorn and Ivory, each two Drams: Boil them in three
Pints of Fountain Water, to two; add toward the End three Ounces of Red Roses;
strain them. The Dose is six Spoonfuls often in a Day.

Upright- Blite, in Latin Blitum erectius.
It has a red and single Root, with some small Fibers. It roots deep in the
Earth if the Place be agreeable to it; otherwise it is fibrous. The Stalk is
nine Inches high, channell'd, smooth, solid; sending forth many Branches, near
the Earth longer than the very Stalks. The Leaves are placed sometimes opposite
to one another, but oftener alternately. Their Footstalk are an Inch long,
smooth, and not so frequent as in other Blites. The Leaves resemble the Leaves
of Wild-Marjoram, but they are somewhat bigger; from the Wings whereof, and
from the Extremities of the Branches, come forth small purple Flowers, in
Clusters. The Seed is small, and black. It grows plentifully upon Dung-hills,
in Hop-grounds, and upon fat Earth.

It mollifies, cools, and tastes insipid.

Blue-Bottles, in Latin Cyanus.
The Root is woody, and fibrous. It has many Stalks a Foot and an half, or two
Foot high; they have Angles, are hoary, and divided into Branches. The
lowermost Leaves have sharp Jags, like Scabious, or Dandelion; the other are
long, and as broad as a Blade of Grass; and have Nerves, that run along them:
They are Sky-colour'd, or whitish. The Flowers come from little Heads that are
composed of Scales; they consist of little jagged Horns, and are commonly of a
Sky-colour, sometimes white, or of a light red, or purple. The Seed is
contained in the little Head of the Flower. The whole Plant tastes dry, and
somewhat nauseous, and has no good Smell. It grows commonly among Corn.

The Flowers and the distilled Water are useful for Inflammations of the Eyes,
and for the Blearedness of them. The Juice of the Flowers distilled, is good
for putrid Ulcers. The Powder of it, taken inwardly, is very effectual in the
Jaundice. The Flowers infused in Spirit of Wine, or in common Water, impart
their Color to the Liquor; and they also color Sugar very curiously, as do
the Flowers of Succory, and the like.

Borrage, in Latin Borrago.
It Is very cordial; and the Flower is one of the four Cordial-Flowers. The
distilled Water, and the Conserve of the Flowers, comfort the Heart, relieve
the Faint, cheer the Melancholy, and purify the Blood. This Herb is supposed
to be Homer's Nepenthe; by the Juice whereof, mixed with Wine, he was wont to
expel Sorrow. The Water of it is good for Inflammations of the Eyes, and for
all Fevers; as is also the Conserve of the Flowers. The Conserve of the Flowers
mixed with Wine, is said to open Women's Obstructions.

To cheer the Heart, Take of the Conserve of Borrage-Flowers one Ounce, of the
Confection of Alkermes two Drams; mix them: The Dose is the quantity of a
Nutmeg* two Hours after Meals, drinking a Glass of Canary presently after it.

Box-tree, in Latin Buxus.
This Tree is always green, and full of Branches. The Bark is white and rough.
The Substance of it is very hard and yellow, and very heavy, and without Pith.
It has many Leaves; they are smooth, more obtuse than the Leaves of the Myrtle,
firm, and sometimes concave; and, which is worth Observation, they are double:
They smell pretty well, but taste ill. A great many of these Trees grow on
Box-hill, near Darking in Surrey.

It Is seldom used in Physic. The Oil drawn from the Wood, is much commended
for the Falling Sickness, and Pains in the Teeth. It Is said, the Decoction of
the Wood cures the French Pox, as well as Guiacum. It Is chiefly used by Turners.

For the Pain of the Teeth, drop two or three Drops of the Oil upon a little
Lint, and stop the hollow Tooth with it, and it will soon give Ease.

Bramble, in Latin Rubus.
The Ancients attributed many Virtues to almost every part of this Plant. The
Leaves, the Buds, the Flowers, and the Fruit are astringent; but the Fruit,
before it is ripe, is very astringent; wherefore it is good for Vomiting, and
all Fluxes. It Is good for Sore Mouths; and is commended by some for the Scurvy,
and not without Reason; for, in quality and figure, it is like the Cloud-Berry
of the Alps, which is a Specific for this Disease; and therefore we need not
charge Children so strictly not to eat them. They do, indeed, occasion
Children's Heads to be scabby; but it is because they eat immoderately of them:
And so any other Fruit would produce the same Effect. A pleasant and generous
Wine may be made of the Juice of the Berries, pressed out, and fermented with a
little Sugar. A Syrup made of the Juice, is very good for Heat of Urine.

It Is most commonly prescribed in Gargarisms to cure Sore Mouths: Take of
Bramble-tops, of the Leaves of Columbine, Cyprus and Sage, each one Handful;
boil them in two Quarts of Water wherein Iron has been quenched, till one is
consumed: Add, Alum, one Dram and an half; Honey of Roses, one Ounce: Make a
Gargarism, wherewith wash the Mouth often in a Day.

White- Briony, in Latin Brionia alba.
The Root is as thick as ones Arm, white and fungous, of a bitter and ac^id
Taste. It sends forth pliant Twigs, channell'd, and somewhat hairy; which
spread themselves far and wide by the help of their Tendrels, and climb up
every thing that is near. The Leaves are like Ivy-leaves, but larger; they are
hairy, and green. The Flowers, joined together, come out of the Wings of the
Leaves, and are of a whitish Color. It grows frequently in Hedges.

It purges strongly Watery and Phlegmatic Humors. It Is proper for the
Diseases of the Spleen, Liver and Womb; for it opens the Obstructions of those
Parts. It drains the Water of Hydropical People by Vomit and Stool. It provokes
the Courses, helps Delivery, cures the Suffocation of the Womb, and the Asthma.

Juglers and Fortune Tellers make wonderful Monsters of this Root, which, when
they have hid in the Sand for some Days, they dig up for Mandrakes; and by this
Imposture these Knaves impose on our Common People. Conserve of White
Briony-Roots, taken twice a Day, to the quantity of a Nutmeg, for a long time,
cures the Falling Sickness, and Mother-Fits. A piece of the Root put into the
Pot the Sick drinks out of, does the same. The Compound-water of Briony is most
in use. I have used this Composition that follows, with excellent Success, in
Women's Obstructions; and it is, undoubtedly much better in Hysteric Diseases,
than the common Compound-water of the London-Dispensatory. Take of dried
Briony-Roots, beaten to a gross Powder, two Ounces; of the Leaves of Rue, and
dried Mugwort, each half a pound; Savine dried, three quarters of an Handful;
of Featherfew, Cat-mint and Pennyroyal, dried, each half an Handful; of the
fresh yellow Pill of one Orange; of Mirrh half an Ounce, of Castor two Drams,
of the best Nants-Brandy one Quart: Put them into a Glass, and let them infuse
six Days in warm Ashes; then strain the Liquor off, and keep it in a
Glass-bottle, well stopped. The Dose is half a Spoonful, to be taken in three
Ounces of Penny-royal-water, sweetened with Sugar, Morning and Evening.

The Lees of Briony, called in Latin Foecula Brioniae, are made after the
following manner: Take what quantity of the Roots of Briony you please, slice
them, and press out the Juice; this being kept in Vessels unmoved, will in a
few Hours depose the Lees, or Foecula; which being separated by pouring the
Water away gently, must be dried in a Glass-Vessel. They are used in a Dropsy.

Common- Brook-Lime, in Latin Anagallis aquatica.
It grows commonly in little Brooks.

It heats and moistens moderately. It Is chiefly used in the Scurvy; it
powerfully expels the Stone of the Kidneys and Bladder; it provokes the
Courses, and expels a dead Child. Outwardly applied, it cures Inflamed Tumors,
and St. Anthony's Fire. It Is much of the same virtue with Watercresses, only
not so strong.

Country People cure Wounds with Brook-lime, mixed with a little Salt, and a
Spider's Web, and applied to the Wound, wrapped about with a double Cloth.

Brook-lime boyld in Water, applied to blind Piles, has presently eased the
Pain, when other Medicines would do no good. Fabricius says, he knew a large
Ulcer that possessed almost the whole Leg, and reached almost to the Bone, was
cured in a Scorbutical Person only with Brook-lime boiled in Beer, and applied
twice a Day. But it is most commonly used inwardly to cure the Scurvy: Take of
the Juice of Brook-lime, Watercresses and Scurvy Grass, each half a Pint; of
the Juice of Oranges, four Ounces; fine Sugar, two Pounds; make a Syrup over a
gentle Fire: Take one Spoonful in your Beer every time you drink.

Broom, in Latin Genista.
It Is common in Sandy and barren Grounds. It flowers at the Latter End of
April. It Is Splenetick, Nepthritick, and Hepatick. It expels the Stone, and
purges Watery Humors upwards and downwards, by Stool and Urine: Wherefore it
is of great use in Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery: And in the
Dropsy and Catarrhs, the Flowers, the Seeds, and Tops are in use.

The Leaves, the Branches, and Tops, boiled in Wine or Water, or the Juice of
them, are good in a Dropsy, and all Obstructions of the Kidneys and Bladder;
for they partly purge watery and superflous Humors by Stool, and partly by
Urine: One Dram of the Seed does the same. The Flowers, when they are green,
are commonly pickled, and make an agreeable Sauce; for they provoke Appetite,
and force Urine. The Ashes are most in use, and frequently commended in the
Dropsy: Take of the Ashes of Broom one Pound, infuse them cold in two Quarts
of Rhenish-Wine, adding to it half an Handful of Common Wormwood: Take four
Ounces of the clear Liquor in the Morning, at Four in the Afternoon, and in the
Evening, every Day.

Broom-rape, in Latin Orobanche.
It Is two Foot high, or more; the Stalk is straight, round and hairy, pale or
yellowish, or brownish; whereon are Leaves that are narrow and longish, if they
may be called Leaves, for they seem rather the Beginning of Leaves: They soon
fade, and Flowers succeed them, which are on a Spike, like the Flowers of
Orchis, but at a greater distance; they are of a dull yellow Color. The Root
is round and scaly, and tastes very bitter. The Flowers smell pretty well.

The Herb candied, or the Root, is of excellent use in Diseases of the Spleen,
and for Melancholy. An Ointment made of it, with Lard, is good to discuss hard
and Scirrhous Tumors.

Butcher's- Broom, in Latin Ruscus, or Bruscus.
It Is a Foot and an half high, and sometimes three or four Foot high: It has
many tough Branches, and is full of Leaves, and they are like the Leaves of the
Myrtle; they are ridged, nervous and prickly; they have no Footstalk; they
are hard and strong, and taste bitter. At the Middle of the Leaf is placed a
small Flower, on a very short Foot-stalk. When first it rises it represents a
little Bunch of small Needles; but being opened, three little, broadish Leaves
appear. A round Fruit succeeds the Flower, that is larger than the Berries of
Asparagus; it is reddish and sweetish. Under the Skin of it lie two great yellow
Seeds, bunching out on one side, and plain on the other: They are very hard.
The Root is thick, oblique, and has many Fibers that are white and long, like
the Fibers of Asparagus.

The Root is one of the five opening Roots. It Is chiefly used for Obstructions
of the Liver, the Urine, and the Courses. The Syrup of the five opening Roots
is much in use, and is prepared in the following manner: Take of the Roots of
Butcher's-Broom, Fennel, Asparagus, Parsley and Smallage, each two Ounces;
Fountain Water three Quarts; digest them hot, then boil them in B. M. to the
Liquor pressed out hard, and clarified, add eight Ounces of Vinegar, and five
Pounds and an half of fine Sugar; make a Syrup with a gentle Heat. The Dose is
two Spoonfuls, in four Ounces of any proper distilled Water.

Buck-thorn, in Latin Rhamnus Catharticus.
This small Tree is common in the Hedges in some places. The outward Bark is
black; there are two within, one green, the other yellow: The Wood is pale, and
hard. It has many Branches, that are placed most commonly opposite one to
another; and it has hard, ridged and long Thorns placed among the Leaves, the
Ends of the Branches being thorny also. The Leaves are like the Leaves of a
Crab-tree, but smaller; they are pointed, of a dark Green, indented, and
nervous, and have an astringent Taste. It has many small Flowers together, of a
light green Color; each consists of four Leaves. The Berries succeed the
Flowers: Great Numbers of them are placed at the Roots of the Thorns, upon
pretty long Footstalk: When they are ripe they are black, and full of green
Juice. They have three or four triangular Grains, which have a blackish Bark,
and a white Marrow that does not taste ill. The Taste of the Berries is bitter,
and astringent; and the Juice has a certain peculiar Taste.

The Berry of this Shrub yields three sorts of Colors. Those that are gathered
in Harvest-time, and dried, and powdered, and infused with Water and Alum,
make a yellow, or rather a Saffron-colour; and is now in use for painting of
Playing-Cards and Leather. Those that are gathered in the Autumn, when they are
ripe and black, being pounded, and kept in a Glass-Vessel, afford a delicate
Green, which is called Sap-Green, and is much used by Painters. Those that
remain on the Trees till the Feast of St. Martin make a red Color. The Berries
are purging, a Dram, or a Dram and an half of them being taken at a time. Some
take fifteen or twenty of the Berries at a time: But they work so powerfully,
that they are not to be given in Substance to weakly People. The Syrup is most
in use: Take of the Juice of ripe and fresh Berries, gathered in September, 2
Pounds, let it clear by standing; then add of Cinnamon and Nutmegs, each three
Drams; infuse it in B. M. for the space of a Day; then press them out, and add
a Pound and an half of White Sugar, and make a Syrup in B. M.

Bugle, in Latin Bugula.
The Stalk is foursquare, empty, and hairy; an Hand, or half a Foot high. The
Leaves are indented, like the Leaves of the greater Water-Brooklime; two are
placed by Intervals, opposite one to another; of a Violet-colour, or purple, or
green: They taste at first sweet, afterward bitter and astringent. The Flowers
come out of the Wings of the Leaves, in a short hairy Cup, that is divided into
five parts: They are of a Sky and changeable Color, and of a sweetish Taste.
The Root is small and fibrous, and tastes more astringent than the Leaves. It Is
common in Woods, and moist Meadows; and flowers in May.

The Virtues are much the same with those of Self-heal. It Is Vulnerary, either
taken inwardly, or outwardly applied. It Is used in the Jaundice, in
Obstructions of the Liver, and for Stoppage of Urine. An Ointment made of the
Leaves of Bugle, Scabious and Sanicle, bruised, and boiled in Lard till they
are dry, and then pressed out, is of excellent use for all sorts of Ulcers and
Bruises, and to heal Wounds. It Is one of the Ingredients for the Wound-Drink of
the London-Dispensatory, commonly called The Traumatick Decoction.

Bugloss, in Latin Buglossum.
It has many Stalks coming from the same Root, about three or four Foot high,
round and rough, with ridgid Hairs. It Is branchy at the top, whereon the Leaves
grow without Footstalk: They are many, narrow, oblong, of a Sky-colour'd
Green, not wrinkl'd, like Burrage; they end in a sharp Point, and are hairy on
both sides, and equal about the Edges from the Wings of the Leaves; and
sometimes at their Sides, or lower, or a little higher, the Branches rise. The
Flowers come on the top of the Stalks and Branches, from a Cup composed of five
oblong, norrow, sharp, hairy pieces; the Flowers are less than those of
Borrage, and consist of one Leaf, of a light purple Color; an oblong Thread
grows up from the bottom of the Cup, which is encompassed with four Seeds that
are of a russet Color and wrinkled when they are ripe. The Root lives many
Years, is black without, and white within. It flowers in June and July, and the
Summer after.

It has the same Virtues with Borrage. The Flowers are of great use in
Melancholy and Hypochondriack Diseases, and are reckoned among the four Cordial
Flowers. A Person was cured of the Falling Sickness by the constant Use of the
Flowers in Wine for half a Year. Take of the Leaves of Bugloss, Borrage, Balm,
Fumitory, Watercresses, and Brook-lime, each four Handfuls; of July-flowers,
Marrigolds, Borrage-flowers and Cowslips, each three handfuls; the outward
Barks of six Oranges, and of four Limons: All being cut and bruised, pour upon
them four Quarts of Posset Drink made with Cider; distill them in a cold Still,
and mingle all the Water. Take three Ounces Night and Morning.

Bur-dock, in Latin Bardana.
It has a single, thick Root, that grows deep in the Earth; without black,
within white. The Leaves are placed upon long Footstalk; they are very large,
green above, and hairy under; they have a thick, short Down; they are not
exactly round, but a little longish, and end in a sharp Point; they have short,
small Prickles about the Edges, that are scarce visible. The Stalk is two Foot
and an half high, or higher; thick, round and hairy, and of a purplish Color,
and full of Pith; the Leaves are placed on them alternately, at small
distances; they branch out almost from the bottom. The Flowers are placed on
the top of the Stalks and Branches, and come out of rough Heads, or Burrs, with
crooked Prickles; they are purplish; the Burs are apt to stick to Clothes. The
Seed is pretty large, oblong, and of a brown Color.

It Is Drying, Pulmonick, Diuretic, Diaphoretick, Cleansing, and somewhat
Astringent. It Is good in an Asthma, for the Stone, and Spitting of Blood; for
old Sores, and Swellings of the Spleen, and of all other Parts in Gouty
Diseases, wherein it is peculiarly proper. The Seed is an excellent
Lithontripick, being powdered, and taken in Small Beer or Posset Drink. The
Leaves are applied outwardly, to old Sores, and to Burns. The Seed powdered,
and taken forty Days together, cures the Hip-Gout. It Is said, it provokes
Venery.

Take of the Seeds of Bur-dock two Drams, of Wild-Carrot-Seeds one Dram, of
Salt of Amber one Dram, of Oil of Nutmegs half a Scruple, Balsamum Capivii a
sufficient quantity; make small Pills, take four Morning and Evening. This is a
good Diuretic Medicine. But the Root is chiefly used.

Take of the Roots of Bur-dock three Ounces, of Sarsaparilla six Ounces, of the
Wood of Guaiacum three Ounces, of the Bark of the same one Ounce, of the Roots
of Notty China three Ounces, of Sassaphras one Ounce and an half, of Hartshorn
and Ivory, rasp'd, each one Ounce; of Red and White Sanders, and of the
sweet smelling Flag, each six Drams; of Raisins of the Sun, stoned, one
Handful; of the Seeds of Anise and Fennel, each half an Ounce: Infuse them in
eight Quarts of Fountain Water for twenty four Hours in B. M. and cover the
Vessel close; then boil it with a gentle Fire, till a third part of the Liquor
is is consumed; toward the latter end of Boiling, add of the Tops of
Eyebright, Betony, dried Sage, and of the Cordial-Flowers, each one Pugil; of
Woody Cassia half an Ounce; of Nutmegs, number two; strain it for use. Take
half a Pint four times a Day.

Burnet, in Latin Pimpinella vulgaris, sive minor.
It has a long, slender, brown Root, with some Fibers. The Stalks are a Foot,
or two Foot high, angl'd, branchy, and of a light red Color. At the top of the
Branches are small Heads, from whence arise small purplish Flowers. The Seeds
are short, and apiece. It has many long, winged Leaves, that lie on the
Ground, which consist of several small, roundish Leaves, green above, and
grayish underneath, finely indented about the edges, and set on each side of a
Middle-rib. It grows commonly on chalky Ground, and in hilly Pastures.

It Is Cordial, and Alexipharmick. The green Herb is put into Wine, to cheer the
Heart; and it renders it very pleasant, by imparting an Aromatic Smell and
Taste to it. It Is a good Preservative against the Plague, and other contagious
Diseases. It Is also astringent: Of excellent use in immoderate Fluxes of the
Courses and Belly, and in all Hemorrhages, and to dry and heal Wounds and
Ulcers, and the Biting of a Mad Dog. The following Water was much used in the
last London-Plague: Take of the Tops of Burnet, Rosemary, Wormwood, Sun-Dew,
Mugwort, Dragon's Scabious, Agrimony, Balm, Carduus, Betony, the Lesser
Centory, one Handful each; of the Roots of Tormentil, Angelica, Peony, Zedoary,
Liquorish and Elecampane, each half an Ounce; of the Leaves of Sage, Celandine
and Rue, of the Leaves and Flowers of Marigolds, each one Handful; cut them,
and infuse them three Days in four Quarts of the best Whitewine, then distill
them carefully, and keep the Water for use. The Dose was four Spoonfuls.

Butter-bur, or Pestilent-wort, in Latin Petasitis.
First it sends forth a Stalk about nine Inches high, that is concave and
downy, with narrow, sharp Leaves on it. At the top is a long, spiked Head of
Flowers, of a purplish Color. When the Flowers fade, and the Stalks die, large
Leaves succeed, like the Leaves of Coltsfoot, but twice or thrice as large, or
larger; hooked near the Foot-stalk; they are almost round, and indented about
the Edges. The Root is thick and bitter, and creeps much. It grows in moist
places, and near the Banks of Rivers* the Spike and Flower flourish in April.

It Is much used in Pestilential Fevers. It Is also reckoned good in Coughs, and
for an Asthma. It expels the broad Worms of the Belly, and provokes Urine and
the Courses. It Is outwardly applied to Bubo's, and Malignant Ulcers. It Is used
also to provoke Sweat, and to expel Malignity: Take of the Root of Bur-dock,
Virginian Snake-weed and Contrayerva, each one Dram; of Cochinell and Saffron,
each half a Dram; make a Powder. The Dose is half a Dram* to be taken in a
proper Water.

Butterwort, or Yorkshire-Sanicle, in Latin Pinguicula.
The Root has some white Fibers, that are pretty large considering the smalness
of the Plant. It does not grow deep. Six or seven of the Leaves lie on the
Earth, and sometimes more; of a pale yellow Green; they look greasy, and shine
as if they were besmeared; in length two Inches, and in breadth about one; they
are somewhat blunt at the Ends, the Edges are smooth, the upper part of the
Leaf is covered with a very short Down, which is scarcely seen. Some
Footstalk, about an Hand high, arise amongst the Leaves; at the top of each
is placed one purplish Flower, of one Leaf, divided into five parts. It grows
in marshy Places, and on moist Hills.

The Leaves bruised and applied, cure fresh Wounds. Country People cure Chaps
in Cows Dugs, and Chaps and Swellings on their Hands, by anointing them with
the fat Juice of this Herb. The Welsh make a Syrup of it, wherewith they purge
themselves: They also boil the Herb in Broth for the same purpose, for it
purges Phlegm very briskly: They also make an Ointment of it, which is of
excellent use for Obstruction of the Liver. The Leaves beat, and applied to
Parts affected with Pain, ease the Pain. It Is reckoned Vulnerary, and very good
for Ruptures in Children.

C.
CAbbage, in Latin Brasica.
Warts anointed with the Juice of it, are taken off in the space of fourteen
Days. The Leaves boiled in Wine, and applied to Ulcers, and the Leprosy, do
much good. And so great is the Virtue of it, that the Urine of those that feed
on it is very useful, and proper for curing the Fistula, Cancer, Tetters, and
such like Diseases. At the Beginning of an Inflammation of the Jaws, (when we
design to cool and repel) we make use of the Liquor of it. A Person so overrun
with the Scurvy that he could scarce go or stand, and had Spots all over his
Breast and Legs, was cured by drinking daily three Pints of Wine, wherein four
handfuls of Red Cabbage had been infused, with half a Dram of Ginger, and two
Drams of Cinnamon. For a Pain in the Side apply a Leaf of it, besmeared with
Butter, hot, to the Part affected, having first sprinkled Powder of Cumin-seed
upon it. It Is said, Cabbage prevents Drunkenness.

Sea- Cabbage, or Colewort, in Latin Brasica Marina.
It grows every where, almost, on the Seashore, in England: Our People, in
such places, eat it; preferring it before Garden-Cabbage.

Field- Calamint, in Latin Calamintha.
It springs up yearly, with many Stalks, which are two Foot high, small,
apiece, stiff and hairy; they look reddish in Sunny Places; they are
branchy, and bend downward. The Leaves, by Intervals, are opposite one to the
other, small, hairy, with here and there a Jag; they smell as strong as
Pennyroyal, and almost as strong as Water-mint; they are, for the most part,
triangular, of an acrid and quick Taste. The Flowers are placed in Whirls at
every Joint, and are of a pale purple or sky-colour, and have a long Tube, with
a Lip divided into three Clefts; and are placed upon pretty long Footstalk.
From the Wing of the Leaf, on each side, comes forth a common Foot-stalk,
oblong, and small, sustaining many small Flowers, with little, peculiar
Footstalk. The Cup of the Flower, and the Seed-vessel, is oblong, narrow,
channel'd, and contains four Seeds, joined together at the bottom; they are
very small, and red. It flowers late, about Autumn. It grows plentifully in
Ditches, and near Highways, and on Sandy and Barren Grounds*

It Is hot and dry, Stomachick and Uterine. It provokes the Courses and Urine:
It opens the Liver, and cures a Cough. The Leaves relieve those that are bit by
Serpents, being infused in Beer, or used outwardly in an Ointment. A Decoction
of them is good for those that are Short-breathed, Bursten, or Gripped: It cures
the Jaundice, and resists Poison. The Herbs used in Drink, with Salt and Honey,
kills Worms. It cures an Elephantiasis, if it be used frequently. Take of the
Leaves of Calamint, Savoury and Lungwort, each one Handful; one large Leaf of
Tobacco, of Liquorish sliced two Drams; of the Roots of Elecampane, of Polypody
of the Oak prepared, each two Ounces; of Currants two Ounces; of Sebestens,
number fifteen; of the Seeds of Nettles one Dram and an half: Boil them in
sweet Wine diluted to a Pint and an half, with a Pound and an half of Sugar
make a Syrup. Let it be taken in the form of a Linctus, or a Spoonful Morning
and Evening. This is good for an Asthma.

Calve's-snout, or Snapdragon, in Latin Antirrhinum.
It Is a very curious Plant, consisting of a small, whitish Root. The Stalks are
a Foot, or two Foot high, round, and hairy. The Leaves are placed alternately;
they are somewhat red, and fat under, and taste a little acrid and bitterish.
The little Flowers come out of the Wings of the Leaves, and they are of two
Colors, partly white, and partly purple; five or seven green, hairy Leaves
encompass the bottom of them.

This Plant is seldom used in Physic, but is preserved in Gardens for the
Beauty of its Flower. Those Things that are affirmed of the Virtue of this
Plant against Apparitions, Enchantments and Sorcery, are frivolous,
superstitious, and wholly fabulous.

Camomile, in Latin Chamaemelum.
There is so much Camomile in Cornwall, that you scent it as you ride there on
the Road.

It digests, loosneth, mollifies, eases Pain, provokes Urine and the Courses;
wherefore it is much used in the Cholick, and for Convulsions that proceed from
Wind. Among* all the Plants that are used in Baths for the Stone, none is so
effectual as the Flowers of Camomile. It Is outwardly used in Paregorick,
Emollient and Suppurating Pultesses, and for Clysters. The Oil of Camomile
softens hard Swellings, and discusses them, and eases the Pain. Some drink a
Decoction of it for the Stone. A Person that had the Stone, and had tried many
Medicines to no purpose, was wonderfully releiv'd by the following Remedy. I
took, says he, two Handfuls of the Flowers of the Common Camomile, which I
infused in a Quart of Rhenish-Wine, and digested them in hot Ashes two Hours;
then I strained the Liquor, and added two Handfuls more of the Flowers, and
digested them as before; and repeated the same a third time; but the last time
it must be infused no longer time than Asparagus or Fish are wont to be boiled
in. It is to be noted, that this Decoction is rendered so salt, that one would
think a good quantity of Salt had been dissolved in it. I took two or three
Spoonfuls of this Decoction in a small Draught of hot Wine; and by the Use of
this simple Medicine (God be praised) the dreadful Symptoms were mitigated, and
the Vreters relaxed; so that some Stones came away by Urine, without any great
Pain. Afterward I prescribed the same for several Others that were so
afflicted, who found also much Relief, especially if they were placed in a
Bath. The Saltness he mentions in this Infusion, is very remarkable.

Two or three Spoonfuls of the Juice of Camomile, with a few Drops of Spirit of
Vitriol, given in Broth before the Fit comes, generally cures Agues of all
sorts.

Oil of Camomile is made the same way that Oil of Roses is.

Caraways, in Latin Carum.
It has a long, single Root, as thick as the Thumb, or thicker, and white. The
Bulk of it is increased by some Fibers that grow to it, which have an Aromatic
Taste, and are somewhat acrid. It has many Stalks three or four Foot high,
channel'd, smooth, solid and jointed; and sometimes divided into Branches. The
Leaves have a long-Foot-stalk that is like the Keel of a Ship, but it is narrow;
they grow partly from the Root, and partly from the Wings of the Branches; like
Leaves of Wild-Carrot, but they bear their Wings at a greater distance. The
Flowers are single, small, round, whitish, or reddish. The Seed is oblong,
channel'd, and of an acrid and Aromatic Taste. It grows frequently in fat,
pleasant and green Fields, and in Meadows that are sometimes watered.

The Seed is Stomachick, and Diuretic: It expels Wind, and helps Concoction;
provokes Urine, and strengthens the Brain* It Is of great Use in the Cholick,
and for Giddiness in the Head, and the like. It Is much used in the Kitchen; for
it is baked in Bread, and mixed with Cheese, and boiled in Broths. It Is sold in
the Shop Candied. The Root, when it is tender, is as effectual as the Seed, and
eats more pleasantly than Parsnips. Take of the Seeds of Caraways, Coriander
and Sweet Fennel, each fifteen Grains; of White Amber one Dram; of the yellow
Pill of Citron, of the Flowers of Rosemary, one Dram and an half; of Nutmeg
half a Dram; of the finest Sugar three Ounces; make a gross Powder of them all:
Take half a Spoonful of it after Meals, to help Digestion.

Wild- Carrot, in Latin Daucus Offinarum.
It Is Uterine and Diuretic: It Is chiefly used in Obstructions of the Courses,
in a Suffocation, for the Pain of the Matrix, and for a Flatulent Cholick, the
Hickop, Obstruction of Urine, and an old Cough. The Seeds of it infused in
Beer, and drunk, is much commended by some Modern Authors, especially by
Charlton, for the Strangury, and the Stone in the Kidneys. Two Drams of the
Seed infused in White Wind, and drunk, is good for Mother-fits. The little
purple Flower of it is counted a certain Remedy for the Falling Sickness. Mr.
Boil, in his Book of the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy, says, That
discoursing once with an eminently learned and experienced Physician of the
Anti-nephritical Virtue of the Seed of this Carrot, fermented in Small Ale, he
smilingly told him, That he found its Efficacy but too great; for, having
prescribed it to some of his rich Patients, who were wont frequently to have
recourse to him for the Stone; after the Use of this Drink for a pretty while,
he seldom heard of them any more. Mr. Boil prescribed one Ounce and an half of
this Seed to a Gallon of Ale.

Celandine, in Latin Chelidonium majus.
It has diverse tender, round, light-green Stalks, with greater Joints than
ordinary in other Herbs; they are very brittle, branchy, and have large,
tender, long Leaves, divided into many Parts, and each of them cut in the
Edges; they are placed at the Joints, on both sides of the Branches, of a
dark-bluish green Color above, like Columbines, of a pale bluish Green
underneath. They are full of yellow Sap, which is of a bitter Taste, and strong
Smell. At the tops of their Branches, which are much divided, grow yellow
Flowers, consisting of four Leaves: After which come small, long Pods, with
blackish Seeds therein. The Root is pretty large at the Head, shooting forth
diverse other long Roots, and small Fibers; reddish on the outside, and full of
yellow Sap within.

It Is hot and dry: It evacuates Choler by Urine and Stool, and clears the
Sight. A Syrup made of the whole Herb is good in the Jaundice* for Obstructions
of the Liver, Spleen and Kidneys. It cures a Tetter (called in Latin Herpes
Miliaris) effectually, it being anointed with the Juice. The Juice, or
distilled Water of it, outwardly applied, strengthens the Eyes, and cures
Ulcers: But because the Juice is very acrid, it must be mixed with those things
that will abate its Acrimony. A great quantity of the Juice is made use of in
the Composition of Aqua Mirabilis, which is made in the following manner: Take
of Cloves, Galangal, Cubeds* Mace, Cardamoms, Nutmeg, Ginger, each one Dram; of
the Juice of Celendine half a Pint, of Brandy one Pint, of Whitewine three
Pints; infuse them twenty four Hours, and then distill a Quart in B. M.
Celendine grows in shady and rough Places, and amongst Rubbish.

The Lesser Celandine, or Pile-wort, in Latin Chelidonium minus.
It Is a little Plant, about an Hand's breadth, which has yearly a new Root,
Leaf and Flower. The Root is inspid, and partly round, as an Onion, and partly
consisting of many white Fibers; from whence arises a small Stalk, near the
Earth white, above of a light Purple; and at the bottom is a Joint, from whence
arise two Leaves, opposite one to another, with long Stalks, that have a broad
Beginning, and are of a fleshy Color, and end narrow and green: They are
somewhat like Ivy-leaves, but softer, less and rounder; they shine, and are
nervous, and have sometimes white Spots; as also those two that arise from the
Root. The Leaves upon the Stalks are much indented, like the Leaves of
Creeping-Ivy; and they are commonly placed alternately, and hang upon short,
green Footstalk. At the top of the Branches is placed one Flower, resembling
that of Crowfoot, consisting of eight or nine small Leaves, of a Golden shining
Color. The Cup consists of three little, short Leaves, and has in the middle
many yellow Threads. A little Head, covered with Pricks, succeeds the Flower,
of a yellowish green Color, composed of the Seeds. It flowers at the Latter
End of March, or the Beginning of April; in May the Leaves and Flowers vanish;
the Roots shoot forth the next Spring. It grows in Meadows, near Ditches, and
chiefly in wet Grounds.

It cools and moistens, and is chiefly used for the Jaundice, Scurvy, and
Bleeding of the Hemorrhoids. Outwardly applied, it is a Specific for
Excrescencies in the Fundament; and is much commended for Cleansing the Teeth,
and for preserving them from Putrefaction.

The Lesser Centory, in Latin Centaurium minus.
The Root is small, white and woody, it creeps awry* it is full of Twigs,
without Juice, and insipid: It has most commonly but one Stalk, nine Inches or
one Foot high, smooth and firm. Some of the Leaves lie on the Ground, others
are placed on the Stalk by Pairs, one opposite to another, larger than the
Leaves of St. John's-wort, smooth and green. They have three great Nerves, very
conspicuous, on the Underside, running according to their Longitude. There are
many Flowers joined together at the top of the Stalk and Branches, but they
have no Foot-stalk; they are expanded from a long Tube, into five sharp pieces,
resembling so many Leaves, and they have five yellow Tops. The Cup of the
Flower is composed of five narrow, acute, small Leaves, Long, starvling, little
Heads succeed the Flowers, full of Seeds like Sand. It flowers in July, and is
common in dry Pastures.

Gallen, by reason of the wonderful and great Virtue of this Plant, wrote a
whole Book of it. It Is Splenetick and Hepatick, bitter without Biting: it is
Cleansing, Opening and Vulnerary: It Is good in the Jaundice, in Suppression of
the Courses, in the Gout, and for Worms; and is a Specific for the Biting of a
Mad Dog. The Decoction of it is used with Success in Tertian-Agues; wherefore
it is called by some the Febrifuge-Plant. It Is one of the Ingredients of the
Bitter Drink, so much used by the London-Physicians; which is made in the
following manner: Take of the Tops of the Lesser Centory, of the Flowers of
Camomile, each one Pugil; of the Roots of Gentian half a Scruple; of the Leaves
of Sena, and Carduus-seed, each one Dram; of Salt of Wormwood ten Grains; boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water, to four Ounces. A Decoction of
the Tops of it takes off Pimples, Spots, Morphew, and other Diseases of the
Skin. A Lee made of it cleanses the Hair, and makes it white. A Man almost
destroyed by the Jaundice, was cured by drinking every Morning a strong
Decoction of this Herb. It will not grow in Gardens.

Common Wild Charvil, in Latin Cerefolium Silvestre.
It has a woody, single, white Root, and very small Fibers; it is as thick as
the Little Finger. The Taste of it is somewhat acrid. It has sometimes one,
sometimes more Stalks. They are a Cubit and an half high, or higher, round,
channel'd, smooth and empty, and knotted with joints, placed at a great
distance; and they belly out under the Joints. The Branches come out
alternately, at each Joint, from the Wings of the Leaves. This is one of the
Plants that are called Umbelliferous. The Flowers are small and white, and
consist of five Leaves, and so many white Threads. The Seeds are oblong, smooth
and blackish when they are ripe, of a sweet and Aromatic Taste. The Leaves are
softer, and cut sharper than the Leaves of Parsley* of an Aromatic Smell and
Taste, and of a pale-green Color, and sometimes a little red. The Footstalk
are often red, and somewhat hairy. Though we said the Leaves grow alternately
upon the Stalks, yet at the top they are placed by Pairs: And from the Wings of
these two Branches rise, which is common to most other Umbelliferous Plants. It
flowers in May: Soon after the Seed is ripe it withers away. It springs again
in the Autumn, and is green all the Winter.

Charvil (especially that which grows in Gardens) is hot and dry, and
Diuretic. It provokes the Courses, and is Lithontriprick: It quickens the
Blood, when coagulated; and disposes to Sleep.

It Is used outwardly with great Success for the Cholick, and Obstruction of
Urine: Used in Caraplasms, it discusses Tumors and Clodded Blood, like
Solomon's-Seal. It Is chiefly used for Swellings, and Hardness of the Paps.

Take of the Roots of Charvil, Knee-holm, Polypody of the Oak, of each one
Ounce; of the Leaves of Water-Hemp, Agrimony, of the Oak of Jerusalem, of
Maidenhair, and Ground Ivy, each one Handful; of the Seeds of Bastard-Saffron
one Ounce, of the Roots of Florentine-Flower-de-luce, half an Ounce, of the
Seeds of Danewort five Drams, of the Root of the Sweet Smelling Flag half an
Ounce; boil them in two Quarts of Fountain Water, to the Consumption of a third
part; then strain it, and add one Ounce and an half of Sena, and two Drams of
Agarick; Mechoacan and Turbith, each half an Ounce; of Yellow-Sanders one Dram
and an half, of the Roots of Lesser Galanga one Dram; boil them in a close
Vessel two Hours, then strain the Liquor, and add two Ounces of the best Honey,
clarified with the White of an Egg; make a purging Mead: The Dose is six or
eight Ounces, twice or thrice a Week. This is proper in a Dropsy of the Breast.

Cherries, in Latin Cerasus.
Cherries, when they are fresh, loosen the Belly; but when dry, they bind:
Those that are sweet, purge; but they are offensive to the Stomach. Sharp and
harsh Cherries are Binding. The distilled Water of sharp Cherries, and the
Cherries themselves extinguish Feverish Heats, and quench Thirst, and create an
Appetite: And, preserved with Sugar, they are very grateful to the Stomach, and
reckoned by the Women the best Sweetmeats; but, by reason of the Abundance of
their Moisture, they cannot be kept long.

The Decoction of dried Cherries is excellent in Hipocondriack Diseases; and
many have been cured by this Remedy alone. Sweet Cherries are peculiarly good
for Diseases in the Head, the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy and Palsy. A Lord
that was seized with an Apoplexy, and was speechless three Days, recovered his
Speech by taking Spirit of Cherries. In Stammering, and other Vices of Speech,
wash the Mouth often with the Spirit of Black-Cherries; for they are very
Cephalic, and do much strengthen the Muscles of the Tongue and the Spirits
designed for their Use. The distilled Water of sweet Black-Cherries is much
commended, and used for Children's Convulsions. Take an equal quantity of this
Water, and the Water of Lime-tree-flowers: The Dose is, an Ounce, or two
Ounces, according to the Age of the Child. Wines and Potions are prepared of
Cherries several Ways; either by Distillation, or Infusion, or by mixing Sugar
with the Juice, and fermenting it. In Italy they prepare a Potion with fresh
Cherries, which they call Marasco; they drink it before it ferments: It Is sold
there in Taverns in the Summertime, and is counted a good, cooling Liquor. The
Oil drawn from the Kernels, in a Press, is said to take Spots and Pimples from
the Skin, by anointing it: And it is reckoned good for the Gout, and Stone in
the Kidneys and Bladder. The Gum of Cherries, diluted with Wine, cures
inveterate Coughs, quickens the Sight, and provokes Appetite: It Is counted also
Lithontriptick, drunk in Wine. Some, when they eat great quantities of
Cherries, swallow the Stones to prevent Surfeits, which is a vulgar Error;
for, many times they lie long in the Stomach, and do much hurt. The Livers of
Sparrows grow very big at Cherry-time. The following Sorts of Cherries are much
esteemed here in England, (viz.) The May-Cherry, the Duke-cherry, the
Arch-Duke-Cherry, the Flanders-Cherry, the Red-Heart-Cherry, the Carnation and
the Amber-Cherry, the Bleeding-heart and the Naples, the Purple-Cherry, the
Black Orleance, and the common Black-Cherry, Luke Ward's Cherry, the
Cluster-Cherry, the Dwarf-Cherry, and the Morello-Cherry.

Chesnut-tree, in Latin Castanea.
It is a great and stately Tree, as thick as an old Oak; so very large
sometimes, that three Men, with their Arms extended, can scarce encompass the
Trunk of it. It has many Branches, the small Twigs are of a Crimson Color. It
has a smooth Bark, spotted, and blackish, and sometimes of an Ash Color, but
chiefly the Extremity of the Branches: And when the Tree is young, the Wood of
it is strong and lasting; but yet it bends with a Burden, and cracks much in
the Fire, and its Coals are soon extinguished. It has large Leaves, about two
Inches broad, and in length about five; they are thin, wrinkly, and indented
like a Saw, with many transverse Veins sticking on the Back, extended from the
Middle-rib that is most remarkable. Long hanging Buds precede the Fruit, having
yellow Tufts. The Cups are prickly, and like a Bur; within they are hairy, and
as soft as Silk: They contain two or three Nuts, some but one, ending sharp,
from a broad Basis; they are about an Inch long, flat on one side, and bellying
out on the other, and are in shape something like the Heart. The Nut is white,
solid and hard, sweet and palatable; especially when it is roasted. It chiefly
grows on Mountains, and Rising Grounds. There are Abundance of them in Italy,
where the People that live on the Mountains eat little else. They bud at the
Beginning of Spring; and soon after flower. The Fruit is ripe about the Latter
End of September. The good Nuts are known from the bad, by putting them in
Water; for, if they are sound and good they sink, but if otherwise they swim.
We in England make of this Wood Bedsteads, Chairs, Tables, Chests, and other
Furniture for Houses. In some Places beyond Sea they make Bread and Frumenty of
the Flower of the Nuts; but such sort of coarse Diet is no way pleasing to the
English, who (God be thanked) have Plenty of wholesome Food, and great Abundance
of all things necessary. They are either boiled whole in Water, or roasted on
the Fire, or fried. In Italy the Gentry and Citizens roast them under Ashes,
and, having pill'd them, mix a little Sugar and Juice of Oranges or Limons with
them, and so eat them for a Second Course. But, which way soever they are
prepared, they are windy, and injurious to the Stomach and Head, and to those
that are subject to Cholical Pains, and the Stone. The Nuts are astringent, and
consequently do good in Fluxes of the Belly, and for Spitting of Blood. They
are said to be good for Coughs, being eaten with Honey, fasting: As also is an
Electuary prepared with the Flower of them and Honey. An Emulsion of Chestnuts,
made with the Decoction of Liquorish, and a few White Poppy-seeds, is good for
Heat of Urine.

Chick-weed, in Latin Alfine.
It cools and moistens moderately; upon which Account it is good for
Inflammations, and against Heat, either taken inwardly, or outwardly applied,
as Purslan, and the Lesser House-leek. It Is counted good for such as are in
Consumptions, and wasting Conditions. Birds that are kept in Cages are much
refreshed by this Herb, when they loath their Meat.

Common-Garden- Clary, in Latin Horminum.
The Stalk is two Foot high, and higher, about the bigness of the Little
Finger, foursquare, stiff and hairy, and full of white Pith. The Leaves are
large, hairy and whitish, very much wrinkled; from a large Basis, they end by
degrees in a blunt Point; they are somewhat indented about the Edges: They are
placed on long Footstalk, especially the lower, which come out of the Earth;
those of the Stalks are placed by Pairs, opposite to one another. The Flowers
are set upon long Spikes, on the top of the Stalks and Branches; they are
composed of many Whirls, they are of a light blue Color. The Seed is pretty
large, and smooth, and of a brownish Color. The Root is single, and woody, and
consists of many Fibers. The Smell of the whole Plant is very strong, the Taste
is bitter. It grows in Gardens: It flowers in June, or July.

Wine fermented with it is very agreeable to a cold Stomach. It Is also good for
barren Women, and for those that are troubled with the Whites. The Herb
powdered, and applied to the Nostrils, provokes Sneazing, and cures a Catarrh,
and purges the Head. A Decoction of it in Water provokes the Courses, and
expels the Afterbirth. Cakes made of it are reckoned good to strengthen the
Reins, and to stimulate Venery. The Musilage of the Seeds is proper for
Diseases of the Eyes. It Is also said to be good for the Falling Sickness, and
Mother-fits. The Seed put into the Eyes, takes away Motes.

Cloud-berry, Knot-berry, or Knout-berry, in Latin Chamamorus.
It rises up with slender, brownish Stalks, not a Foot high; set with four or
five large Leaves, one above another, at several winged winged Joints, each of
them divided into five parts, and each of them pretty much indented, and
jagg'd, rough, and, as it were, crumpled: Each of them is placed on a long
Foot-stalk, which at the Joints have two small pieces, like Ears, set thereat.
Every Stalk has one Flower set at the top of it, consisting of five roundish,
pointed Leaves, of a dark purple Color; after which follows a large Berry,
like a Mulberry, of a reddish Color when ripe, and is of a sowrish sweet
Taste. The Root creeps much, and far, shooting forth small Fibers at the knotty
Joints, whereby it is fastened in the Ground; and from thence diverse new Stalks
shoot. It Is said, that in Norway they have so great an Opinion of the Virtues
of Knot-berry, for curing the Scurvy, and such like Diseases, that they remove
their Scorbutic People to a neighboring Island, where only such inhabit; and
there they are forced to abide till they recover their Health; and having no
other Provision allowed them, they feed on these Berries, whereby they are
infallibly cured within a few Days. But this sort of Remedy can be only used in
Summertime.

Clowns-all-heal, in Latin Panax Coloni.
It has a jointed, creeping Root; it bunches out. The Stalks are five or six
Foot high, somewhat reddish, hairy, rough and apiece, and empty. The
Leaves are placed at the Joints, by Pairs, opposite to one another; they are
sharp, hairy, soft, except the Rib of the Under-side, which is reddish, and a
little rough; they are indented about the Edges; they have a strong Smell, and
bitterish Taste. The Flowers are spiked, and consist of several Whirls; each of
them is hooded, and purplish, The Lip is of several Colors in the Cup of the
Flower, which is short, and divided into five acute Pieces. The Seeds grow four
by four, black, shining and triangular. It grows in watery Places, and near
Rivers.

Our Gerard wonderfully extols the Efficacy of this Herb, in curing Wounds. He
beats it up with Lard, and applies it to the fresh Wound. A Syrup made of it,
is an excellent Remedy for Hoarsness.

Col^y-flower, in Latin Brasica florida.
This has the same Virtues with the Common Cabbage.

Common- Coltsfoot, in Latin Tussilago.
The Leaves are roundish, have many Angles, and are like Butter-Bur-leaves, but
much lesser; under whitish, above green; with a little Cotton upon them, which
may be easily rubbed off with the Fingers: From the same come several Stalks, an
Hand, and sometimes nine Inches high, concave reddish, and have Cotton on them,
and little Leaves, much unlike those that come from the Root; namely, long,
sharp, thin, and without Footstalk; placed alternately, and pressed to the
Stalk. Each of them sustain a yellow Flower, consisting of abundance of small
Leaves. The Roots are small, and white, and creep much. The Flowers and Stalks
wither soon, (but not in a Day or two, as some have said;) upon which Account,
it has been supposed to have neither Flower, nor Cup. It grows in watery Places.

The fresh Leaves are applied outwardly to hot Ulcers, and Inflammations; but
being dried, are pretty acrid, and hot. The Fume of them received into the
Mouth, through a Tunnel, and swallowed down, or smoked in a Tobacco-pipe, is
good for a Cough, Difficulty of Breathing, and an Ulcer of the Lungs. A Syrup
prepared of the Leaves, is good for the same Use. Mr. Boil says, That the
Leaves powdered, with Saffron and Amber, and smoked in a Pipe, have cured a
Consumption. The whitish Down which grows to the Root, being cleans'd from it,
and wrapped in a Rag, and boiled a little in Lee, adding a little Saltpeter,
and after dried in the Sun, makes the best Tinder. Take of the Leaves of
Coltsfoot, Ground Ivy, Maidenhair, Hartshorn rasp'd, Water-Hemp, Agrimony,
of each one Handful; of the Roots of Charvil, and Butcher's Broom, each one
Ounce; of the Seeds of Bastard. Saffron, of Sweet Fennel-Seed, each half an
Ounce; boil them in three Quarts of Fountain Water, to the Consumption of half;
adding toward the End three Drams of Liquorish, and two Ounces of Raisins of
the Sun stoned, and six Jujubes, or three Ounces of the best Honey clarified:
Make an Apozem. The Dose is four Ounces, hot, twice or thrice in a Day. This is
good for Coughs.

Columbine, in Latin Aquilegia.
The Seed candied, is commended for Obstructions of the Bowels, and for
Giddiness. One Dram of the Seed powdered, and taken in Wine, with Saffron,
cures the Jaundice, if the Sick keep in Bed, and sweat. The distilled Water of
it discusses inward Tumors, expels Poison, and eases the Gripes. The Seed of
it finely powdered, and taken in Wine, helps Delivery: If the first Draught
does not do the Business, repeat it. But it is most frequently used in
Gargarisms, to cleanse the Teeth, and to cure the Scurvy, and Ulcers of the
Mouth and Jaws. Take of the Leaves of Columbine two Handfuls, of White-Pepper
one Dram; boil them in a Quart of Posset Drink till half is wasted: Make a
Gargarism.

Great- Comfrey, in Latin Cons^lida major.
It grows in moist and good Ground. The Root is thick, and full of Sprigs, and
very clammy, and taste insipid. The Stalks are two Foot and an half high, and
higher, a Finger thick, empty, hairy, and rough. The Flowers are many together,
upon the Tops of the Stalks and Branches, of a pale-yellow Color, and
sometimes incline to a Purple. The Leaves are sharp, wrinkly, prickly, equal
about the Edges, and disposed in no Order. The Seeds are like the Seeds of
Viper-Bugloss. It grows in watery Places, or near Rivers; and flowers in May.

It Is an excellent Wound-Herb, is Musilaginous and Thickning, and qualifies the
Acrimony of the Humors. It Is used in all Fluxes, especially of the Belly; and
for a Consumption. The Flowers boiled in Red Wine, are very proper for those
that make a Bloody Urine. Outwardly applied, it stops the Blood of Wounds, and
helps to unite broken Bones; wherefore it is called Bone-set. It eases the Pain
of the Gout, and cures Eating-Ulcers: Take of the Root as much as you think
convenient, beat it in a Mortar till it is reduced to a Mass; spread it on
Leather, and apply it to the Part affected. This is excellent for Abating Gouty
Pains, and the Sciatica; and for Pains in the Arms; and has been also used for
Venereal Pains, with good Success. Take of Comfrey-Roots half a Pound, slice
them, and put them into an Earthen Pipkin, with half a Pint of Alicant, and
half a Pound of Loaf-Sugar; cover it with a Paper, and bake it in an Oven, as
you do Apples: Eat, Night and Morning, two or three Slices of the Comfrey, and
take a Spoonful or two of Syrup presently after. This was prescribed for a Lady
with Child, that had her Courses immoderately, by Doctor Willis. And it has
cured several others.

Sea- Coralline, in Latin Corallina.
It Is one, two, or three Inches high, hoary, and of an Ash Color, sometimes
yellowish, reddish, or whitish. It has abundance of thin Branches, jointed
sometimes, with small Twigs growing on the side. It smells like a Fish; the
Taste also is saltish, and unpleasant: It cracks between the Teeth, like Sand;
and is easily reduced to Powder, by rubbing it with the Fingers. It grows upon
Rocks, and on Shells and Stones near the Seaside.

It Is not soft when under Water, as Caesalpinus writes. Being grossly powdered,
it kills and expels Worms: Half a Dram is given to Boys, not Ten Years of Age;
a Dram to grown People. This is much commended for the Worms: Take of Coralline
and Calcined Hearts-horn, each half a Scruple; of Virginia-Snake-weed one
Scruple; make a Powder: Let the Child take a third part of it, Morning and
Evening, in a small Draught of the white Decoction.

Female- Cornel, Dog-berry, or Gatter-tree, in Latin Cornus foemina.
It grows commonly in Hedges. The Wood of it is so very hard, especially when
it is dry, that it can scarce be cut. Some People make Oil of the Berries, for
their Lamps.

Costmary, in Latin Balsamita mas.
The Roots grow oblique, like the Roots of Mint; they are round, and have many
Fibers. The Stalks are two or three Foot high, channel'd, branchy, and of a
pale-green Color. The Leaves are like the Leaves of Pepperwort, and of the
same Color with the Stalks; indented about the Edges, but seldom jagged; it
has a very strong Scent, and a very bitter Taste. On the top of the Branches
are Umbles or Tufts of Golden yellow Flowers, somewhat like the Flowers of
Tansie. The Seeds are small, oblong and flat. It grows in Gardens.

It cures the Crudities of the Stomach, Belchings, Vomitings, and a Stinking
Breath; the Gripes, Heart-burning, and Pain in the Head, that is occasioned by
Fumes from the Stomach: It opens Women's Obstructions, and is good in the
Stone. The Juice and the Seed kill Worms. It Is supposed to be peculiarly good
against the Malignity of Opium, and other Poisons. It cures Wounds presently.
An excellent Balsam for old Ulcers is prepared of this Herb and Adder's-tongue,
boy'ld in Oil of Olives; adding Wax and Rozen to bring it to a Consistence.

Cowslips, in Latin Paralysis.
It Is common in Pastures, and flowers in April.

The Leaves and Flowers are used amongst Pot Herbs, and in Sallets; and are
very agreeable to the Head and Nerves. They are used in Apoplexies, Palsies,
and Pains in the Joints. The Juice of the Flowers takes off Spots and Wrinkles
from the Face, and other Vices of the Skin. The Water of the Flowers, the
Conserve, and the Syrup are Anodine, and gently provoke Sleep; and are very
proper Medicines for weakly People. The Juice of the Leaves and Flowers, mixed
with an equal quantity of Red-Cow's Milk, cured an inveterate Headache, when
other Medicines would do no good. Take of Cowslip-water two Ounces, of the
Syrup of White Poppies one Ounce, of the Juice of Limons fresh drawn, two
Spoonfuls; make a Draught. This is commonly used at Bedtime, to cause Sleep.

Common-Garden- Cresses, in Latin Nasturtium hortense.
It flowers in May and June; and, when the seed is ripe, withers quite away.

The Herb, especially the Seed, is acrid, and hot; for which Reason it opens,
attenuates, and cleanses. It Is chiefly used for the Swelling of the Spleen, for
Obstructions of the Courses, and to expel a dead Child. It cuts the Tartareous
Musilage of the Lungs, and is good in the Scurvy. It Is outwardly used, beat up
with Lard, to cure Scabs in the Head, and other Parts of the Body. It Is used
every where in Sallets, with Lettice, and other Herbs: It qualifies the
Coldness of the Lettice, and comforts the Stomach, and promotes Concoction by
its Heat. For Lethargies, and sleepy Diseases, there is nothing better than
Cresses, either boiled, or eaten in Sallets. For Children's Scabs, or Scalded
Heads, nothing is so effectual and quick a Remedy as Garden-Cresses, beat up
with Lard; for it makes the Scales fall in twenty four Hours, and perfectly
cures them, if they continue the Use of it.

Water- Cresses, in Latin Nasturtium aquaticum.
It grows frequently in Brooks, and watery Places. It flowers chiefly in July
and August, and sometimes before.

It Is much used in the Springtime, in Broths, to purify the Blood. It Is good
in the Stone; for it provokes Urine, it opens Women's Obstructions, and
relieves those that are in Dropsies.

Spirit of Watercresses: Take a large quantity of Watercresses, beat them in
a Marble Mortar, press out the Juice, dissolve some Leaven with it; make an
Heap, and beat them well with your Hands; then put them in a convenient Place
for eight Days, afterward distill the Spirit in B. M. The Dose is one Spoonful,
or two in Wintertime, for Scorbutical People. The Spirit of Celandine,
Brooklime and Scurvy Grass may be made the same Way. Take of Watercresses and
Brook-lime, each two handfuls; Wood Sorrel one Handful; bruise them, and put
the Juice into a Pint of White Wind; let it stand close stopped till the Wine is
clear: Take two Spoonfuls of the clear Wine in your Beer, every time you drink;
continue the Use of this for the space of three Weeks. This is good for an hot
Scurvy.

Cross-wort, or Mugweed, in Latin Cruciata.
It grows up in square, hairy, brown Stalks, about a Foot high; having four
small, broad, and pointed; hairy, yet smooth; yellowish green Leaves growing at
every Joint, each against the other, cross-wise. The Flowers are of a
pale-yellow Color. Its Seeds are small, round and blackish; four, most
commonly, in every Husk. The Root is very small, and full of Fibers, or
Threads, which spread much in the Ground, It grows amongst Bushes, and in
Hedges.

It dries, is astringent, and one of the chief Vulneraries, inwardly taken, or
outwardly applied. Drunk in Wine, it is good for Ruptures. It also expectorates
Viscous Humors.

The Common Creeping Crow-foot, in Latin Ranunculus pratensis.
The Root has many white Fibers. The Leaves are placed upon very long
Footstalk, and have three Divisions, and are most like the Leaves of
Smallage; they are cut in deep, and indented about the Edges; hairy on both
sides, of a dark-green Color, and sometimes spotted with white. It has many
small Stalks, round, hairy and concave, that creep on the Ground, and send down
Roots from the Joints, by Intervals. The Flowers are placed upon long
Footstalks; they have five Leaves, are yellow, and shine as if they were
varnished. Many Seeds succeed the Flowers; all joined together, make a a Bur:
They are black when they are ripe. It grows in moist Grounds.

This Sort is not at all acrid, and therefore may be applied to the Body
without Danger. The German-Women eat them in April, when they are tender, with
other Herbs.

Round-rooted, or Bulbous Crow-foot, in Latin Ranunculus bulbosus.
The Leaves and Flowers are like the former: It differs from it in these six
Things; 1. The Root is bulbous. 2. The Stalks are upright, and do not creep at
all. 3. The Leaves upon the upper Stalks are cut into smaller and longer Jags.
4. The Leaves of the Cup, when the Flower opens, are turned back to the
Foot-stalk. 5. It flowers earlier. Lastly, The Heads of the Seeds are a little
longer, and each Seed not prickly at the top, as is every Seed of the Creeping
Crow-foot. There are other Differences, but these may suffice for the
Distinction of them. This grows every where in Pastures, and is too frequent
there.

This is called Devil's Crow-foot by Tragus. Beggars make Soars upon their
Flesh with this Plant, to move Compassion. The Water of the Root, or the
Infusion made in Spirit of Wine, is praised in the Plague. The Root of it burns
violently, and therefore must be used only externally. It Is of excellent Use
for eating down, and drying up hard Tumors. It takes off long Warts, and the
like. Camerarius says, That if the Root be kept dry a Month, it becomes sweet.
Nicholas Chesneaw commends the Juice of Crowfoot (I suppose he means the
Bulbous) in Headaches, which (says he) wonderfully moves the Pain, when it
possesses a little Space. Choose that Sort whose Leaves are like the Leaves of
Anemony, and bites the Tongue when chewed; beat the Leaves of it in a Marble
Mortar; and having applied a Plaster with an Hole in it, as is made use of in
the Application of a Caustic, put it on the pained Part, and apply the Leaves,
beaten, with the Juice in them, in the Hole of the Plaster; and then put
another Plaster over, to keep them in; and in the spaee of two Hours it will
open the Skin, especially if the Herb be gathered in a Place where the Sun
shines. Note, The Hair must be shaved, and you must take care not to apply it
near the Eyes. He mentions many Observations of the Cure of the Headache by
this Medicine. He used it in the Gout, with the same Success. A Priest, says
he, that had kept his Bed three Years with the Gout, and was not able to walk,
was cured by applying Crowfoot to the Part most pained, after the Manner
abovementioned. One that was seized with the Plague, and was in great danger,
was cured by two Issues made in the Groin with the Leaves of Crow-foot, he
having a Bubo there.

Ivy-leav'd, Water- Crow-foot, in Latin Ranunculus aquaticus, or Hederaceus
albus.
The Stalks of it are round, solid, lie along, and are jointed; from the Joints
whereof, the Plant spreads it self much, by many white Fibers. The Leaves are
placed at the Joints, with pretty long Footstalk; they are triangular, and
somewhat like Ivy-leaves; they are smooth, shining, and sometimes have a black
Spot upon them. The Flowers grow on the Stalks, opposite to the Leaves; they
are small, and have five sharp Leaves. The Cup is divided into five parts, and
is white. An Head of Seeds succeed the Flowers, of the bigness of the common
Vetch: The Seeds are not sharp. It grows plentifully in Brooks, and Ditches
that have Water in them; especially on Sandy Ground.

The following Medicine is excellent for the Scurvy and Dropsy: Take of the
Tops of Alder, Ivy-leav'd-Water-Crow-foot and Sage, each one Handful; infuse
them one Night in White Wind, and drink the Infusion.

Cuckow-pintle, in Latin Arum.
It has a Tuberous Root, and sends its Fibers every way into the Earth. The
Leaves are oblong, triangular, smooth at top, and shining below, and have
sometimes black Spots upon them. The Taste of the Root and Leaf is very biting.
The Stalk is about an Hand high, on the top whereof the naked Pestel comes out,
from a long, membranaceous Sheath, and is oblong, and of a dark-purple Color.
The Berries are of a Vermilion Color. The Roots, when they are young, yield a
Milky Juice.

The Root, especially of that which is spotted, green, or dry, taken to the
quantity of a Dram, is an excellent Remedy for Poison, and in the Plague. Some
add to it the like quantity of Treacle. The Root boiled, and mixed with Honey,
cures all Phlegmatic Humors of the Breast, and is good for an Asthma. It cures
Ruptures, and provokes Urine. Women use the distilled Water of the Root, to
beautify their Faces; but the Juice of the Root, set in the Sun, is much
better. The dried Root is an excellent Medicine for the Scurvy; and is full as
effectual in cold Diseases of the Spleen, and Stomach; especially for Wind. The
Country People about Maidstone, in Kent, use the Herb and Root, instead of
Soap. The Compound-Powder of Wake-Robin is as follows: Take of the Roots of
Wake-Robin, powdered, two Ounces; of the Roots of Sweet Smelling Flag,
Pimpernel and Saxifrage, each one Ounce; of Crab's-eyes half an Ounce, of
Cinnamon three Drams, of Salt of Wormwood, and Juniper, each one Dram: Make a
Powder.

Cucumber, in Latin Cucumis.
The Seed of it is one of the four greater cold Seeds. It cleanses, opens, and
provokes Urine. It Is frequently used in Emulsions for Pleurisies, and the Stone
in the Kidneys. The Flower of it is reckoned good to clear the Skin. It Is
generally reckoned, that the Substance of Cucumber is cold and moist, and of an
Excrementitious Juice; and therefore to be used only by those, whose Stomachs
are strong: But I, says Schroder, though my Stomach is not very strong, having
lived a Sedentary Life, have eaten plentifully of Cucumbers, for many Years, as
long as they are in Season, and fit to eat; yet never received the least Injury
or Inconvenience by them, though I am now Sixty Years of Age. And when I was at
Florence, and had a Fever there, an English Physician prescribed the Pulp of
Cucumber in Broth for me; whereby I was much refreshed, and relieved. But when
they are eaten raw, they must be cut into thin Slices, and sprinkled with Salt,
and beat betwixt two Dishes, so that the Watery Humor may be drained from
them: After add Vinegar, Pepper and Oil to them: And being so ordered, they are
very grateful to the Palate, and Stomach; and, undoubtedly, not unwholsom. The
small ones, pickled with Salt, Pepper and Vinegar, Dill and Cloves, are kept
all the Year; and are very good to provoke Appetite, and cool an hot Stomach.

Wild- Cucumber, in Latin, Cucumis silvestris.
Elaterium is made of the Juice of it pressed out, and inspissated. It purges
Phlegm and Watery Humors, upwards and downwards. It moves the Courses, and
kills the Child in the Womb; wherefore it is seldom used; especially, for that
it is accompanied with Malignity. It Is the most durable of all Juices, for it
is supposed to continue good above an hundred Years. A certain Emperick cured
several People of Dropsies, by giving them two Pills, of the bigness of a
Vetch, made of Wheaten Flower and this Juice: Afterward he washed their Legs
with a Lotion, made of the Stalks; and then he gave the Pills again, and so
perfected the Cure.

Common- Cudweed, in Latin Gnaphalium vulgar majus.
Many small Stalks arise from the same Root, about half a Foot, or nine Inches
high, upright, hoary, downy, branchy at top. It has many Leaves, disorderly
placed, downy, narrow, and oblong, much less than the Leaves of Lavender,
pressed to the Stalks for the most part, whereunto they grow without
Footstalk. Among the Leaves grow small Flowers, of a brownish yellow Color.
After the Flowers, come small Seeds, wrapped in Down. It grows every where, in
dry and barren Grounds.

The distilled Water of it is of excellent use for Cancers, especially of the
Breast; for it hinders their Growth, and prevents their Breaking, Rags being
dipped in it, and applied to them. But some dip the Leaves of Asarabacca in the
Water, and apply them to Cancers. It Is of a drying and astringent Nature. The
Country People in the West of England use the Herb infused in Oil, to take off
Black and Blue Bruises and Stripes. It also stops the Courses.

Currant-bush, in Latin Ribes.
Currants are cold and moist, and provoke Appetite, allay the Heat of the
Stomach, quench Thirst; and therefore are good in Fevers. They temper the Heat
of the Liver, and Choler; and resist Putrefaction.

Cypress-trees, in Latin Cupressus.
The Wood of Cypress is very lasting: The Doors of the Temple of Ephesus were
made of it, and lasted four Ages: And the Gates of St. Peter at Rome were made
of this Wood, and continued sound and fresh from the Time of Constantine the
Great, to Eugenius, the fourth Pope; which was about Six hundred Years. It Is
used in making Tables, and Chests, and Musical Instruments, and the like. It
has a very curious Smell, which continues to many Ages. The Fruit and Leaves
are dry and astringent. The Decoction of the Leaves in sweet Wine, helps the
Strangury, and a Cough, Short-windedness, Fluxes of the Belly, Spitting of
Blood, and Ruptures. The Powder of the Leaves provokes Urine. The Leaves beaten
with Figs, soften Tumors, and are good in the King's Evil, applied outwardly.
Take of the Tops of Cypress eight Handfuls, of the Whites of Eggs beaten two
Pints, of Cinnamon half an Ounce; cut them small, and pour upon them four
Quarts of New Milk; distill them carefully in a common Still: Take six Ounces of
the Water thrice a Day. This is used in a Diabetes.

D.
WIld English D^ffadil, in Latin Narcissus Anglicus.
The Root is bulbous, composed of many Coats of a moderate Bigness; it tastes
and feels clammy, it is sweetish, but leaves behind it some Bitterness. The
Leaves are long* of a Light-green. The Stalk is an Hand or nine Inches high,
channel'd, and hollow; upon the top of which is one Flower, bending downward,
about two Inches long, consisting of six pale Leaves. The Seed is at first
broadish, and afterward round. It grows in several Places near Hedges,
especially in moist Ground, and in Woods.

The Root is Vomitive. The Leaves bruised, are proper in an Erisipelas.

The Greater Wild White Daisies, in Latin Bellis major.
The Root is fibrous, and creeping, of an acrid Taste; sending forth many
Stalks, nine Inches high, or higher, five-angled, solid, branching; and it has
many oblong, fat and indented Leaves, with obtuse Points. The Flowers cast
forth Beams of Brightness; they are white in the Circumference, in the middle
yellow, and large; composed of many small, yellow Flowers, divided into five
little Pieces, with a small Pillar in the middle of each. The Leaves of the
Cups have a blackish Fringe. It flowers in May and June. It grows frequently in
Pastures.

The whole Herb, Stalks, Leaves and Flowers, boiled in Posset Drink, and drunk,
is accounted an excellent Remedy for an Asthma, Consumption, and Difficulty of
Breathing. It Is very good in Wounds and Ulcers, taken inwardly, or outwardly
applied. A Decoction of the Herb cures all Diseases that are occasioned by
drinking cold Beer when the Body is hot.

The Lesser Daisie, or Common Wild Daisie, in Latin Bellis minor.
It grows in Meadows and Pastures.

There is some Difference amongst Writers, about the Temperament of this Plant.
Some say, it is hot and dry: Others say, it is cold and moist. But its sharp
Taste argues Frigidity; and the Effects of it, Siccity. Both the Greater and
the Lesser are excellent Wound-herbs. It Is used outwardly in Plasters and
Fomentations, and inwardly in Vulnerary Potions; and upon that Account it is
called in the Shops, the Lesser Comfrey. Women usually give the Herb and the
Flower to Children, to loosen their Bellies. The Roots are used outwardly, with
very good Success, in the King's Evil. It Is commonly reported, that the Roots
of the Lesser Daisie, boiled in Milk, and given to Whelps, hinder their Growth.
Take of the Lesser Daisie, Comfrey, Marshmallows, each three Handfuls; Clivers
two Handfuls, Liquorish one Ounce, half an Ounce of Anniseeds, four Nutmegs;
boil all, being shred, sliced and bruised, in six Pints of Water, till half is
wasted; after strain it, and dissolve in it four Ounces of Sugar, and clarify
it. This is good in Ulcers of the Bladder.

Dandalyon, in Latin Dens-leonis.
It has many long Leaves, much jagged, lying on the Ground; the Middle-rib is
white, and full of bitter Milk. The Root is as thick as a Little Finger, and is
full of Milk. The Stalks are naked, and empty, and sometimes hairy: Each of
them bears, at the top, a large, yellow Flower. The Down at the top is as round
as a Ball, and is soon blown away by the Wind, or Breath. It grows commonly in
Gardens, Courts and Meadows.

It Is Epatick, and much of the same Virtue with Endive; and is also Diuretic.
Take of fresh Horse-dung four Ounces, of Carduus-water one Pint and an half;
make an Infusion over a gentle Fire, in a close Vessel, two Hours; then strain
the Liquor, and add to it two Ounces of the Syrup of Dandalyon, and a Dram of
the Spirit of Sal-Almoniack: The Dose is five or six Spoonfuls, three or four
times a Day. This is very good in Pleurisies, and other Diseases that proceed
from the Clamminess of the Blood, and from its being coagulated.

Dane-wort, in Latin Ebulus.
It Is neither Tree, nor Shrub, but rather an Herb; but it is so like Elder,
that it is called Dwarf-Elder. It Is seldom so high as a Man, but most-commonly
three Foot high, and no higher. The Stalk is green, and channel'd, and full of
Pith, like Elder; which withers in Winter. The Leaves are whiter and greater
than those of the common Elder, long, and broad, and cut in the Edges like a
Saw. The Leaves are placed by Couples, and smell strong. The Flowers are white,
tip'd with red; and grow at the top of the Stalks, in Tufts. The Berries are
black. The Root is long, and of the thickness of a Finger, not woody. It
spreads much, and grows commonly near Highways, and Ditches, and Churchyards.
It flowers in June, or July; and the Betries are ripe in August and September.

It Is said to have the same Virtues with Elder, but they are stronger. The Bark
and Seeds purge Water; wherefore they are good in Dropsies, and other Diseases
arising from watery Humors. The Root likewise purges very strongly. The Leaves
of it, as well as those of Elder, applied to Burns, cure them. In Diseases of
the Spleen, Take four Ounces of the distilled Waters of the Roots, for the
space of ten or twelve Days, fasting. Take of the Roots of Dwarf-Elder, of our
Flower-de-luce, each one Ounce and an half; of the Leaves of Soldanella, and
Hedge-Hyssop, each one Handful; of the Roots of Asarabacca and Wild Cucumbers,
each two Ounces; of the Lesser Galangal six Drams, of choice Jalap half an
Ounce, of Elaterium three Drams, of Cubebs two Drams; slice and bruise them,
and pour upon them three Pints of small Spirit of Wine Tartariz'd; digest them
in a close Vessel, in a Sand-Furnace, two Days; strain it, and let it stand
till it is clear: Take two or three Spoonfuls, in a proper Vehicle. This is an
excellent Purge in a Dropsy.

Darnel, in Latin Lolium album.
The Root is very fibrous. The Straws are two or three Foot high, like the
Wheat-straw, but a little less. They have four or five Knots, at each whereof
are the Leaves; they are narrower and greener than the Blade of Wheat; they
shine, and are smooth, fat, channel'd, and are spiky. The Grain is less than
Wheat, and is included in a single, brown Husk. It grows too much amongst Wheat.

It Is hot and dry: It attenuates, resolves and cleanses. Being mixed with Malt,
it makes the Beer heady: And mixed with Bread, it occasions great Dullness. It
offends the Eyes, by sending ill Vapors into the Head. The Flower of it, mixed
with other Medicines, is commended by the Ancients for putrid Ulcers, the Itch,
the Leprosy, the King's Evil, Gangreens, and the Hip-Gout.

Dill, in Latin Anethum.
It Is very like Fennel, yet it differs from it in many things: The Root is
annual; the Stalk is less, and and lower, for it is rarely three Foot high; the
Leaves are lighter colored, and smell stronger, and not so pleasant; the Seed
is broader, of an acrid Taste, and not so pleasant as that of Fennel; the Tufts
of Flowers are yellow, but not so large. It grows in Gardens, and springs
yearly from its Seed: But it grows no where spontaneously in England, as I know
of.

The Herb, but especially the Seed, digests, discusses and ripens Tumors,
increases Milk, disposes to Sleep, lessens Venery, cures Vomiting, and the
Hickops. It Is said to be offensive to the Eyes; which seems strange to me, for
that it is very like Fennel, both in Quality, and outward Appearance; and it
expels also Wind: And Fennel is allowed by all to be good for the Eyes. The
tender Tops, and the Root, when fresh, provoke Urine, and so very good for
those that are afflicted with the Stone.

Our People are wont to put the Seeds and Leaves into Pickle of Cucumbers, to
better the Taste and Smell, and to correct the Coldness. Take of the Oil of the
Seeds of Dill four Drops, of Oil of Almonds half an Ounce; mingle them for a
Draught. This is excellent for the Hickops, when they proceed from a cold Cause.

Dittander, in Latin Lepidium latifolium.
The Root is of a Finger's thickness, and thicker, white, of an acrid and hot
Taste, which soon vanishes. It creeps in the Earth. It has many Stalks four
Foot high, sound, smooth, and full of Pith; branchy, less than the Little
Finger, and covered with Sky-colour'd Dust, which may be easily wiped off. The
Leaves are long and broad, but end sharp; they are smooth, fat, of a dull green
Color, and placed alternately; they are indented about the Edges: Those which
come from the Root, and are on the bottom of the Stalk, are prop'd by long
Footstalk. The little Flowers are placed on the top of the Stalks and
Branches; they consist of three white Leaves; there are many of them. The small
Seed-vessels succeed the Flowers; they are fat, and pointed. Gardiners dislike
it, because it spreads so much.

The Women in Suffolk boil it in Beer, to facilitate Delivery. The Herb is
acrid. The Root eases the Pain of the Teeth.

Sharp-pointed Dock, with curled Leaves, in Latin Lapathum acutum crispum.
The Root is single, and has sometimes Sprigs; it grows deep in the Earth;
without brown, and within yellow. The Leaves are narrow and long, and of a dull
color, curled, and crooked about the Edges, especially near the Footstalk.
The Flowers are small, hanging down upon long Footstalk, and many Whirls. The
Seed is of a Chesnut-colour. It grows on untilled Grounds, and in Courts;
especially in moist Places.

Sharp-pointed Dock, in Latin Lapathum acutum.
The Leaves are shorter than the former; the Lower grow narrow by degrees, from
a broad Beginning, and are less than the other. The Stalk is small, stiff, and
sometimes crooked. The Whirls of the Flowers are not so thick; the Flowers are
smaller, and the Seeds not half so large. It grows in moist Places, and near
Water; and commonly in Ditches, and Hedges.

The Root of Sharppointed Dock is much commended for the Itch: And, infused in
Beer, is excellent for the Scurvy, and the Jaundice. The Powder of the Seeds
strengthen the Liver, and stop all Fluxes of the Belly.

Provide four Gallons of Small Ale; instead of Hops, boil in it three Handfuls
of the Tops of Pines, or Firr; after it has done Working in the Vessel, put
into a Canvas-bag three Handfuls of Scurvy Grass, four Ounces of the Root of
Sharp-pointed Dock prepared, and the Peels of four Oranges; hang the Bag in the
Vessel, with something to sink the Bag: After it has stood a Week, and is
clear, drink of it for your ordinary Drink. This is frequently used for the
Scurvy, and is an excellent Diet-drink.

The Dock called Monk's-Rubarb, or Garden-patience, in Latin Hippo-lapathum.
It Is sometimes as high as a Man. The Stalk is channel'd, and reddish; above it
is divided into many Sprigs. The Leaves are a Foot, or a Foot and an half
broad, and pointed; of a dull green Color. The Root is thick, long, and has
many Fibers, and of a Saffron-colour. The Leaves come out in March, and it
flowers about June.

The Root purges Choler, and watery-Humours. Take of the dried Root one Dram,
of Ginger one Scruple: Those that use it for Rubarb take a double quantity. The
Root expels Gravel: Take Dock-roots prepared and Polypody, each one Ounce; Sena
ten Drams, Rubarb six Drams, Monks-Rubarb five Drams, Yellow Sanders two Drams,
Salt of Wormwood, and Scurvy Grass, each one Dram; cut and bruise them, and put
them into a Glass, with Snail-water and White Wind, each one Pint and an half;
stop the Glass, and set it in a Cellar twenty four Hours: Take six Ounces of
it, or more, according as it works, every Morning. This is good for the Itch.

Dodder, in Latin Cuscuta.
This fawning Parasite, and ungrateful Guest* hugs the Herb it hangs upon, with
its long Threads, and reddish Twigs; and so closely embraces it, that at length
it defrauds the hospitable Herb of its Nourishment, and destroys it by its
treacherous Embraces. It has no Leaves. The Flowers are placed thick, at
several Distances, or Intervals: Each of them consists of four small, acute
Leaves, that are thick, and full of Juice. This Plant has no need of a large
Description; for it is distinguished from all other Plants, by having no
Leaves, nor Root, when it is grown up; consisting only of long Threads, by
which it encompasses the neighboring Plants, and sucks away their Nourishment.
Upon which Account the Country People in Sussex call it Hell-weed, or The
Devil's Guts. And so much for the Vices of this Plant.

It Is supposed to participate of the Plant it adheres to: So that which grows
to Broom is reckoned Diuretic; that is counted moist, which sticks to Flax;
that astringent, which climbs Madder; that which grows on Nettles, is very
Diuretic. It Is hot, dry, and cleansing: It opens Obstructions, and purges
Melancholy; is of good use in the Itch, for the Black Jaundice, and
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. But that which grows on Nettles is
preferred before all the other in Physic. Take of Dodder of Thime, and of
Rubarb, each one Dram and an half; of Sena three Drams, of Yellow Sanders half
a Dram, of Coriander-seeds two Scruples, of Salt of Wormwood half a Dram, of
Celtick Spike one Scruple; infuse them in a close Vessel all Night, in four
Ounces of White Wind, and Water of Apples: To five Ounces of the strained
Liquor, add six Drams of Syrup of Dodder of Thyme, and two Drams of
Aqua-mirabilis; mingle them, and make a Potion: For those that are difficult to
purge, add a Dram, or two Drams, of the Fibers of Black Hellebore, infused in
Vinegar. This is an excellent Purge for melancholy People.

Common Drop-wort, or Filipendula, in Latin Filipendula.
It has many Roots; black without, and white within. The Fibers of it are
bulbous. It has many Leaves at the Roots; they are long, winged, and indented
almost like Burnet-Saxifrage. The Stalk is most commonly single, upright, nine
Inches or a Foot high, or higher, channell'd branchy, with a few Leaves on it.
The Flowers are placed on the top of the Stalk, in a Tuft; they smell sweet,
and are white; they consist of seven Leaves. Eleven or twelve Seeds, more or
less, are placed in the form of a Star. It grows in Meadows, and Hilly Pastures.

The Root attenuates, and is somewhat astringent. A Decoction of it provokes
Urine, and expels Gravel: It cures the Heat of Urine, and takes off the
Difficulty of it. The Powder of the Root, and the Juice of it, is commended by
some, in the Falling Sickness: It Is excellent for the Whites, and the
immoderate Flux of the Child-bed-Purgations: The Dose is, one Dram of the Root
in Wine. It also cures the Bloody Flux, and Ruptures.

Common Dove's-foot, or Crane's-bill, in Latin Geranium Columbinum vulgar.
It has several small, round, pale-green Leaves, cut in about the Edges, like
Mallows: They are placed upon long, reddish, hairy Stalks, lying on the Ground;
among which rise up two or three, or more, reddish, jointed, slender, weak and
hairy Stalks, with some such like Leaves thereon, but smaller, and more cut in.
It has many very small, bright, red Flowers, of five Leaves a-piece; after
which follow small Heads, with small, short Beaks, pointing forth, as all other
Sorts of this Kind of Herbs have.

It Is very Vulnerary, either outwardly applied, or taken inwardly. It stops a
Flux of Blood, and resolves coagulated Blood: It cleanses Wounds and Ulcers: It
expels Gravel; and eases the Pain of the Cholick. The Powder of the Root and
Leaves taken, in Wine, is very effectual for curing Ruptures.

The Dove's-foot, callet Herb-Robert, and in Latin Geranium Robertianum,
has the same Virtues with this above-describ'd.

Dragons, in Latin Dracontium.
It Is easily known, being speckl'd like a Snake. It flowers in July.

It Is hot and dry, astringent, and of an acrid Taste. It Is something of the
Nature of Cuckow-pint. It Is good in Coughs, Catarrhs, and Convulsions. The
Leaves are good for Ulcers, and Venomous Bitings. The distilled Water is good
in the Plague, and Pestilential Fevers. Take of Dragon-water, and
Wood-Sorrel-water, each four Ounces; of Compound-Scordium-water two Ounces; of
Treacle-water, and Bezoartick-water, each one Ounce; of Prepared Pearl one
Dram, of Syrup of Gillyflowers two Ounces, of Spirit of Vitriol twelve Drops;
make a Julep: The Dose is three Ounces often in a Day. This is used in the
Plague.

Duck's-meat, in Latin Lenticula palustris.
This grows in Standing-waters, and is full of shining, round Leaves, green
above, and black below. They are joined together with white, small Threads. It
often covers all the Water it grows in.

It Is Cooling, and good in Inflammations. It also cures Children's Ruptures. An
Infusion of it in Whitewine cures the Jaundice infallibly, six Ounces of it
being taken every Morning, for nine Days, Ducks feed upon it very much.

E.
EArth-nut, in Latin Bulbocastanum.
The Root is Tuberous, white, and solid; with small Fibers at the Bottom and
Sides: It has a sweetish and pleasant Taste: It grows deep in the Ground. The
Leaves are cut more sharp than the Leaves of Parsley. The Stalk is single,
round, channel'd, with one Leaf growing to it: Most commonly, before it divides
it self into Branches, at every Division of the Stalk a Leaf is placed, much
more cut than those that rise from the Root. The Flowers are white, and very
small. This is one of the Umbeliferous Plants; so called, because they sustain
their Flowers by long Footstalk, in a Circle. The Seeds are small, and
somewhat long, of a Chesnut-colour. It flowers at the Latter End of May, or
Beginning of June; and grows frequently in Sandy and Gravelly Pastures. When
the Seed is ripe, the Superficies withers immediately, the Root remaining in
the Ground.

Our Country People eat the Root raw; but when it is pill'd, and boiled in
fresh Broth, with a little Peper, it is pleasant Food, and very nourishing, and
stimulates Venery. Being mixed with Medicines, it helps those that spit Blood,
and void a Bloody Urine.

Egglentine, or Sweet-Bryer, in Latin Rosa silvestris odora.
It needs no Description, its curious Smell will not let it be unknown.

The Virtues of the Flowers are much the same with Garden-Roses, but more
astringent; wherefore they are of excellent use in Fluxes of the Womb. The
Fruit of it is much commended for its Lithontriptick Virtue. The Heads, when
they are ripe, contain a Pulp of a pleasant, acid Taste, which, without doubt,
is very useful in Fevers, and to provoke Appetite. The Conserve of it is
commonly kept in the Shops, and is very good for the hot Scurvy, and for
Spitting of Blood. The Root is good for the Biting of a Mad Dog, a sort of a
Sponge grows from the Branches when they are broken or hurt, which is of a
reddish Color; which laid on the Pillow, disposes to Sleep. The Ashes of it
cure the Heat of Urine, and kill Worms. Take of the Conserve of Hips, and
Wood Sorrel, each one Ounce; Conserve of Berberies half an Ounce, Cream of
Tartar one Dram; make an Electuary, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Limons: Take the quantity of a Nutmeg thrice a Day. This is good in Fevers.

Elder, in Latin Sambucus.
Martin Blockwitz wrote a whole Book of the Virtues and Use of the Elder; the
Title of it is, The Anatomy of the Elder. The inner Bark of the Elder purges
watery Humors; wherefore it is good in Dropsies. The tender Leaves boiled in
Wine, is likewise very good for the same purpose, and more convenient for
weakly People. The inner Bark, applied to Burns, takes out the Fire. The
Flowers discuss, mollify and dissolve, and are Sudorifick and Anodine.
Vinegar, wherein the Flowers have been infused, is very agreeable to the
Stomach, and excites Appetite; and it cuts and attenuates gross and crude
Humors. The Berries are Alexipharmick, and Sudorifick. The Spirit drawn from
the Berries, provokes Sweat, and therefore good in Fevers. The Wine made of the
Juice of them, or the Juice mixed with White or Rhenish-Wine, does much Good in
Dropsies. The Seeds cleanse, and purge violently by Vomit and Stool. A
Decoction of the middle Bark, with Syrup of Poppies, promotes Sweat. But note,
That Narcoticks, mixed with Sweating Medicines, do much provoke Sweating. For
Swellings in the Feet, take of the Leaves as much as is sufficient, boil them
in Oil, with Salt, and foment them with it. In St. Anthony's Fire, a
Fomentation is frequently used, made of two Parts of Elder-water, and one of
Spirit of Wine. This is commonly used in London, with good Success. My Father
makes an Ointment of the Red-Lead-Plaster and Oil of Elder, which he frequently
uses for Burns: And I have found it very successful also in other Inflammations.

Elecampane, in Latin Helenium.
Many Leaves, long and broad, come from the Root, and bend toward the Earth;
they are acute at both Ends, above of a pale Green, under hoary, indented about
the Edges. They have short Footstalk, from the Center whereof the Stalks
rise, sometimes one, sometimes more; they are straight, hairy and reddish, five
or six Foot high, with some Leaves thereon, compassing them about at the Lower
Ends; they are branched toward the tops, and bear great, large Flowers, like
those of our Marigold, of a Golden Color. The Root is very thick, without
brown, within white, and of an Aromatic Taste, and smells sweet and
pleasantly, especially when dried. It grows in moist Meadows, and Pastures; but
it is not common. It flowers in June and July.

The fresh Root being candied, or dried, and powdered, mixed with Honey or
Sugar, is very good in a Difficulty of Breathing, an Asthma, and an old Cough.
Being taken after Supper, it helps Concoction. It is also commended as an
excellent Preservative against the Plague. Being taken in the Morning, it
forces Urine, and the Courses. Half a Pint of White Wind, wherein the sliced
Roots have been infused three Days, taken in the Morning fasting, cures the
Green Sickness. A Decoction of the Root, taken inwardly, or outwardly applied,
is commended by some for Convulsions, Contusions, and the Hip-Gout. The Roots
boiled in Wine, or the fresh Juice infused in it, and drunk, kills and expels
Worms. Wine that is every where prepared with this Root in Germany, and often
drunk, wonderfully quickens the Sight. Elecampane distilled in common Water,
yields a Volatile Salt, that smells, and has the same Virtue with Salt of
Hartshorn. Take of the Roots of Elecampane, well cleans'd from the Fibers, as
much as you please; boil them in Water till they are salt, and pulp them
through a Sieve; whereof take one Part, and of Honey two Parts; boil them to the
Consumption of the Moisture. This is a Preservative against the Plague. Take of
the Roots of Elecampane, Oris and Liquorish, each one Dram; of the Flowers of
Sulphur two Drams, Honey a sufficient quantity to make an Electuary, Oil of
Sulphur ten Drops; make a Linctus. This is good for an inveterate Cough.

Elm, in Latin Vlmus.
The Leaves, the Branches, and the Bark, are astringent. The Leaves cure
Wounds. And, rubbed with Vinegar, they are good for a Leprosy. The Bark boiled
in Fountain Water, almost to the Consistence of a Syrup, and the third part of
Aquavitae mixed with it, is an excellent Remedy for the Hip-Gout, if the Part
affected be fomented with it before the Fire. The Water in the Bladders upon
the Leaves clears the Skin, it being washed with it; and it betters the
Complexion. It helps Burstenness in Children, Clothes being wet in the Water,
and applied; but a Truss must be kept on also. Take of the Bark of Elm six
Drams, of the Root of Liquorish half a Dram, of Raisins of the Sun stoned
number twenty, of Red Roses two Pugils; boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Water, to a Pint and an half; dissolve in it of Honey of Roses, and Simple
Oxymel, each two Ounces; make a Gargarism.

Endive, in Latin Endivia.
The Root is fibrous, and full of Milk. The long, broad Leaves like on the
Earth, they are like the Leaves of Lettice; sometimes indented about the Edges.
The Stalk is two or three Foot high, smooth, channel'd, empty, and has many
Branches, and is crooked; being cut, it yields a Milk. The Flowers come from
the Wings of the Leaves; they are Sky-colour'd, and like the Leaves of
Wild-Succory. It grows in Gardens.

It Is Cooling, and the Water of it is used in Fevers and Inflammations.

Eringo, or Sea-Holly, in Latin Eringium marinum.
The Roots are very long, and spread much; they have an Aromatic Taste. The
Leaves are placed upon long Footstalk; they are almost round, yet they are
broader than they are long, sometimes an Hand's breadth, and more; they are
thick, whitish, or gray, as is the whole Plant. The Leaves are sharp and
prickly. The Stalk is two Foot high, and very branchy. The Heads are placed
amongst the prickly Leaves, at the Extremities of the Branches. The Flowers are
white. It has two broad Seeds joined together, which are encompassed by
Prickles on every side.

Eringo is Epatick, Nephretick, and Alexipharmick. It forces Urine, and the
Courses: It expels Wind, and eases Gripes, and cures the Jaundico. The Roots of
it candied are accounted excellent Sweetmeats, and are Provocatives to Venery,
and are good Preservatives against the Plague, and the Contagion of the Air;
and are good for Consumptive People. The Root candied, cures a Gonorrhea, and
is useful in the French Pox. And, used in the form of a Cataplasm, and applied
to the Belly, it prevents Abortion.

Eyebright, in Latin Euphrasia.
It Is a small Plant, an Hand and an half high. The Root is single, and crooked;
it has a few large Fibers; it is woody, and white. The Stalks are roundish,
hairy, and, where the Sun shines, purplish. They have many Branches, which come
from the Wings of the Leaves, that are longer sometimes than the middle Stalk.
The Leaves are placed by Pairs, on the Stalk, opposite to one another, without
Footstalk, and are like the Leaves of Chick-weed; they are of a deep Green,
they shine, are wrinkly, indented, and hairy under, and of a fat and bitterish
Taste. The little Flowers come from the Wings of the Leaves; they are white,
streaked within with purple Lines, and a yellow Spot is in the middle. The
Seeds are oblong, and of an Ash Color. It grows commonly in barren Pastures,
and flowers about the middle of Summer.

Eyebright, which Way soever it is taken, either in a Powder by it self, or in
White Wind, or the Juice, or the distilled Water, wonderfully strengthens the
Eyes, and repairs a weak Sight. It Is applied outwardly, being bruised, for
Inflammations, and Dimness of Sight: Or the Juice is dropped into the Eye: But
especially the Water. Take of Eyebright two Ounces, Mace half an Ounce; make a
fine Powder: Some add to it Fennel-seed and Sugar. This is good for Dimness of
Sight: Take one Dram of it Night and Morning; but the Body must be first well
purged. Fabritius Hildanus, who is an Author of the first Rank, says, That the
Virtues of Eyebright are so effectual in Weakness of Sight, that he had
observed some of Seventy Years of Age to have recovered their Sight (which they
had lost by long Watchings, and much Study) by the Use of it. The Oculists in
England, and Beyond Sea, use the Herb in Sallets, in Broths, in Bread, and in
Table-Beer; and apply it outwardly in Fomentations, and other External
Medicines for the Eyes. Take of Water of Eyebright, and Fennel, each one Ounce
and an half; of White Rose Water one Ounce, Prepared Tutty two Drams, Camphire
two Grains; mix them, drop two or three Drops into the Eye, warm, thrice a Day.
This is good when the Eye is much bruised.

F.
COmmon- Fennel, in Latin Faeniculum vulgar.
It grows on hot and stony Grounds; and in England on the Sea-banks, and on
Chalk-hills; as in Cornwall, and in Pemsley-Marsh in Sussex.

The Powder of the Seed, taken daily, in the Morning, fasting, with Sugar,
clears the Sight wonderfully. The Seed strengthens the Stomach, and takes off
Nauseousness: And being mixed with Pectoral Medicines, it relieves those that
are Asthmatick; and also resists Poison. The Leaves boiled in Barley-water,
increase Nurses Milk: And a Decoction of the Leaves and Seeds asswages
Nephritick Pains, forces Urine, and expels Gravel. The Roots provoke the
Courses, and open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and cure the Jaundice.
The whole Herb boiled in Broths, is reckoned good to prevent and cure
Over-fatness. The tender Buds of Fennel, and the upper part of the Root, before
the Stalks grow out, are used for Second Course, being prepared with Oil and
Pepper by the Italians, and in Savoy, Dauphine, Provence and Languedoc. We
commonly use the fresh Leaves, cut small, in Pickle for Fish, and in Boiling
them. It hinders Abortion. And the Roots of it boiled in Wine, and applied to
the Eye, cured a Suffusion in a Monk in the space of nine Days. Take of the
Seeds of Fennel, Annis and Coriander, each one Dram, of Carroways half a Dram,
of Shavings of Hartshorn, and Ivory, each one Dram; of the Species Aromatic
Rosat half a Dram, of Marjoram half a Dram, of the Cordial-flowers one Dram, of
the Roots of Liquorish and Elecampane, each one Dram; of Ginger, Galangal,
Nutmegs and Cloves, each half a Dram; Saffron one Scruple; beat them grossly,
and add of Sugar of Roses the weight of all: The Dose is half a Spoonful, after
Meals. This has done much Good for those that have been troubled with wind in
their Stomachs.

Hog's- Fennel, or Sulphur-wort, in Latin Pucedanum vulgar.
The Root is thick, it is covered with a black Bark, the Substance of it is
green: If it be cut, the Juice that comes out smells strong, like Pitch. The
Stalk is three or four Foot high, or higher; it is branchy. The Umbels, or
Tufts, are very large. The Flowers are yellow, and have yellow Threads. The
Leaves are large, and divided into three Parts; and each Division is again
divided into three other Parts. The Seeds are thin, flat and yellowish, and
taste acrid, and bitterish. It grows in Marshy Ditches, near Shorcham in
Sussex, and near the Thames, plentifully.

It expectorates and expels Choler. It Is chiefly used in Diseases of the
Breast, for Coughs, Wind, and Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Reins. It
forces Urine, and does good in the Stone. It Is used outwardly in Headaches. The
Ancients reckoned it was good for all nervous Diseases; as, Lethargy, frenzy,
Falling Sickness, Giddiness, Palsy, and the like. The Conserve of it is an
excellent Histerick and Pectoral Medicine.

Fenugreek, in Latin Foenum Graecum.
It has one thin, green, hollow Stalk, divided into Wings and Branches, not
above a Foot high. The Leaves are like the Leaves of Meadow-Tree-foil, but they
are rounder, and smaller; above they are green, below of an Ash Color. The
Flowers come from the Wings of the Leaves, and are like those of Lupines, and
are whitish. It has Pods an Hand, or an Hand and an half long, that are placed
upon very short Footstalk; they are thin, narrow, and flat; in which is
contained the Seed, which is oblong, and almost foursquare, and of a yellowish
Color, and smells sweet. The Root is small, white, single, and woody. It Is
sown in many Places: I never found it grow Spontaneously.

The Flower of the Seed, which is only in use, mollifies, digests, ripens and
discusses; and is Anodine: And the Use of it is so very frequent, that there is
scarce a Surgeon makes a Poultess without it, or its Mucilage. It Is also
often used in Emollient Clysters; for the Musilaginous Substance blunts the
Acrimony of the Humors, and keeps the Guts from Erosion. Take of the Seeds of
Fenugreek as much as you please, boil them in Water and Honey till they are
soft; then beat them, and boil them again with Honey: Spread it on a Cloth, and
apply it for the Hip-Gout; it presently gives Ease. It Is very good also for the
Eyes. Take of the Pulp of Sweet Apples, boiled to the Consistence of a Poultis,
in a sufficient quantity of Fennel and Vervain-water; strain it through a
Sieve, then add of the Musilage of Fenugreek-seeds, extracted in Rose Water, of
the Boodstone finely powdered, each one Dram; of Camphire, and Prepared
Tutty, one Scruple; of Bole-Almoniack a little, of Rose Water a sufficient
quantity: Make an Epithem for the Eyes. For Cold Swellings of the Paps, apply
the Flower of Fenugreek-seed, mixed with Juice of Smallage. Take of Flax and
Fenugreek-seeds, beaten, each one Ounce; of ordinary Barley one Pugil, of the
Flowers of Camomile and Melilot, each one Pugil; of Rye-Bran two Pugils; Make a
Decoction of all in Water, to half a Pint; in the strained Liquor dissolve the
Yolks of two Eggs, Honey of Roses three Ounces, Brown Sugar two Ounces; mix
them, and make a Clyster. This is good in the Bloody Flux.

Common Male- Fern, in Latin Filix mas vulgaris.
It grows every where near Hedges, and in shady Places.

The Root is reckoned injurious to Women, and occasions Barrenness, hinders
Conception, and causes Abortion. It Is peculiarly good for the Rickets.

Female- Fern, in Latin Filix foemina.
It grows every where on barren Grounds. It Is the largest of all that grows in
England. The Root is branchy, and creeping. It Is very injurious to Husbandmen.

Of the Ashes of this, and the Male-Fern, are made, with Water, Balls,
especially in Warwickshire and Staffordshire; and being dried in the Sun, they
wash their Clothes with them, instead of Soap: But before they use them, they
put them into a light Fire, till they are red hot; and then they will easily
powder. This Fern is used in Sussex to burn Lime; for the Flame of it is very
violent, and therefore very fit for that Use. The Root of it reduced into
Powder, and one Dram of it taken in Water and Honey, kills the broad and long
Worms of the Belly. Mounte-banks keep this as a great Secret, and use it to
kill Worms. The Juice of the Root is good for Burns. Some poor People have been
forced (in great Scarcity of Corn) to make Bread of this Root. The Ashes cast
upon Stones, instead of Nitre, make Glass of a green Color.

Flowering- Fern, or Osmond-royal, in Latin Filix florida, or Osmonda regalis.
It shoots forth, in the Spring, diverse rough, hard Stalks, half round, and
hollowish, flat on the other side, two Foot high; having several Branches of
winged, yellowish green Leaves on all sides, somewhat like the Leaves of
Polypody. From the top of some of the Stalks grows a long Bush of small, green,
scaly Aglets, which are counted the Flowers and Seeds. The Root is rough, thick
and scaly, with a white Pith. It grows in Marshy Places, and amongst Woods, in
many Parts of England.

The Root cures Bursten Bellies, and Ulcers. It does good in the Cholick, and
Diseases of the Spleen. The whitish part of the Root is very effectual for
Bruises, and those that are wounded, it being boiled in some Liquor. It Is
excellent in the Rickets, a Conserve being made of the tender Buds of it, and
of Asparagus. Spleen-wort and Hart's-tongue.

Feverfew, in Latin Matricaria.
It has a white Root, and many Fibers. It has many Stalks, about three Foot
high, rigid, channel'd, smooth, pretty large, and full of a fungous Pith. It
has many Leaves, but they are not placed orderly. Toward the top of the Stalks
come forth small Branches from the Wings of the Leaves, whereon, as also on the
tops of the Stalks, many Flowers are placed, upon oblong Footstalk, as it
were in a Tuft; they are not very large; white, short, marginal Leaves
encompass the middle yellow Dish; when the marginal Leaves wither, the Dish
grows large: The Color of the Leaves is of a yellowish Green. The whole Plant
smells strong. It flowers in June or July, and grows in Hedges, and amongst
Rubbish. The Leaves are very much cut about the Edges.

It Is much used in Diseases of the Womb: A Decoction of it forces the Courses,
and expels the Afterbirth: It cures the Suffocation of the Womb: It does all a
bitter Herb can do. It cures Fevers* Bees cannot endure it; wherefore those
that abound with good Humors in the Body, and are most apt to be stung with
Bees, may secure themselves, when they walk in Gardens where Bees are, by
carrying Feverfew in their Hands. Take of Feverfew one Handful, warm it in a
Drying Pan, apply it twice or thrice hot; this cures an Hemicrania: And the
crude Herb applied to the Top of the Head, cures the Headache. A Decoction of
it, with the Flowers of Camomile, cures Histerical Symptoms, and forces the
Childbed Purgations in great Abundance.

Fig Tree, in Latin Ficus.
Fresh Figs, if they are ripe, are very soon concocted. Galen eat no other
Fruit, after Twenty eight Years of Age, than Figs and Raisins. They are
Pectoral, and are used by Physicians in Diseases of the Lungs. Some Women eat
them to facilitate Delivery: And Brandy burnt on Figs, is freqently used to
cure a Cough. Figs, outwardly applied, ripen, mollify, and attract. Being beat
with Leaven and Salt, they break Pestilential Buboes, and other Tumors, in a
few Days. King Hezekiah used the same Medicine, with Advice of the Prophet, 2
King. 20. 7. It Is said that Figs, frequently eaten, breed Lice. The Juice of
the Fig Tree is very biting, and may be reckoned amongst the Causticks; and may
be used to cure Warts, and other sordid Excrescencies of the Skin. Take of
Raisins of the Sun stoned, one Ounce; of Sebestens and Jujubes, each fifteen,
Dates six, fat Figs eight, French-Barley one Ounce, Liquorish half an Ounce, of
the Leaves of Maidenhair, Hyssop, Seabious and Colt's-foot, each one Handful;
boil them in three Pints of Fountain Water, till a third part be consumed: The
Dose is eight Spoonfuls thrice a Day. This is the Pectoral Decoction of the
London-Dispensatory.

Fig-wort, in Latin Scrophularia major.
It has a stinking Smell, like Elder. The Root creeps awry, is white, and
pretty thick, and branches out unequally. The Stalk is firm, straight,
apiece, hollow and Purplish, about four Foot high, and is divided into
Wings. The Leaf is large, sharp, indented, and of a dark-green Color. The
Flowers are placed on hairy Footstalk, in a Five-leav'd Cup, and they are of
a purple Color. It grows in Hedges, and amongst Bushes frequently.

This, and some other Herbs, do good in the King's Evil; but nothing has been
found so effectual, as Touching: And he that, on Trial, shall find the
Contumaciousness of this Disease, which frequently deludes the best Care and
Industry, will find Reason of Acknowledging the Goodness of God, who has dealt
so bountifully with this Nation, in giving the Kings of it, at least, from
Edward the Confessor, downwards, if not for a longer Time, an extraordinary
Power in the miraculous Cures thereof. This our Chronicle has all along
testified; and the Personal Experience of many Thousands, now living, can
witness the same. It Is also useful in Cancers, and Eating Ulcers. The Powder of
the dried Root, applied to the Piles, dries them up. A Dram of it taken
inwardly, expels Worms. The Water distilled from the Root, cures a Red Face. An
excellent Ointment is made of this Herb, for curing the Itch: It is composed as
follows; In May take the Herb, with the Root, and, well washed and cleans'd,
beat them in a Mortar; keep the Juice in a Glass, well stopped, for a Year; and
when you would prepare the Ointment, take of the Juice of Wax, and Oil, equal
parts, and boil them to an Ointment. For the King's Evil make the following
Plaster: Take one Pound of Lard, melted over a moderate Fire; then take of the
Leaves of Fig-wort, Hound's-tongue, the Flowers of White Archangel, and
Fox-glove; cut them small, and boil them in the Lard: Do the same three or four
times, till the Ointment be of a deep green Color; then add two Ounces of
Turpentine, and an Ounce of Verdigrease, and a sufficient quantity of Wax and
Rosin; strain it, and make a Plaster, spread on Leather, and apply it to the
Part affected.

Filberd, in Latin Corylus sativa.
The Nut is very pleasant; but if many of them are eaten, they occasion the
Headache, Wind in the Stomach, Looseness, and the Bloody Flux. Hoops are made of
the Branches: And Painters use the Coal of it, to delineate. Gunpowder was
made of the Coals, before the Coals of Alder were found more commodious for
that Use.

Firr-tree, in Latin Abies.
They say it grows plentifully on the Mountains in Scotland: But I suppose, the
Tree that grows commonly there, is that which is called by skilful Botanists,
Picea; for, that which we plant in our Gardens for the Firr-tree, is the Picea,
as appears by the Characteristick Notes of the Picea; for the Cone is slender
and long, and hangs downward; and the rigid and prickly Leaves encompass the
Branches disorderly. Theophrastus says, it is propagated only by the Seed; and
that the Cutting off the Tops causes it to wither and die the same Year: But we
find by Experience, that the Branches do not only grow, but take Root, and in
time become Trees. The Rosin of it is twofold: First, Liquid, which comes from
young Firr-trees: This the Shops fasly call Venice-Turpentine. Secondly, Dry;
it is like Frankincense. Thirty three stately Trees of this Kind make a fair
Appearance, on a little Hill, near Waryton in Staffordshire, two Miles from
Newport.

The Branches and Tops are infused in Diet-drinks, for the Scurvy, with very
good Success.

Sweet Smelling Flag, in Latin Calamus aromaticus Officinarum.
It was first observed by Doctor Thomas Brown, in the River Yare, near Norwich.
It grows also spontaneously in other Parts of England, (viz.) near Hedley in
Surrey, and in Cheshire. It Is easily known by its sweet Smell.

It Is hot and dry. It Is chiefly used in Obstructions of the Courses, Liver and
Spleen, and in the Cholick; it also provokes Urine. The Root of it candied,
tastes very pleasantly, and is grateful to the Stomach. The Turks usually chew
it in a Morning, to prevent Contagion of corrupted Air. The Tartars carry it
about with them, and will not drink Water, unless this Root has been infused in
it.

Flax, in Latin Linum sativum.
It Is sown in the Fields.

The Oil is chiefly in use for Medicine. It Is taken inwardly in a Quinsie,
Pleurisy, Consumption and Cholick: Outwardly used, it mollifies hard
Swellings, and eases Pains; it asswages the Swellings of the Belly. Printers
Ink is made of this Oil and Lamb-black.

Purging, or Wild Dwarf- Flax, or Mill-mountain, in Latin Linum silvestre
catharticum.
It has a small, white, woody Root, and some Fibers. It sends forth little
Stalks, that creep a little, and then rise an Hand high, or higher; they are
small, jointed and reddish, branchy at the top, and bending downward. The lower
Leaves are roundish, and have an obtuse Point; the upper, on the Stalks, are
placed by Pairs, opposite to one another; there are many of them, they are
small, and half an Inch long; smooth, and without Footstalk. The Flowers have
five white Leaves, and are placed on small Footstalk. The Taste of the whole
Plant is bitter, and nauseous. It flowers at the Beginning of June. It grows
commonly in dry and hilly Pastures.

The whole Herb infused in Whitewine, for a whole Night, over hot Ashes, purges
strongly Watery Humors. Take of Purging-Flax one Handful, of
Sweet-Fennel-seeds two Drams; boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Fountain Water, to six Ounces; add two Ounces of Whitewine: make a purging
Potion.

Marsh-Flea-bane, or Bird's-tongue, in Latin Coniza palustris.
The Root is thick, and spreads much; sending forth hollow and crested Stalks,
three Foot high, with many Joints and Branches, bearing two long Leaves at each
Joint, which are indented about the Edges; green on the upper side, and gray or
woolly underneath. At the tops of the Stalks and Branches stand many small,
yellow Flowers together, like those of Rag-wort. The Seeds, when ripe, fly away
with the Wind. It grows in the Fen-ditches, and on the Banks, in the Isle of
Ely; but not very common. It grows chiefly near Stretbam-Ferry.

The Herb being spread under-foot, or burnt, in any Place, will, as it is
believed, drive away venomous Creatures and Fleas and kill Gnats; wherefore
it is called Flea-bane. Some prepare an Ointment of the Root and Leaves for the
Itch.

Flix-weed, in Latin Sophia Chirurgorum.
It is two or three Foot high. It has many hard, woody Branches; they are
round, and a little hairy. The Leaves are cut small, like Roman-Wormwood; it
tastes somewhat acrid. The Flowers are many, small, and yellowish. The Pods
succeed the Flower; they are about an Inch long, and very small. The Seed is
very small, and brown. The Root is white. It grows in stony and gravelly
Places, and on Stone-Walls, and in untilled Grounds.

A Dram of the Seed is very good for a Looseness: And not only the Seed, but the
whole Herb, is commended for the Fluxes of the Belly, and the Bloody Flux. It Is
used in Plasters for Wounds, and sordid Ulcers. In Yorkshire they use the Seed
to expel Gravel, with good Success.

Common Purple- Flower-de-luce, in Latin Iris vulgaris.
The Root hanged in Wine or Beer, preserves the Beer sweet, and imparts a
pleasant Taste and Smell to the Wine, like Rasberries. It Is much used by
Bakers, to prepare Leaven for Wheaten Bread. Many Virtues are attributed to the
Root of this Plant, by the Ancient and Modern Writers; they are briefly
described as follows: By Schroder it is chiefly used for Coughs, Difficulty of
Breathing, Obstructions of the Courses, and Children's Gripes. Being outwardly
applied, it takes off Spots from the Skin. Mixed with Hellebore and Honey, it is
much used in Powders for the Hair. It cures the Dropsy, and Jaundice: Take
from half an Ounce, to one Ounce and an half, of the Juice; this is commended
in a Dropsy, to purge away the Water. A Gentlewoman cured many Hydropical
People by this Juice alone: She gave four Spoonfuls of it daily, in the Morning
fasting, in six Spoonfuls of White Wind.

The Yellow Water- Flower-de-luce, in Latin Iris palustris lutea.
It grows almost every where, in Marshy Places, and upon the Banks of Rivers.

Whether it be hot, or cold, Botanists do not agree; but almost all allow it
very astringent, and the Taste of it confirms as much; wherefore it is
commended for the Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes of the Belly and Womb: And it
stops Blood, and therefore is useful to prevent the Bloody Flux, and Bleeding:
The Sick must have it hanged about him* So that it is plain that the
Apothecaries were in a great Error formerly, when they used this Root (which
has quite contrary Faculties) for the Root of the Sweet Smelling Flag. The
Highlanders in Scotland make excellent Ink with this Root, infused, or a little
boiled in Water twenty four Hours, by rubbing a white, rough Stone upon a
Knife, or a piece of good Steel in it, for some Hours.

Fluellin, or Male-Speed-well, in Latin Veronica man.
It creeps with Twigs on the Superficies of the Ear^h, and sends down Roots
from the Joints. These little Stalks, or Twigs, are small, round, long, hairy,
and jointed. The Leaves are placed by Pairs, one opposite to another, at the
Joints; they are hairy, and indented about the Edges; they taste bitter, and
acrid. The Flowers come forth spiked from the Wings of the Leaves, composed of
four small Leaves of a deep Sky-colour, with Threads of the same Color in the
middle. The Seeds are contained in small Receptacles, like Shepherd's-purse.
The Flowers consist really of one Leaf only; for, though they seem several, yet
they are all entire at the bottom. It grows plentifully on dry Places, and on
Heaths, in Gravelly, Sandy and Sunny Places.

A large quantity of the Decoction of it, used for some Time, cured a Woman of
the Stone in the Kidneys; which she had been troubled with sixteen Years.

The Lesser Spiked- Fluellin, or Speed-well, in Latin Veronica spicata minor.
The Root grows awry, and is fibrous. The Stalk is upright, sometimes four
Inches, sometimes a Foot, sometimes two Foot high, or higher. Those Leaves that
are placed at the Joints are narrow and sharp, hairy and a little indented;
they are larger at the Root. The Stalk ends in a long Spike, full of
Sky-colour'd Flowers, flowering by degrees, first the Lower, then those that
are at top; when they are faded, little, long Threads remain.

It Is Vulnerary, and Sudorisick. It Is chiefly used in Erosions, and
Obstructions of the Lungs, and Spleen; in the Cholick, and Consumption; for the
Plague, and the Itch. It Is of excellent use in Cleansing Wounds, being
outwardly applied; and for hard Swellings of the Spleen.

Purple Fox-gloves, in Latin Digi^alis purpurea vulgaris.
It Is sometimes four Foot high. The Stalk is as thick as the Thumb, angled,
hairy, reddish, and concave. The Root is fibrous, and bitter. The Flowers are
placed on a long Spike; they are placed on short, hairy Footstalk, and hang
downwards; each of them has a little, sharp Leaf joined to it; they are like a
Taylor's Thimble; without they are of a Crimson Color, except in the lower
Part, which, by the mixture of some White, is of a Flesh-colors; they are
purple also within, but in the lower Part they have some white Spots. To the
Basis of the Flowers grow white or purple Threads. The Leaf is oblong, and ends
sharp; hairy, and indented about the Edges; above of a dark Green, below hoary:
Those that are at the Root are placed on long Footstalk, those on the Stalks
are set disorderly, and there are many of them. The Cup of the Flower consists
most commonly of five Leaves: The Margin of the Flower is divided into five
pieces. It delights in Sandy Ground. It varies the Flower, and is sometimes
white, but very rarely.

It Is Vomitive. The Country People in Somersetshire purge and vomit the Sick in
Fevers with it. It Is very good in the Falling Sickness, if you take two
Handfuls of it, with four Ounces of Polypody of the Oak, and boil them in Beer,
and then drink it: For some have been cured by this Decoction that have had the
Falling Sickness above twenty Years, and that use to have two or three Fits
every Month. But this Medicine must be given only to strong People, for it
purges and vomits violently. Being bruised, and applied to the King's Evil, or
the Juice of it made into an Ointment, does much good. Some confide very much
in the Flowers, in King's-Evil-Swellings: They put a great many into
May-Butter, and set them in the Sun: Others mingle them with Lard, and put them
under Ground for forty Days; they spread the Ointment on a Cloth, and apply
them to the Swellings, and purge every sixth Day; and, in the mean while, use
continually a Decoction of the Herb Robert: With the thinner part of the
Ointment they anoint the Red Part of the Swelling; the thicker they use on
Cloth. A large quantity of this Ointment ought to be provided, for sometimes it
is a Year, and more, before the Cure is perfected. Though the Ulcers should grow
larger at first, you need not be discouraged; for when the Ointment has dried
up all the Humor, the Ulcers will heal and skin. This Ointment is chiefly of
use in moist Ulcers of the King's Evil.

Fumetory, in Latin Fumaria.
It purges Choler, and purifies the Blood, and is much used for a Leprosy, the
Itch, and other Diseases of the Skin. It Is likewise commended for the
French Pox. It opens Obstructions of the Liver, and cures the Jaundice. It is
much used in Whey, in the Springtime. It Is also good for the Scurvy. The Juice
or Water of it, dropped into the Eyes, cures Dimness of Sight. Being mixed with
Treacle, it is good for the Plague. An Ointment made of the Juice of Fumetory,
and of sharp-pointed Dock, and a little Vinegar and Honey, cures the Itch. Take
of the Conserve of Fumetory, and Wormwood, each one Ounce; of the Conserve of
the yellow Peel of Oranges and Limons, each two Ounces; of the simple Powder of
the Root of Wake-Robin, of Yellow Sanders, of Alloes-wood, of the Root of
Capers, each one Dram and an half; of Crab's-eyes one Dram, of Salt of Wormwood
two Drams, of Syrup of Fumetory a sufficient quantity; make an Electuary: The
Dose is, the quantity of a Walnut, twice a Day. This is good for the Scurvy.

G.
Garlic, in Latin Allium.
It Is hot and dry, and Alexipharmick. It Is used outwardly, and inwardly, in the
Flatulent Cholick, the Worms, for the Plague with Vinegar, and for the Stone,
and for the Cough. The Common People use it frequently, boiled in Milk; and
therefore it is called their Treacle: But the often use of it is injurious,
partly by reason of the intolerable Stink; but especially, because it
occasions the Headache, and Drought; and for that it hurts the Eyes, and the
Organs of all the the Senses. Zacutus Lusitanus relates an Observation of an
Old Man, who, traveling a long Way in the Snow, was taken desperately ill; the
innate Heat of his Stomach being, in a manner, extinguished: And when Zacutus
had tried all hot Remedies to no purpose, he at length, according to Avicen's
Directions, gave him Dried Garlic, mixed with Honey; and when he had used this
four Days, the Man found himself better; and was quite recovered by using it a
Month. And Experience teaches the Northern People the Use of this Root; for
which Reason they eat it often. Garlic beat with Lard, and applied to the
Soles of the Feet, in the manner of an Ointment, opens the Stoppages of the
Lungs. If Garlic be applied to the Soles of the Feet, the Breath will stink of
it; but the Vapors penetrating the Habit of the Body, do not occasion that
Stink; but Particles of the Garlic are mixed with the Blood, and, together
with it, are brought to the Lungs, and so are emitted by Expiration, with the
Sooty Effluvia of the Blood. Take Cloves of Garlic pill'd, four Ounces, boil
them till they are soft, change the Water twice, pour the Water off, and put
the Garlic into a Vessel; to which put Syrup of Vinegar half a pound; stop it
up close, and set it in a Skillet with Water, put Hay under the Vessel, and
boil it for half an Hour: Take four or five of the Cloves every Day, and a
Spoonful or two of the Syrup. This is much commended for Coughs, and the Worms.

Wild Germander, in Latin Chamaedrys silvestris.
It Is rooted with a great many Fibers. The Branches bending to the Earth,
sometimes turn to Roots; and so by creeping it increases. The Stalks are
sometimes two Foot high, downy, round, small, and weak; to which the Leaves
grow by Intervals, opposite to one another, without Footstalk; they are
indented, hairy, very green, and wrinkly; from a large Basis, they grow by
degrees pointed, but not very sharp. The Flowers come from the Wings of the
Leaves, and grow like an Ear, and seem as if they had four Leaves, though they
have really but one, for they are entire at bottom: They are of a pleasant
Sky-colour, and shine, and are streaked with deep colored Lines, and white in
the Middle, where is a very small Violet-Pillar, with two Threads, sustaining
the white Tufts. The Cup of the Flower has four Leaves. The Flowers are placed
upon short Footstalk, coming from the Bosom of a small Leaf. The Seed-vessels
are flat, and Twins, like those of Speed-well.

It Is hot and dry, and somewhat bitter. It Is good for a Cough, at the Beginning
of a Dropsy, for an ill Habit of Body, the Green Sickness, an hard Spleen, the
Strangury, and Obstructions of the Bowels. The Garden-Germander provokes Urine
and Sweat powerfully; upon which Account it is good in Fevers, for the Scurvy,
and for the Blood when coagulated; but especially for the Gout, the Jaundice,
and Suppression of Urine. It was commended to the Emperor Charles V. as an
Arcanum for the Gout. It Is outwardly used for Eating Ulcers, for the Piles, the
Itch, and to dry Catarrhs. It Is frequently used in a Decoction to open Women's
Obstructions. It Is called in Cambridgeshire English-Treacle. Take of the dried
Leaves of Germander, Ground Ivy, and White Hoar-hound, each one Handful; of the
Roots of Elecampane, and Florentine-Flower-de-luce, each one Ounce and an half;
of Anniseeds bruised two Ounces, of Liquorish one Ounce and an half, of Raisins
of the Sun three Ounces; hang all these in a Bag, in a Glass that has a large
Mouth, and put three Quarts of Limewater to it; stop it close, and set it in a
cold Place; pour out the Liquor as you use it: The Dose is four Ounces thrice a
Day. This is good for Catarrhs, and Ulcers of the Lungs.

Goat's-beard, in Latin Tragopogon.
Any part of this Plant being cut, yields a white Milk, which soon turns
yellow, and clammy. The Root is straight, about the bigness of a Finger. The
Stalks are empty, and branchy; larger and stronger-than those of Scorzonera. It
has many Leaves, that are like the Leaves of Leeks, which are sometimes very
broad, sometimes long, narrow, and sharp. The Flowers are placed on the top of
the Stalks and Branches, and consist of eight, nine, or ten green Leaves; they
are long and sharp, above three Inches long, of a deep purple or Sky-colour,
and at last turn into a soft Down, to which the Seed adheres; it is two Inches
long, round, streaked and rough, and black when ripe.

The Root boiled is reckoned delicate Food; it is also used raw in Sallets. It
nourishes much, and therefore good for Consumptive People. It Is used in
Diseases of the Breast, and for a Cough, and Difficulty of Breathing. It Is
supposed to expel the Stone, and to force Urine. The Juice of the Root, and the
distilled Water of it, do the same.

Goat's-Rue, in Latin Galega.
It spreads a small, white Root in the Earth. The Stalks are four Foot high, or
higher, channell'd, empty, and has many Branches. The Leaves are like the
Leaves of a Vetch, they have a soft, little Thorn at the end of them. The
Flowers are placed upon peculiar Twigs, arising from the Wings of the Leaves;
they grow one above another, like the many flowered Vetch, and are of a whitish
Color. The Pods are round, small, long, and upright, wherein is contained the
Seed.

It Is Alexipharmick, and Sudorifick. It expels Poison, and cures the Plague.
It Is used in Children's Convulsions; a Spoonful of the Juice may be given at a
time. It Is good for the Worms, and for the Biting of Serpents. The raw Herb, or
when it is boiled, is also eaten in these Cases. The distilled Water of it is
used to expel Contagion, and in Children's Convulsions. The Honorable Mr.
Boil commends it much, from his own Experience, in curing Pestilential and
Malignant Diseases. It Is one of the Ingredients in the London-Plague-Water.
Take of the Roots of Angelica, Master-wort, Butter-bur, and Peony, each half a
Pound; of Athamantick Spikenard, and of Scorzonera, each four Ounces; of
Virginian Snake-weed two Ounces; of the Leaves of Rue, Rosemary, Balm, Carduus
Benedictus, Scordium, Marigolds and their Flowers, Dragons, Goat's Rue, and
Mint, each four Handfuls; pour upon them four Gallons of the best Brandy, let
them infuse gently in B. M. (the Vessel being close stopped) for three Days;
draw off four Gallons, wherein hang in a Bag half an Ounce of Saffron; to every
Pint of this, add an Ounce and an half of Fine Sugar.

Golden-rod, in Latin Virga aurea.
The Root is brown, and has many whitish Fibers, and is jointed, and grows
awry. The Stalks are stiff, upright, five or six Foot high, channell'd, a
little hairy, and full of a fungous Pith. The Leaves that come from the Roots,
and those that grow on the Stalks, are placed alternately, on long Footstalk;
and sometimes they have none at all, or very short ones: Those that are at
bottom are almost an Hand's breadth, and about twice as long; but here in
England they are not so long, nor so broad: The uppermost are of a dark-Green,
hairy on both sides, and indented about the edges. The Flowers are many, and
grow on the tops of the Stalks, and on peculiar Footstalk arising from the
Wings of the Leaves; they are yellow, and at last turn into a kind of Down. It
grows commonly upon Heaths, and in Hilly Woods and Groves. It flowers in
August. The Flowers sometimes vary.

It Is an excellent Wound-herb, either taken inwardly, or outwardly applied.
It Is Lithontriptick, and Diuretic. Two Drams of the Powder being taken in
White Wind, hot, every Morning. It Is very cleansing, and drying. It Is good in
the Obstructions of the Bowels, and for those that are inclined to a Dropsy,
and for stopping all Fluxes of the Womb or Belly, and inward Bleedings.

Goos-berry-bush, in Latin Grossularia.
It loves cold Places. It flowers in April; the Fruit comes forth in May, and
is ripe in June and July.

The Fruit is very agreeable to the Stomach. Being boiled in Broth before they
are ripe, they do good in a Fever. They provoke Appetite, and stop the Fluxes
of the Belly. They also cure a Gonorrhea, and the Whites. They are outwardly
applied for Inflammations, and St. Anthony's Fire. But before they are ripe,
many of them must not be eaten; for they occasion the Cholick, and Gripes. Wine
is made of them, when they are ripe, in the following manner: The Berries being
put into a Tub, they pour upon them a sufficient quantity of hot Water, and
then, covering the Vessel very close, they let them stand three Weeks, or a
Month, till the Liquor is impregnated with the Juice and Spirit of the Berries;
then they draw it out, and put it into Bottles, with Sugar, which they keep
close stopped, till the Liquor is well mixed and fermented with the Sugar; and
so it becomes a generous Wine.

Goose-grass, or Cleavers, in Latin Aparine.
This Herb, beat up with Lard, cures the King's Evil. The distilled Water stops
the Flux of the Belly, and is good in the Jaundice. The distilled Water, or the
Herb cut small, and boiled in a sufficient quantity of Wine, and drunk, is an
excellent Remedy for the Stone and Gravel. The Herb dried, with the Spleen of a
Calf, in a Furnace, is accounted very excellent for Tumors of the Spleen, and
Hypochondriack Winds. Take of the Leaves of Cleavers, Plantane and Brook-lime,
each four Handfuls; bruise them, and pour upon them three Ounces of Aqua
Lumbricorum, and three Ounces of Aqua Raphani Composit* then strain them: This
is to be taken twice a Day; at Eight in the Morning, and Five in the Afternoon.
This is good in a Dropsy.

Groncil, or Grouncel, in Latin Lithospermum.
The Root is about the thickness of the Thumb, woody and Perennial, and has
some Fibers on the Sides. It has many Stalks two or three Foot high, straight,
firm, round, rough and branchy. It has many Leaves, placed disorderly; they are
long, narrow, and end in a sharp Point, and have no Footstalk: Those that are
at the top of the Stalks and Branches are broader, and shorter, and of a deeper
Green. The little Flowers are placed on short Footstalk, and come from the
Wings of the Leaves; they are white, and consist of one Leaf, divided into five
blunt pieces. The Cup is hairy, and consists of five narrow Jags. Four Seeds
succeed each Flower; they are of an Ash Color, very hard, and look as if they
were polished. It grows near Hedges in dry Grounds, near Highways, and in
Bushes. It flowers in May and June.

The Seed of it cleanses the Reins, and provokes Urine; breaks the Stone, and
expels it. Two Drams of the Seed, or more, may be given at a time. Matthiolus
prescribes it for Women in Labor, in a Woman's Milk.

Ground Pine, in Latin Chamaepytis vulgaris.
It Is a small Plant, of the breadth of an Hand, and rarely above an Inch, or
two Inches high. The Root is long, woody, and single. The little Stalk is
round, hairy, and somewhat red near the Earth; in other Places green, inclining
to a yellow; as also are the Leaves, which are placed at small Distances, at
the Knots, by Pairs, opposite to one another; they are hairy, and resemble the
Claws of a small Bird; they taste and smell like Pitch and Rosin. The Flowers
proceed from the Wings of the Leaves, are yellow, and have a broad Lip, divided
into two parts, the Upper has red Spots instead of an Hood; they have Threads
of a light Purple. The Seeds are placed in little Cups, four and four in a
Rank; and they are three-square. The Tube of the Flower bellies out, and serves
instead of a Seed-vessel. It grows in Tilled Grounds, but is rare in England.

It strengthens the Nerves; incides, opens, and is Diuretic, and provokes the
Courses. It expels a dead Child, and the Afterbirth; and works so powerfully,
that Women with Child are wholly forbid the use of it, because it occasions
Miscarriage. Boiled in Wine, or powdered, and made into Pills, with
Hermodactyls and Venice-Turpentine, does much Good in a Dropsy. Outwardly
used, it cures Ulcers, by cleansing them, and taking off the Hardness. Take of
Ground Pine and Wormwood, each two Handfuls; of Scurvy Grass ten Handfuls, of
Mountain-Sage six Handfuls, six Oranges sliced; put all into a Pie, made of two
parts of Barly-meal, and one of Rye; bake it, and after shred it all small;
then put it into a Bag, and hang it in five Gallons of Midling Ale: After six
Days, drink of it for your ordinary Drink. This was used, with excellent
Success, to a Person that was afflicted with the Gout and Scurvy.

Groundsel, in Latin Erigeron.
This grows every where in the Fields, and Gardens, and in Courts, too
frequently, all the Year.

The Juice of the Herb taken in Beer, or a Decoction of it with Honey, vomits
gently. Outwardly applied, it is good for the Inflammations of the Paps, and
for the King's Evil. It Is very probable that it may be useful against Worms,
for Farriers use it as a present Remedy for the Botts.

H.
HArt's-tongue, in Latin Phillitis.
It has many black, Capillary Roots. It has six, eight, or ten long Leaves,
nine Inches, or a Foot long, and about two Inches broad; of a curious shining
Green above, below streaked with small, and somewhat long, brownish Marks. The
Bottoms of the Leaves are a little bowed on each side of the Middle-rib. It
smells strong, and tastes rough. It grows in moist, stony and shady Places,
especially on Mountains, and in Wells and Caves. It grows in great Abundance by
Walberton, near Arrundel in Sussex.

It Is used chiefly in Swellings of the Spleen, for the Flux of the Belly, and
for Spitting of Blood. Outwardly applied, it cleanses Wounds and Ulcers. The
Powder of it is of excellent use for the Palpitation of the Heart, for
Mother-fits, and Convulsions, being taken in Small Beer, and Posset Drink. A
Conserve made of the green Leaves, is used for the same purpose.

Hemlock, in Latin Cicuta.
It Is very cold, and supposed to be poisonous; yet it is frequently used
nowadays for Tumors and Inflammations of the Spleen. Some Physicians say, it
is hot. Outwardly used, it is Anodine. A Cataplasm, or the Plaster of Hemlock,
with Ammoniacum, discusses powerfully hard Swellings, and a Ganglion. Twenty
Grains of the Powder of the Root is an excellent Diaphoretick in Malignant
Fevers.

Common- Hemlock, Wild-Ciceley, or Cow-weed, in Latin Ci^utaria vulgaris.
The Root is thick, long, and white, especially within: It has an acrid and
Aromatic Taste. The Stalks are three or four Foot high, or higher, as thick as
the Thumb, empty, hairy, and reddish. The Leaves are like the Hemlock
abovementioned, but they are broader, and of a paler Green; they shine, and
have a short Down, but it is scarce visible. The white Flowers are placed in a
Circle, and each of them consists of five Leaves; the uppermost are larger than
the rest. A Pair of Seeds succeed each Flower; they are long, smooth, and black
when they are ripe. It grows every where in Hedges, and in Orchards, and under
Trees. It springs in the Beginning of the Spring, and flowers in May. In the
Spring, when the Leaves are tender, Cows eat them greedily; wherefore our
Country People call it Cow-weed.

J. Bauhinus says, he knew two Families, who thinking they had gathered
Parsnips, by chance found these Roots in the Winter, without Leaves; (for they
are more like Parsnips, than the Roots of the abovementioned Hemlock,) and
having eaten a few of them, they were like to be suffocated; and were
senseless, and mad, and just like Anticks: He cured them with Vomits. And I
remember, a whole Family, several Years ago, was strangely surpised, at a
Village called Huntington, about two Miles from the City of Chichester, in
Sussex, upon the like Occasion. But some affirm, that old Parsnips will cause
the same Symptoms; wherefore they call them Madnips.

Hemp, in Latin Cannabis sativa.
The Seed of it boiled in Milk, is good for a Cough: And five or six Ounces of
it taken, cures the Jaundice: An Emulsion of the Seeds does the same. The Juice
of the Herb, and of the green Seed, cures Pains and Obstructions of the Ears.
It Is supposed by some, that it extinguishes Venery; but the Persians use it
nowadays, fried, and mixed with Salt, to provoke the same. The Oil of the
Seeds, mixed with a little Wax, is excellent to take out the Pain and Fire in
Burns. Galen reckons, that the Virtues of Hemlock and Hemp are much the same.

Common Hemp-Agrimonr, in Latin Eupatorium cannabinum.
The Root grows awry, and has large, whitish Fibers. The Stalk is five or six
Foot high, straight, round, has Cotton on it, and is purplish, and full of
white Pith; it has an Aromatic Smell when it is cut, and has many Wings. There
are many Leaves upon the Stalks, three upon one Foot-stalk, something like the
Leaves of Hemp, oblong, pointed, and indented about the Edges, and of a bitter
Taste. The Flowers are placed on tufts, composed of five or six small purple
Flowers. The Seeds, when ripe, fly away with the Down. It grows on the Banks of
Rivers and Brooks, and near Standing-waters. It flowers in July.

It Is Epatick and Vulnerary. It Is chiefly used for an ill Habit of Body; for
Catarrhs, and Coughs; for Obstructions of Urine, and the Courses. It cures the
Jaundice. Take of the Leaves of Hemp, Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, Speed-well,
Colt's-foot, Mouse-ear, and Sanicle, each one Handful; of the Roots of Madder
and Charvil, each one Ounce; of Barley half an Ounce, of Red Vetches half an
Ounce, of Raisins of the Sun one Ounce and an half; boil them in two Quarts of
Fountain Water, till half is consumed; sweeten it with Honey. This is used in an
Empyema.

Common Hen-bane, in Latin Hyoscyamus vulgaris.
It Is easily known by its stinking Smell. The Leaves are soft, downy, fat, and
cut deep about the edges, and are placed disorderly upon the Stalks, which are
two Foot high, branchy, thick, and covered with a thick Down. The Flowers
scarce appear above the Husk, they end in five round Points, they grow one
above another, are of a dull yellow Color, somewhat pale toward the Edges;
they have many purplish Veins. The Seed is of a greyish Color, and contained
in an hard, close Husk. The Root is thick, wrinkly, white within, and brown
without, and does not stink so much as the Leaves. It grows near most
Highways, in untilled Grounds, amongst Rubbish, and on fat Earth.

It cools and mollifies very much: It disposes to Sleep, eases Pain, and
mitigates Acrimony. It Is good for hot and sharp Defluxions of the Eyes. It
stops Eruptions of Blood, and Overflowing of the Courses. It Is applied for
Inflammation of the Testicles, and other Parts. Take of the Seeds of Hen-bane
and White-Poppy, each two Drams; Conserve of Red Roses two Ounces; make an
Electuary: Take the quantity of a Nutmeg. This stops any Hemorrhage. Take of
the Seeds of Henbane and White-Poppy, each half a Dram; of Sugar of Roses three
Drams, of Syrup of Comfrey a sufficient quantity; make an Electuary: Take the
quantity of a small Nutmeg, drinking upon it a Draught of Tincture of Roses.
This is good for Bleeding at the Nose, and Spitting of Blood.

Herb-Robert, in Latin Geranium Robertianum.
It grows commonly in Hedges. It has a small Root. The Stalks are sometimes
nine Inches, sometimes two Foot high; they are hairy, knotted, reddish,
especially about the Joints; they branch out. The Leaves come partly from the
Root, and partly from the Joints; they are hairy, and are placed on reddish,
hairy Footstalk, and are divided almost like the Leaves of Feverfew; they
smell like Parsnips when they are rubbed, and taste astringent. The Flowers are
purple, and consist of five Leaves; they come from a Cup that is hairy, of a
deep red Color, and divided into five Parts. The Beaks are sharp-pointed.

It Is Vulnerary. Inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, it stops Fluxes of
Blood, and resolves coagulated Blood. It cleanses Wounds and Ulcers. It expels
Gravel, and cures Cholical Pains. It Is also commended for Ruptures. It Is used
outwardly in an Erisipelas, and for Ulcers of the Mouth and Paps.
Country People make a Decoction of it for Cattle, when they void Blood by Urine.

Holly, in Latin Agrifolium.
The Berries are useful in the Cholick, for they purge gross and pituitous
Humors by Stool, ten or twelve being* taken at a time. This Tree is fittest to
make Arbours, in the Northern Parts especially; for it will endure Cold very
well, it continues always green, is very pleasant to the Sight, and will bear
Sheering: It grows very slowly, so that it will not be injurious to a Garden,
either by reason of its Luxuriant Branches, or spreading Roots.

The Way to make Bird-lime.
Pill as many of this sort of Trees as you have occasion for, in June or July;
boil the Bark, seven or eight Hours together, in Water, till it is tender: When
it is boiled, make an Heap with Fern* strowing a Lay of one, and a Lay of the
other. This sort of Position the Chemists call Stratum super stratum; and mark
it thus, S. S. S. Let it ferment a Fortnight, or three Weeks; then take it out,
and beat it in a Mortar till it may be kneeded like Dough; then wash it in
Water, it will soon be clean. And so you will have pure Birdlime.

The Prickles of the Leaves boiled in Posset Drink, wonderfully ease the
Cholick, and Pains in the Bowels. With this a Gentlewoman cured her self, and
many others, when other Medicines would do no good.

Common Hony-suckle, or Wood-bind, in Latin Periclymenum.
It heats and dries much: It Is Splenatick, and very Diuretic. It Is chiefly
used in an Asthma, and for a Cough. It dries moist and sordid Ulcers. It cures
Scabs, and other Diseases of the Skin. It helps Difficulty of Breathing, and
hastens Delivery, and expels Gravel. The distilled Water, and the Juice of it,
is in use. The Leaves also are frequently used in Gargarisms; but some think
they are too hot and acrid for such an Use.

Hops, in Latin Lupulus.
They preserve Beer, and make it more wholesome, and better tasted; and render it
Diuretic. Beer purges the Blood, is good in the Jaundice, and for
Hypochondriack Diseases: But whether it expels Gravel, or generates it, is much
disputed by some: They that commend it for the Stone, argue from its being hot
and Diuretic: They that condemn the use of it in the Stone, say, that it makes
the Fits worse; and that Ale, on the contrary, mitigates the Pain. Besides,
they say that the Stone is much increased in England since the use of Hops. But
I agree with those that approve and commend the use of it in Beer; for the Beer
is thereby rendered more agreeable to the Stomach, and promotes the Concoction
of the Meat the better. Nor does it avail any thing, that Physicians forbid the
use of Beer in the Stone, and prescribe Ale; for they do so only to lessen the
Pain; for which Intention Ale is very proper, by reason of its Smoothness; but
it does no way conduce toward the Eradicating the Disease, or Removing the
Cause; but rather promotes the Growth of it, by its being clammy, and apt to
stick to it: And it plainly appears by Mr. Graunt's Observations on the Bills
of Mortality, that fewer die of the Stone, in London, since Hops were so much
used, than before. The Buds of Hops, eaten in the Springtime, being first
boiled and buttered, purge the Blood, and loosen the Belly, and open
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen.

Take of Black-Soap, and fresh Hops, each two Handfuls; of Blue-Currants a
quarter of a Pound; beat them, and mix them, and apply them to the Wrists, to
cure a Quotidian-Ague.

White Hore-hound, in Latin Marrubium album.
It has a single, woody Root, with many Fibers. It has many Stalks, a Foot
high, or higher; they are downy, apiece, branchy, and have many Leaves on
them, two opposite to one another, at each Joint; they are roundish, wrinkly,
and indented, and are placed on pretty long Footstalk. The Flowers are
whitish, and very small; they encompass the Stalk at the Joints, and have short
Footstalk, or none at all. Four Seeds, joined together, succeed each Flower.
The Smell of the whole Herb is strong, and somewhat offensive. It grows near
Highways, and amongst Rubbish.

The Juice of it mixed with Honey, is good for those that have Coughs, and are
Consumptive. The Powder of it kills Worms. Take of the Syrup of White
Hore-hound two Ounces, of Oil of Tartar per deliquium one Scruple; mix them:
Let the Sick take often of it, a Spoonful at a time. This is excellent in the
Jaundice. The Tops of it infused in Wine, and drunk three Mornings, is good to
provoke the Courses, and to expel the Secundine, and to strengthen the Stomach,
and to cure an ill Habit of Body. A Conserve of the Flowers, made with Honey,
and an Ounce of it taken in the Morning, for forty Days, cured a Nobleman of a
Scirrhus in his Liver, when Chalybeats, and other Medicines, would do no good.

Horse-tail, in Latin Equisetum.
The Root is small, black, jointed, and creeping, and has many small Fibers
arising from the Joints. It springs up with Heads somewhat like Asparagus,
which grow into hard, rough, hollow Stalks, joynted at many places, one within
another. At every Joint grows a Bush of rusty, hard Leaves, resembling an
Horse-tail. At the Tops of the Stalks come forth small Catkins, like those of
Trees.

It Is very astringent, and therefore is used to cure the Whites, and Fluxes of
Blood; one Dram of the Powder of it, or four Ounces of the Decoction of it in
Wine, being taken Night and Morning. Three Spoonfuls of the distilled Water,
taken two or three Mornings, cures Bleeding, and Ulcers of the Reins and
Kidneys. Outwardly applied, it cures Wounds, even when the Nerves are cut. For
Ulcers of the Lungs, drink three Ounces of the Decoction made in Water, or two
Ounces of the Juice, Morning and Evening. A Dram of the Powder taken in three
Ounces of Plantane-water, Morning and Evening, for some Days, is commended for
a Consumption.

Great Hounds-tongue, in Latin Cynoglossum.
The Root is thick, black without, white within; it smells worse than it
tastes, it has an odd, sweet Taste. The Stalks are about three or four Foot
high; they are divided into many Branches. The first Year the Leaves are long,
and somewhat broad: The second Year, when it bears a Stalk, they are sharp and
pointed, hoary, soft, and downy, and stink. The Flowers are of a sordid red
Color, divided, for some time, into five pieces; the Flowers and Seeds most
commonly bend to one part, and each is placed on a Foot-stalk an Inch long,
which has no Leaf. The Leaves grow alternately to the Stalks, without
Footstalk. It grows commonly amongst Rubbish, and in Fields not cultivated.
It flowers in June.

It cools, and dries. It Is used to stop Blood, a Looseness, a Gonorrhaea, and
Catarrhs. An Ointment made of the Juice, with Honey and Turpentine, is much
commended for old Fistulous Ulcers. The Pill made of Hound's-tongue is
compounded in the following manner: Take of the Roots of Hound's-tongue dried,
of the Seeds of White Hen-bane, and of Opium prepared, each half an Ounce; of
Mirrh six Drams, of Olibanum five Drams, of Saffron, Castor, and Storax
Calamite, each one Dram and an half: The Roots of Hound's-tongue, the Seeds of
Hen-bane, and the Castor must be all powdered together; but the Myrrh, the
Saffron, and the Olibanum must be powdered apart; the Opium must be sliced
small, and dissolved in Rose Water; afterward you must add the Powders, and
with Syrup de Stecade make a Mass: The Dose is one Scruple. It Is frequently
used in Catarrhs, and to cause Rest.

House-leek, or Sin-green, in Latin Sedum magus vulgar.
It does not grow spontaneously in England, but it is commonly sown on Houses.

It Is very Cooling, and Astringent. It Is used inwardly in Bilious Fevers, for
it quenches Thirst, and moderates the Heat, the Juice of it being mixed with
Sugar. Rags dipped in the Juice, or distilled Water of it, and applied to any
Inflammation of the Body, especially in the Frenzy, are very beneficial. The
Juice of it cures Corns and Warts. For Ulcers of the Matrix, and Urinary
Passage, take of the Juice four Ounces, and one Ounce of Litharge, and the
Yolks of two Eggs; rub them a long time in a Leaden Mortar; then make
Application. In Fevers, when the Tongue is dry, and chap'd, dip a Leaf of it in
Rose Water, and apply it to the Tongue, and repeat it often. Take of the Juice
one Spoonful, of White Wind two Spoonfuls; mix them together; drop one or two
Drops into the Eyes, and apply a double Linen Rag, dipped in the same. This is
good for an hot Distillation on the Eyes.

Hyssop, in Latin Hyssopus.
It Is hot, and acrid: It attenuates, opens, and cleanses. It Is chiefly used in
Diseases of the Lungs. It Is frequently applied outwardly to remove Blood that
is settled in the Eyes. A Bunch of it being boiled in Water, and applied hot to
the Eye, is also very good for Bruises.

I.
JAck-by-the-Hedge, or Sauce-alone, in Latin Alliaria.
It sends forth Stalks, round, channel'd and solid; small, and somewhat hairy;
three or four Foot high. The Root is small, woody and white; and stinks like
Garlic. The Leaves are first round, like Ground Ivy, but much larger; but soon
afterward they are a little pointed, and indented about the Edges; they are of
a pale Green, and smooth, and set on large Footstalk; the Smell and Taste of
them is not so strong as Garlic; they are placed at a great distance upon the
Stalks. Disorderly, upon the tops of the Stalks and Branches, are many whitish,
small Flowers, consisting of four small Leaves, upon very short Footstalk; in
the midst whereof are Tufts, of a Color betwixt Yellow and Green. The oblong
and blackish Seed is contained in long Cods, that are angl'd, and divided by a
Membrane that has two Valves. It grows in Hedges and Ditches.

Country People use it in Sauces. When it is green, it provokes Urine; when
dry, it expels Poison. Being boiled in Wine, or mixed with Honey, it cures old
Coughs. It Is excellent for resisting Putrefaction: Upon which Account, the Herb
it self, beat up with Honey, and the Juice boiled till it is thick, are put into
Cataplasms for Gangreens, and other putrid and malignant Ulcers. The Seed
applied to the Bottom of the Belly, cures Mother-fits. The Seeds rubbed, and put
into the Nose, provokes Sneezing, and purges the Head. The Herb boiled in Oil
and Water, and taken inwardly, relieves Asthmaticks. Some boil the Leaves in
Clysters for the Cholick. Nephritick Pains, and the Stone. It Is like true
Scordium in Virtue and Smell. Fabricius Hildanus says, he often found the Juice
very good for Gangreens, And none need wonder why the Ancients, especially the
Arabians, substituted this Herb for Scordium; not for that Scordium was unknown
to them, but because they found, in a manner, the same Virtues in this Plant.
Besides, Scordium does not grow in many Regions, and so it must be had dry and
obsolete; whereas this Herb grows almost every where.

White Iessamin, in Latin Jasminum album.
The Flowers are chiefly used to perfume Gloves. The Oil of it heals,
mollifies, and opens; and is used in Contractions of the Limbs; and the like.

Iew's-ear, in Latin Fungus sambucinus.
It grows to the Trunk of the Eldertree.

Being dried, it will keep good a Year. Boiled in Milk, or infused in Vinegar,
it is good to gargle the Mouth or Throat in Quinsies, and other Inflammations of
the Mouth and Throat. And being infused in some proper Water, it is good in
Diseases of the Eyes.

St. Iohn's-wort, in Latin Hypericon.
It has a woody Root, that is much divided, and has many stiff, woody, round,
reddish Twigs, two Foot and an half high, or higher, and divided into many
Branches. The Leaves grow by Pairs, opposite to one another, and have no
Footstalk; they are smooth, and full of Holes, which may be plainly perceived
if you hold them up against the Sun; they taste dry and astringent, with some
kind of Bitterness. At the top of the Stalks and Branches grow yellow Flowers
of five Leaves apiece, with yellow Tufts in the middle; which being bruised,
yield a bloody Juice. After the Flowers, come small, round Heads, wherein are
contained small, black Seeds. It grows in Hedges, and among Bushes.

It Is an excellent Diuretic and Vulnerary Herb. A Decoction of it cures
Tertian and Quartan-Agues: It stops Spitting of Blood, and expels Gravel. A
Tincture of the Flowers is excellent in a Mania: And the Flowers infused in
Spirit of Wine, kill Worms. The Compounded Oil of the London-Dispensatory is
much used, and is made in the following manner: Take one Pint of White Wind; of
the Tops, and Flowers, and Seeds of St. John's-wort four Ounces; bruise them,
and infuse them three Days in a Pint of old Oil of Olives, in the Sun, or upon
a gentle Fire; and then press it. Note, they must infuse in a Glass well
stopped. There must be a second and third Infusion in the same Wine. After the
third Infusion, boil it till all the Wine is, in a manner, consumed; then
strain it, and add three Ounces of Turpentine, and one Scruple of Saffron; then
boil it a little, and put it up for Use. This is excellent for Bruises and
Aches. For Spitting of Blood, Take of the Leaves of St. John's-wort,
Hart's-tongue, Speed-well, Mouse-ear, and Ground Ivy, each one Handful; of the
Roots of Chervil, and fresh Nettles, each one Ounce; boil them in three Pints
of Fountain Water, to two; add an Ounce and an half of Raisins of the Sun
stoned, of Liquorish two Drams, of the Byzantine Syrup two Ounces; clarify
them with the White of an Egg, and make an Apozem: Take four or six Ounces
twice or thrice a Day, for a Month.

Iuly-flowers, in Latin Caryophyllus.
They are Cephalic and Cordial. The Syrup is chiefly used, and is made in the
following manner: Take of fragrant July-flowers, the White being cut off, one
Pound; pour on them a Quart of Spring Water, and let them stand all Night; then
strain the Liquor, and, being gently warmed, dissolve therein four Pounds of
the whitest Sugar, without boiling it; and make a Syrup.

Iuniper-tree, in Latin Juniperus.
It spreads it self near the Ground. The Leaves are like the Leaves of Furze,
but not so large, nor so prickly; they are always green; they are stiff, and
smooth above; they are seldom an Inch long, and are very narrow. The Branches
are divided into many Twigs. The Berries are many, round, and twice as large as
Pepper; when they are ripe they are blackish; they taste acrid and resinous,
with a sort of Sweetness.

The Wood being burnt, perfumes the Air. The Berries are good for a cold
Stomach, and are good against Wind and Gripes: They provoke Urine, and expel
Poison, and are good in Diseases of the Head and Nerves. The Oil of Juniper is
much in use; it helps the Toothache, and is good in the Cholick, and against
Gravel: The Dose is five or six Drops, in a proper Vehicle.

Climbing- Ivy, in Latin Hedera Arborea.
It Is frequently used outwardly, upon Issues, and for Pains in the Ears
proceeding from Matter contained within. The Ancients boiled the Leaves in
Wine, and applied them to Burns, and malignant Ulcers. Some that are afflicted
with the Gout apply the green Leaves to the pained Parts. A Pugil of the dried
Flowers, taken in Wine, cures the Bloody Flux. A large quantity of the Powder
of the ripe Berries taken in Wine, is an excellent Remedy for the Plague. A
Dram of the Stones taken in Wine, provokes Urine, and expels Gravel. Three of
the Stones powdered, and taken, with a little Saffron, in Penny-royal-water,
for some Days, in the Morning, scarce ever fails to move the Courses: It must
be taken hot.

The Berries purge upwards and downwards. The Oil of the Berries, drawn by
Distillation, is very good for cold Diseases of the Joints: It provokes the
Courses, expels Gravel, and cures sordid Ulcers. Take one Dram of the ripe
Berries, dried in the Shade, and powdered, in a Glass of White Wind: This is
very Sudorifick, and is good in the Plague, and for Pains of the Stomach.

Ground- Ivy, in Latin Hedera terrestris.
It Is Vulnerary, either outwardly applied, or taken inwardly. It Is also
Diuretic, and moves the Courses. It Is frequently used for Diseases of the
Lungs, for Obstructions of the Kidneys, and the Jaundice, and in Clysters for
the Cholick. The People in the North put it into their Beer, to clear it; and
therefore it is called Alehoof. The Juice of it drawn up into the Nostrils,
cures inveterate and violent Headaches. A Tincture of the Leaves, made in
Nantz-Brandy, is excellent in the Cholick. Take of the Conserve of Red Roses
four Ounces, of Flowers of Sulphur four Scruples, of pure Oil of Turpentine
one Dram, of the Species of the Lungs of a Fox three Drams, of Syrup of
Ground Ivy a sufficient quantity; make a Linctus: Lick of it often in a Day,
with a Liquorishstick. This is proper to stop a Tickling Cough.

K.
KIdny, or French-beans, in Latin Phaseolus.
They provoke Urine, and are good in the Stone, a Dram of the Powder of them
being taken in White Wind. They are of easy Digestion, and excite Venery.

Common Knot-grass, in Latin Polygonum mas vulgar.
The Root is hard, woody, and single, and has many Fibers, and is of an
astringent Taste. It has many Stalks; they are sometimes upright, but they
oftener bend toward the Earth, or lie on it; they are above two Foot long; they
are small, round, solid and smooth. The Leaves are placed alternately; they are
oblong, narrow, and smooth, and are placed on very short Footstalk. From the
Wings of the lower Leaves, at the Knots of the Stalks, come forth small
Branches: And from the Wings of the Upper, two or three small Flowers together,
on short Footstalk; they consist of five Leaves, and are of a light purple
Color. The Seeds are pretty large, triangular, and of a dark Chesnut-colour.

It Is Vulnerary, Drying, and Astringent. It Is chiefly used for stopping all
Fluxes. Outwardly it is used for Wounds and Ulcers, and for Inflammations of the
Eyes. A certain Nobleman that vomited Blood, and had used other Medicines in
vain, was much relieved by the Juice of this, in a little Styptick Wine.

L.
COmmon Ladies-bed-straw, in Latin Gallium luteum vulgar.
This Ladies-bed-straw rises up with several small, brown and square, upright
Stalks, a Yard high, or more; sometimes branched forth into many Parts, full of
Joints, and with several very small, fine Leaves at every one of them, little,
or not at all rough. At the Tops of the Branches grow many long Tufts, or
Branches of yellow Flowers, set very thick together, one above another; they
smell pretty strong and resinous. The Seed is small, and black; and two, for
the most part, joined together. The Root is reddish, and has many small Fibers.

The Tops of it turn Milk, like Rennet. The Herb, or the Powder of it, stops
Bleeding; and is commended for Cancerous Ulcers.

Ladies-mantle, in Latin Alchimilla.
It has a Root of the thickness of the Little Finger, or Thumb, consisting of
many Fibers, that are astringent, and drying. Some thin, hairy Stalks arise,
branching out about nine Inches high; upon which there are small Flowers, of a
Grass-colour, placed in a Circle; each consists of eight Leaves, four large,
and four small; placed alternately; in the middle whereof are little yellow
Tufts. The Flowers grow on the uppermost Seminal Vessels; two small, shining
Seeds are contained in each Vessel, not exactly round, but somewhat long in one
part. Some of the Leaves arise immediately from the Root, with long, hairy
Footstalk, about one Handful and an half long: Others adhere to the Stalk, by
a short, or no Foot-stalk at all. As to other things, the Leaf is like a
Mallow, of a Color betwixt yellow and green, and hairy under; divided into
eight or nine obtuse Angles, peculiar Nerves coming into each Angle, from the
Footstalk; they are neatly indented about the Edges. It grows in Meadows and
Pastures, especially on hilly Grounds, spontaneously. There is abundance of it
in the North of England, in Yorkshire and Derbyshire, where it is commonly
called Bear's-foot.

It Is an excellent Wound-herb. It Is hot and dry, and astringent. It stops
Bleeding, the Courses, and the Whites. The Leaves, the Tops, and the Roots are
used in Vulnerary Potions, Powders, Plasters, and Ointments. Rags dipped in a
Decoction of it, and applied to Women's Breasts when they are very lax, renders
them hard and solid. It agglutinates inward Wounds, and Ruptures. And the
Decoction of it, or the Powder of the dried Herb, taken in the Decoction, or in
the distilled Water, is excellent in curing Children's Bursten Bellies. The
Astringent Quality is chief in this Plant; by means whereof it does what it
does. Take of Ladies-mantle, Sanicle, Golden-rod, Sengreen, Betony and
Agrimony, each one Handful; Marshmallows two Handfuls; Fern, Flowers of
Camomile, St. John's-wort, Mugwort, Briars, Origanum, and Tormentil-Leaves and
Roots, each one Handful; put them into three Bags, then boil them in the Faeces
of Red Wine; and apply them one after another. These are very astringent, and
of good use to stop Fluxes.

Ladies-smock, in Latin Cardamine.
The Root is white, thick, and has many small Fibers. It has most commonly but
one Stalk, upright, round, firm and smooth, and about nine Inches high, reddish
near the Earth. It Is divided into Branches, at the top whereof are many Flowers
together, of a light-purple Color; they are large, and consist of four obtuse,
veiny Leaves. The Cods are of a deep purple Color, and a Finger in length, or
longer; they are upright, rigid, and somewhat flat. The Leaves are of two
sorts; the Lower lie on the Earth, and are divided into four or five small
Leaves, sticking to the Rib by Intervals; the Uppermost, on the Stalk, have no
Footstalk; they are smooth, and divided into small pieces. It tastes like
Watercresses.

Take of the Conserve of Ladies-smock and Brook-lime, made with an equal weight
of Sugar, each three Ounces; of the Species of the three Sanders, of Diarrhod^,
Abbatis, each one Dram and an half; of Ivory powdered one Dram, of Pearl half a
Dram, of Salt of Wormwood and Tamaris, each one Dram; make an Electuary, with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Coral: Take the quantity of a Nutmeg Night and
Morning. This is good in an hot Scurvy.

Lavender, in Latin Lavendula.
It Is Cephalic, and good for the Nerves; and is much of the same Virtue with
Staechas. It Is chiefly used in Catarrhs for Palsies, Convulsions, Giddiness,
Lethargy, and the like. It provokes Urine, and the Courses, and hastens
Delivery: And it is used for Flatulent Gripes. It Is used outwardly in
Fomentations. The distilled Water, the Conserve, and the Oil are in use. The
following Medicine is counted excellent to hasten Delivery: Take of the Seeds
of Lavender half a Dram, of the Seeds of Plantane and Endive, each two
Scruples; make a Powder: Take it in the Waters of Endive and Holly, each three
Ounces. The Oil of it kills Lice in Children's Heads, their Heads being
anointed with it. The Spirit of it is most in use, and is, indeed, an excellent
Medicine. It Is made in the following manner: Take of the Flowers of Lavender
one Gallon, pour on them three Gallons of the best Brandy, and stop the Vessel
close; let them infuse in the Sun for the space of six Days, then distill them
in an Alembeck. Take of the Flowers of Sage, Rosemary and Betony, each one
Handful; of Borrage, Bugloss, Lilly of the Valleys, and Cowslips, each two
Handfuls; infuse all these Flowers, gathered in Season, in a Gallon of the best
Brandy, and mingle it with the Spirit of Lavender abovementioned, adding of
the Leaves of Balm, Feverfew, Oranges, and Lawrel-berries, each one Ounce:
After sufficient Digestion, distill them again; and at length add of Orange and
Citron-Peel, and the Seed of Peony, each six Drams; Cinnamon, Nurmegs, Mace,
Cardamoms, Cubebs, and Yellow-Sanders, of each half an Ounce; of the Wood of
Aloes one Dram; digest them twenty four Hours, strain them, then add of
prepared Pearl two Drams; of Amber-grease, Musk and Saffron, each half a
Scruple; of dried Roses, and Red-Sanders, each half an Ounce; of
Yellow-Sanders, and the Bark of dried Citron, each two Drams; hang the Species
in a Rag, in the Spirit abovementioned.

Common Lavender-c^tton, in Latin Abrotanum faemina vulgar.
The Root is thick, hard and woody. The Twigs are above two Foot high; they are
woody, tender, and white with Down, and are divided into many Branches, and are
encompassed by the Leaves, which are about an Inch long, and a little indented;
they have a Physical Smell, and a bitter and acrid Taste.

It Is chiefly used in Obstructions of the Liver and Kidneys, and to cure the
Jaundice. It kills Worms. And the dried Leaves do good for the Whites.

Spurge- Laurel, in Latin Laureola.
It Is about four Foot high, or higher. The Stalk is sometimes single, and
sometimes divided into Branches. The Bark is whitish. The Stalk bends easily,
but is hard to break. The Leaves are placed at the top of the Stalk; they are
like Laurel-leaves. The whole Plant tastes hot.

Being chewed, it inflames the Jaws. Taken inwardly, it provokes Vomiting; and
hurts and burns the Stomach, and inward Parts; and therefore, by reason of its
great Acrimony, it is seldom prescribed by Physicians. The Powder of it infused
in Vinegar, and sprinkled upon Cancers, does good before they are ulcer'd.

Leeks, in Latin Porrum.
They have the same Virtue with Onions.

Garden- Lettice, in Latin Lactuca sativa.
It cools the Stomach, and qualifies Choler and Heat, and disposes to Rest, and
increases Milk, and yields good Nourishment. In Frenzies, Madness, and Burning
Fevers, and the like, apply to the Temples, and the Coronal Suture, and also to
the Wrists, double Rags, dipped in Lettice-water wherein Sal prunella has been
dissolved, viz. half an Ounce to a Pint of the Water.

Lilly of the Valleys, in Latin Lilium convallium.
It has a small, white, fibrous Root. The Stalk is angular, and about an Hand
high. The Leaves are like the Leaves of the smallest Water-Plantane. It has
small, white Bell-Flowers, of a pleasant Smell.

The Flowers and Leave are counted good in Apoplexies, Palsies, for the
Falling Sickness, and Giddiness, and other cold Diseases of the Head. Take of
Conserve of Lilly of the Valleys six Ounces, of the Powder of the Root of
Male-Peony half an Ounce, of Humane-skull prepared three Drams, of the Seeds
and Flowers of Male-Peony powdered, each two Drams; of Red Coral prepared, of
Pearl, and the whitest Amber, each one Dram; of Salt of Coral four Scruples, of
the Syrup of the Flowers of Male-Peony a sufficient quantity; make an
Electuary: The Dose is two Drams, Morning and Evening. This is commended in an
Apoplexy.

Water- Lilly, in Latin Nymphaea.
The Roots, the Leaves, the Flowers, and Seeds of the Yellow and White
Water-Lilly are used in Fluxes; especially for a Gonorrhaea, and nocturnal
Pollutions. They are said to lessen Venery. The Root of the White Water-Lilly
moderates the Flux of the Courses. Take of the Waters of Purslane, Lettice,
Roses and Water Lillies, each one Ounce; of Syrup of Violets, and of
Water Lillies, each six Drams; of Sal prunella one Dram: Take this often, and
it will cure the Heat of Urine.

White- Lilly, in Latin Lilium.
The distilled Water of it is given to Women that have hard Labors, and to
expel the Afterbirth. The Root is commonly used in Cataplasms to assuage Pain,
and to ripen Tumors. The Oil of Lillies serves for the same purpose. It Is
said, many People in Dropsies have been cured with the Juice mixed with
Barly-flower, and made into Bread; which Bread they must use only for the space
of a Month, or six Weeks.

Lime-tree, in Latin Tilia.
The Bark and the Leaves repel, and dry, and provoke Urine, and the Courses. A
Mucilage of the Bark does much Good in Burns and Wounds. The Leaves rubbed, and
sprinkled with Water, discuss Swellings of the Feet. The Flowers are Cephalic,
and smell sweet. The distilled Water of them is frequently used for the
Falling Sickness, Giddiness, and Apoplexies: The Dose is one Ounce, or one
Ounce and an half. Women use it to beautify their Faces: And some take it for
the Gripes. The Berries powdered, are much commended for the Bloody Flux, and
other Fluxes of the Belly. Being rubbed with Vinegar, and put up the Nostrils,
they stop Bleeding at the Nose: And some of them taken inwardly, do the same.

Liquorish, in Latin Glycyrr^iza.
It Is good for the Lungs, and the Reins. It mitigates Acrimony, and helps
Expectoration, and gently loosens Children's Bellies. It Is chiefly used for
Coughs, Hoarsness, Consumption, Pleurisy, Erosions of the Bladder, and
Sharpness of Urine. Syrup of Liquorish is made in the following manner: Take of
Green Liquorish, cleansed and bruised, two Ounces; of White Maidenhair one
Ounce, of Hyssop half an Ounce; pour on them three Pints of hot Fountain Water,
let them stand in Infusion twenty four Hours; strain it, and clarify it; and
with the best Honey, and Fine Sugar, each ten Ounces, make a Syrup, according to
Art.

Liverwort, in Latin Hepatica vulgaris.
The Root of it is as fine as Silk. The Leaves are a Fingers-breadth, and twice
as long, or longer; above they are green, or a little yellowish; they are
scaly, like the Skin of a Serpent; they have no Flowers. The Stalk is white,
firm and juicy, and about four Inches long; upon which there is, as it were, a
small Fungus. It grows in shady, wet places, among Stones. It tastes a little
bitterish, and astringent.

It Is chiefly used in Obstructions of the Liver and Bladder. It Is good in the
Jaundice, for the Itch, and a Gonorrhaea. Outwardly applied, it stops Blood in
Wounds.

Lovage, in Latin Levisticum.
The Stalk is as high as a Man, thick-jointed, hollow, and channel'd. The
Leaves are large, and divided into Wings; they are of a shining Green, and of a
strong Smell. At the top of the Stalks and Branches are large Tufts of yellow
Flowers. The Seed is pretty large, and flat. The Root is thick, and woody.

It Is Alexipharmick, Diuretic, and Vulnerary. It strengthens the Stomach, and
does good in an Asthma. It forces the Courses, and the Monthly Purgations; and
expels a dead Child. It opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; and cures
the Jaundice. It Is used outwardly, in Baths, and Cataplasms for the Womb. The
Virtues of it are much the same with Angelica, and Master-wort. Half a Dram of
the Seed provokes the Courses. The Juice of the Leaves expels the Afterbirth.

Lung-wort, in Latin Muscus arboreus.
It grows on old Oaks and Beeches, in dark, shady, old Woods. It has broad,
grayish, rough Leaves, variously folded, crumpl'd and gash'd on the edges, and
sometimes spotted on the upper side. It bears no Stalk, nor Flower.

It Is Drying, and Astringent. It stops Bleeding, and cures fresh Wounds. It
stops the Courses, and the Flux of the Belly. The Powder, the Syrup, and the
distilled Water of it are commonly used for Diseases of the Lungs; as, Coughs,
Short Breath, Consumptions, and the like. That which grows on an Oak is
excellent in curing the Jaundice: Take one Handful of it, and boil it in a Pint
of Small Beer, in a Pot well stopped, till half is consumed: Take thirteen
Spoonfuls of it warm, Morning and Evening.

Lupines, in Latin Lupinus sativus.
Inwardly taken, it kills Worms. But it is chiefly used outwardly, in
Cataplasms for Gangreens, and malignant Ulcers, and the like.

M.
MAdder, in Latin Rubia tinctorum.
It Is used in Vulnerary Potions; but whether it is Astringent, or Opening, is
disputed. They that count it Astringent, prescribe it for the Bloody Flux, the
Flux of the Courses, and of the Hemorrhoids. They that suppose it is Opening,
use it in the Jaundice, for the Dropsy, and Obstruction of Urine. And perhaps
it partakes of both Qualities, first Opening, and then Binding, as is the
Nature of Rubarb.

White Maidenhair, or Wall-Rue, in Latin Adian^um album.
'The Root is very small, consisting of very small, black Fibers. It grows upon
old Walls. It has many Footstalk, that are small, and about half an Hand
high, and blackish about the Roots, or brown; they are elsewhere green, and
somewhat divided at top. From the Extremities and Sides of these the Leaves
grow; they are channel'd, and somewhat stiff, and indented about the Edges; the
upper Part is green, the Under sprinkled with red or brown Powder, that seems
fine, and tastes somewhat sour and astringent, with a little mixture of
Sweetness. It grows in Cambridgshire, on the Walls of Cherry-Hinton-Church.

It removes the Tartareous and Viscous Mucilage that is contained in the Lungs;
and therefore it is good for those that have Coughs, and Short Breath; and for
others that have Pains in the Side, or in the Kidneys or Bladder. It gently
provokes Urine, and expels Stones and Gravel; and is of great use in Children's
Ruptures, the Powder of it being given four Days together. Take of Syrup of
Maidenhair, and of Jujubes, each three Ounces; of Oil of Flax fresh drawn two
Ounces, of Fine Sugar two Drams; mingle them, make a Lohoch: Take half a
Spoonful every other Hour. This is good for Coughs, and Pains of the Sides.

Common Mallow, in Latin Malva vulgaris.
It mollifies, eases Pain, loosens the Belly, mitigates Sharpness of Urine.
It Is used outwardly, in Cataplasms, and Fomentations, to ripen Tumors, and to
ease Pain; and in Clysters, to loosen the Belly in Nephritick Pains. Three
Ounces of the Decoction of the Leaves, or the distilled Water of them, with one
Ounce and an half of Syrup of Violets, cure Heat of Urine presently.

Marsh- Mallows, in Latin Althaea.
It softens, discusses, eases Pain, brings Tumors to Suppuration, and corrects
sharp Humors. The Herb, the Root, and Seeds, are all good for the same
purpose. It Is chiefly used for Diseases of the Bladder, and the Stone of the
Kidneys; and for an Asthma, and Pleurisy. It Is also used in Clysters, and
Cataplasms. The Syrup of Marshmallows is made in the following manner: Take of
the Roots of Marshmallows two Ounces; of Meadow-grass, Asparagus, Liquorish,
Raisins of the Sun, and Red Chich-Pease, each one Ounce; Tops of Marshmallows,
Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Pimpernel, Common Maidenhair, and Mont
pelier-Maiden-hair, of each of Handful; of the four Lesser and Great Cold
Seeds, each two Handfuls; wash and cleanse the Roots from their Dirt, Pith and
Strings, and slice them; and having boyld the Grass-Roots a quarter of an Hour,
first, in eight Pints of Fountain Water, put into the Decoction the Roots of
Marshmallows and Asparagus, and let them boil well for half an Hour; then add
the Raisins cut, and the Chich-pease whole; when they have boyld a little
while, put in the Tops of the Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory, and Pimpernel,
shred, and boil them about a quarter of an Hour among the rest; after that, add
the Liquorish sliced, and the Maidenhair cut; and when they begin to boil, put
in the cold Seeds, thrust them down into the Decoction, and take the whole off
the Fire, and strain them a quarter of an Hour afterward; then clarify the
Liquor with the White of an Egg; add four Pounds of Sugar, and boil it over a
moderate Fire, to the Consistence of a Syrup. Ointment of Marshmallows is made
in the following manner: Take of the fresh Roots of Marshmallows two Pounds,
Flax and Fenugreek-seeds, of each one Pound; of Fountain Water eight Pints; let
them infuse three Days, then boil them gently, and press out the Mucilage;
whereof, take two Pounds, of Common Oil four Pints; let them boil together till
the watery Part of the Mucilage is evaporated; then add one Pound of Yellow
Wax, Rosin half a Pound, Turpentine two Ounces; boil them to the Consistence of
an Ointment.

Vervain- Mallow, in Latin Alcea vulgaris.
It has a woody, Perennial Root, which sends forth many Stalks, three or four
Foot high, or higher; they are round, filled with a fungous Pith, and hairy;
the Hairs are few, and long; they are covered with a Sky-colour'd Dust, which
may be easily wiped off. The Leaves that come from the Root, and the lowermost
on the Stalks, are somewhat round, and indented about the Edges, and are placed
on long Footstalk* Those that are on the Stalks are placed alternately; the
nearer they approach to the Top, so much shorter are their Footstalk; and
they are cut in deeper. There are most commonly five large Jags, almost like
the Leaves of Monk's-hood; they are of a dark-green Color, and hairy,
especially on the Underside. A Flower is placed in every Wing of the Leaves,
and has an hairy, apiece Foot-stalk; and there is great Abundance of them
on the Stalks, and upon the tops of the Branches; they are large, and of a
purple Color, and consist of five channel'd Leaves, jointed at the bottom. The
Cup is hairy, and divided into five Parts; under which there are three narrow
Leaves, that come together when the Flower falls, and make a Receptacle for the
Seeds, which are hairy and black when they come to maturity; joined together,
they represent a Cheese. It grows frequently among Bushes.

It Is reckoned amongst Emplastick and Emollient Medicines. And as it is like,
so it agrees in Virtue with the Mallow. It Is much commended by Empericks, for
curing Dimnness of Sight. A Decoction of it is good for the Gripes.

The Great Maple, commonly called the Sycamore-tree, though falsely, in Latin Acer
majus.
I think it does not grow of its own accord amongst us; yet it is so frequent
in Courts, and Churchyards, and about Gentlemen's Houses, that it may be well
reckoned amongst those that are ours by Adoption.

At the Beginning of spring, when the buds grow big, but before they unfold
themselves into Leaves, this Tree, being cut in the Trunk, Branches, or Roots,
yields plentifully, like the Birch-tree, a sweet Liquor, fit to be drunk. Also
in the Autumn, presently after the Leaves fall off: And in the Winter too, when
it is cold, and somewhat frosty; for we have observed in this Tree, and in the
Lesser Maple, and also in the Walnut tree, cut or bored, that after a Frosty
Night, when the Sun shines clear, (if the Frost has not been too violent) the
Juice flows plentifully when the Sun has been up two or three Hours, especially
about Noon. And after a long and hard Frost, just when the Frost begins to
break, it flows most of all.

Garden- Marigold, in Latin Calendula sativa.
The Flowers are Cordial, Hepatick, and Alexipharmick; and provoke Sweat, and
the Courses, and hasten Delivery. The distilled Water dropped into the Eyes, or
Rags wet in it, and applied to them, cures the Redness and Inflammation of
them. Take of Conserve of Marigold-flowers two Ounces, Confection of Alkermes,
and of Hyacinth, each two Drams; of Pearl powdered one Ounce, of Syrup of the
Juice of Citron a sufficient quantity; make a Confection: Take the quantity of
a Nutmeg Night and Morning. This is very Cordial, and refreshes the Spirits.

Marjoram, in Latin Majorana.
It digests, and attenuates. It Is good in cold Diseases of the Head, taken any
way. The Powder of the dried Herb drawn up into the Nostrils, provokes
Sneezing. Take of the Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary and Sage, each half a Dram;
of Tobacco one Dram, of White Hellebore and Ginger, each one Scruple; of Musk
two Grains; make a Sneezing-powder.

Master-wort, in Latin Imperatoria.
It Is Alexipharmick, and Sudorifick. It expels Wind, and is excellent in the
Cholick. It Is chiefly used for the Biting of venomous Creatures, and malignant
Diseases. It helps Expectoration, and cures a Stinking Breath, and is good for
Phlegmatic Diseases of the Head, a Palsy, Apoplexy, and the like. Half a
Spoonful of the Powder of it, taken in Wine, an Hour before the Fit comes, is
said to cure a Quartan-Ague. It Is also counted very good for the Dropsy, and
long Fevers. A piece of the Root put into an hollow Tooth, eases the Pain.
It Is, in Shape and Virtue, much like Angelica.

Maudlin, in Latin Ageratum vulgar.
It agrees in Virtue and Temperament with Costmary.

Stinking May-weed, in Latin Cotula foetida.
The Root is single, white, and has many Fibers. It has sometimes but one
Stalk, sometimes more; they are a Foot high, round, and smooth, or with a short
Down; they are full of Branches, which come from the Wings of the Leaves, and
grow higher than the Stalks. The Leaves are placed alternately; they are cut
into narrow and sharp Jags, and are of a pale-green Color; they stink. Upon
the top of the Stalks and Branches grow pretty large Flowers; they are placed
upon long Footstalk, their Leaves are white, the Dish or Bottom is yellow;
when the Flowers fade, the Dish grows round. It grows commonly amongst Corn,
and in Tilled Grounds.

The Decoction of this Herb is used by some successfully for the King's Evil.

Meadow-sweet, in Latin Vlmaria.
The Fibers of the Roots are reddish, and woody. The Stalk is three Foot high,
or higher, upright, angular, smooth, reddish, firm and branchy. The Leaves grow
to the Stalk alternately, by Intervals; they are broad, and winged, and deeply
indented about the Edges; they are rough, hard, and crumpl'd, like Elm-leaves;
above they are green, underneath white; they smell and taste pleasantly. Tufts
of white Flowers stand thick together on the tops of the Stalks and Branches;
they smell sweeter than the Leaves. The Seeds are oblong, naked, and crooked.
It grows in moist Meadows, and on the Banks of Brooks.

It Is Sudorifick, and Alexipharmick. It Is good in Fluxes of all Kinds; for a
Looseness, the Bloody Flux, the Flux of the Courses, and for Spitting of Blood;
and also in the Plague. The Leaves put into Wine or Beer, impart a pleasant
Taste to it. It Is an Ingredient in the Milk-Water called Aqua Lactis
alexiteria, which is made in the following manner: Take of the Leaves of
Meadow-sweet, Carduus B. and Goat's-Rue, each six Handfuls; of Mint, and common
Wormwood, each five Handfuls; of Rue three Handfuls, of Angelica two Handfuls;
bruise them, and add to them three Gallons of New Milk; distill them in a cold
Still.

Medlar-tree, in Latin Mespilus.
Medlars stop Vomiting, and all Fluxes of the Belly.

Melilot, in Latin Melilotus.
The Root is white, small, clammy, and has short Fibers. It has many Stalks,
two or three Foot high, or higher, smooth, round, channel'd, empty, weak and
branchy. The Leaves are placed alternately, by Intervals, three on one
Foot-stalk, about an Inch and an half long: The Leaves are oblong, smooth,
indented, and most times gnawed about the edges, and of a dull green Color.
The Flowers are placed on long Spikes, that come from the Wings of the Leaves;
they are small, and yellow. Short, hanging, wrinkl'd Cods succeed them, that
are black when they are ripe. The Seed is yellowish. It flowers in June and
July, and grows amongst Bushes, and sometimes with Corn.

It digests, mollifies, and eases Pain; for which purposes it is commonly used
in Plasters and Cataplasms. To ease the Pain in a Pleurifie, the following
Fomentation has been used with good Success: Take of the Herb Melilot, and true
Pellitory, each two Handfuls; of Betony one Handful; make a Decoction, and
apply it to the Breast often.

Melon, in Latin Melo.
They are cold and moist, and apt to putrify in the Stomach, and to occasion
Fevers and Gripes. The Seed is one of the Great Cold Seeds. Take of Seeds of
Melons and Pumpions, each half an Ounce; of the Seeds of White-Poppy two Drams,
eight Sweet Almonds blanched; beat them in a Marble-Mortar, and pour on them
gradually a Pint and an half of Barly-water; strain it, and sweeten it with
Fine Sugar; make an Emulsion. This is used to cure Heat of Urine.

Common English Mercury, or All-good, in Latin Bonus Henericus.
The Root is thick, and yellowish, and has some Fibers; it is acrid, and bitter.
It sends forth many Stalks that are channel'd, partly erect, and partly supine;
they have a small Down on them, and are a Foot, or two Foot high. The Leaves
are triangular, like Orache, or Cuckow-pint; above they are smooth, under
sprinkled with fine Flower; they are placed upon long Footstalk, joined
alternately to the Stalks; they taste somewhat nitrous. The little Flowers are
placed on the Top-branches, in Clusters, on an Ear; they are yellow, and have
Threads; the come out of a five-leav'd Cup; they are so very small, that the
Parts of them can scarce be discerned. The Seeds are small, and black when they
are ripe, and in Figure like a Kidny; they are either included in Membranaceous
Bladders, or in the Flowers. It grows in Courts, and Cross-ways, and amongst
Rubbish, and also frequently with Pot Herbs. It flowers in April and May.

It Is excellent for cleansing and healing sordid Ulcers. The Leaves boiled with
Pot Herbs, and eaten, render the Body loose. It kills the Worms that are in the
putrid Ulcers of Four-footed Beasts, being bruised, and applied to the Ulcers.
The whole Herb, used in form of a Cataplasm, mitigates the Pain of the Gout;
and there is no Danger to be feared from the Use of it in this Case; for it
does not repel, but discusses, and digests; and besides, is Anodine: Which
Qualities are rarely found in one Simple. Take of Common English Mercury,
green, without the Flowers, four Handfuls; of Camomile and Elder-flowers dried,
two Handfuls; beat them grossly, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Elder-water, till they are very tender; then mix with them of Gum-Caranna and
Camphor, each half an Ounce; make a Cataplasm for the Gout. Take of the Leaves
of Mercury, Marshmallows, and Pellitory, each one Handful; of the Flowers of
Camomile one Pugil; of Carraway, Cumin-seeds, and Laurel-berries, each one
Ounce; boil them in clear Posset Drink; to twelve Ounces of the strained
Liquor, add three Ounces of Honey of Mercury, and two Drams of Hierapicra;
mingle them, and make a Carminative Clyster. This is useful in the Cholick.

Dog's- Mercury, in Latin Cynocrambe.
It has many small, fibrous Roots, that are Perennial and pliant, of a
nauseous, sweetish Taste; both the Male and Female creep in the Ground; they
are filled with an hard Nerve, like the Fibers of Hellebore. It has many
Stalks, round and jointed; they have large Spaces betwixt the Joints; they are
a Foot high, and without Branches; near the Earth they are of a purple Color.
The Leaves are placed by Pairs, upon the Joints, one opposite to another, and
are two or three Inches long, (those that are below are much less) and are
sharp-pointed, and indented about the Edges; they have short Footstalk; they
have a nauseous Taste. The Footstalk come from the Wings of the Leaves. The
little Flowers are of a greenish Color, and consist of three Leaves. It grows
commonly in Woods and Hedges, and other shady Places.

Prevotius, in his Book of Medicines for the Poor, ranks it amongst those
things that evacuate Serosities gently.

Milfoil, in Latin Millefolium.
The Stalks are sometimes two Foot high, and higher; they are small, stiff,
round, channel'd, hairy, and full of Pith, and divided at top into Twigs. Many
long Leaves lie on the Ground, which are finely cut into many small Parts,
finer than Tansie; they are a little indented about the edges: The Leaves on
the Stalks are smaller and finer near the tops, where stand Tufts of small,
white Flowers, with a yellowish Thrum in the middle; of a strong Smell, but not
unpleasant. The Root is woody, fibrous and blackish.

It stops Blood. It Is used for Bleeding at the Nose, and for all Fluxes. It Is
outwardly applied for Bleeding at the Nose, and for the Headache; and to heal
Wounds and Ruptures.

Milk-wort, in Latin Polygala.
The Root is woody, white, of a bitterish Taste, and somewhat Aromatic. It has
many Stalks; some upright, and some creeping; they are about an Hand in length,
and somewhat reddish. It has many Leaves, that grow alternately. The little
Flowers are placed on a Spike, and are of a Sky-colour; and sometimes white,
and of other Colors. The Leaves that grow on the Stalks are oblong, and sharp;
those that lie on the Ground are roundish. It grows commonly in dry Pastures.

An Handful of it infused in Wine all Night, purges Choler by Stool very much.

Mint, in Latin Mentha.
It strengthens the Stomach, takes off Crudities, and the Hickops, stops
Vomiting, and expels Wind. Two Ounces of the Water taken often stops Vomiting.
Outwardly applied, it takes off the Hardness of the Breasts, and dissolves
Curdl'd Milk, and prevents the Breeding of it. The distilled Water cures the
Gripes in Children. The Smell of it strengthens the Brain, and preserves the
Memory.

Take of Black-Cherry-water, and Balm-water, each three Ounces; Dr. Stephens's
Water one Ounce and an half, Spirit of Mint three Drams, Confection of Alkermes
two Drams, of Syrup of Mint a sufficient quantity; make a Julep: The Dose is
five Spoonfuls. This is good for Pains of the Stomach, and for Fainting.

Misleto, in Latin Viscus.
It grows on Apple Trees, Pear Trees and Crab-trees; on Ashes and Oaks; that
which grows on the Oaks is most esteemed. It grows also on the Barberry-tree,
and the Hasel.

Bird-lime is made of the Berries. The Wood is chiefly used for the
Falling Sickness, and is counted a Specific for it. It Is also used for
Apoplexies and Giddiness: It Is taken inwardly, or hanged about the Neck. In all
which Diseases it is reckoned very prevalent by Ancient and Modern Physicians.
The Powder of it also cures a Pleurisy, and forces the Courses. Some think
that the Misleto that grows on the Hasel-tree is better for the
Falling Sickness, and other Diseases of the Head, than that which grows on the
Oak. Henricus ab Steers thinks it does not grow on Hasel-trees till they are
about an Hundred Years old. A young Lady having been long troubled with an
almost hereditary Falling Sickness, and after having been wearied by Courses of
Physic prescribed her by the famousest Doctors that could be procured, without
at all mending, but rather growing worse; so that sometimes she would have, in
one Day, eight or ten dismal Fits, was cured only by the Powder of true
Misleto, given, as much as would lie on a Sixpence, early in the Morning, in
Black-Cherry-water, or in Beer, for some Days, near the Full-Moon.

Mony-wort, or Herb-Two-pence, in Latin Nummularia major vulgaris.
It has many long, slender Branches, that creep on the Ground, with two Leaves
at each Joint, opposite to one another; they are almost as round as a Penny,
but that they are pointed a little at the Ends; they are smooth, and of a
yellowish green Color; they taste dry, and astringent. From the Wings of the
Leaves come forth large, yellow Flowers, two most commonly at every Joint; they
consist of five sharp Leaves. The Seed is very small, and scarce visible.

It Is dry, astringent and vulnerary. The Flowers and Leaves beat, and applied
to Wounds and Ulcers, cure them. Taken in Wine, they cure Dysenteries, and
other Fluxes, and the Whites, and inward Wounds and Ulcers, especially of the
Lungs. But it is most of all commended for Ruptures in Children, the Powder of
it being taken inwardly, or the Herb being outwardly applied.

Moon-wort, in Latin Lunaria.
It springs up with one dark-green, thick, fat Leaf, standing upon a small
Foot-stalk, about an Inch high: But when it is in Flower it has a small, tender
Stalk, about three Inches high. The upper part of it, on each Side, is divided
into five or seven Parts, and sometimes more, resembling an Half Moon. On the
top of the Stalk are many Branches of small, long Tongues, much like the spiky
Head of Adder's-tongue, of a brownish Color. The Root is small, and fibrous.

The Ointment of it, used to the Region of the Reins, is counted a certain Cure
in the Bloody Flux.

Cup- Moss, in Latin Muscus pyxidatus.
It Is of an Ash Color, and like a Cup.

The Powder of it given in Posset Drink, or Small Beer, cures the Hooping-Cough
by a Specific Quality: A Scruple of it must be given Night and Morning. Or,
Take an Ounce of the Moss, boil it in a Quart of some Pectoral Water, till half
is consumed; then strain it, and make a Syrup with Sugar Candy: It Is good for
the same.

Moss of a dead Man's Scull. It being put up the Nostrils, stops Bleeding. It Is
common in Ireland. The Honorable Mr. Boil was cured of a violent Hemorrhage
by the use of it.

Mother-wort, in Latin Cardiaca.
It Is commended by some for Diseases of the Heart; but it is peculiarly good
for Hypochondriack Diseases. It provokes the Courses and Urine, and cleanses
the Breast of Phlegm, and kills Worms. A Spoonful of the Powder of it taken in
Wine, hastens Delivery wonderfully. A Decoction of it, or the Powder mixed with
Sugar, is very good in a Palpitation of the Heart, and for Hysteric and
Hypochondriack Diseases. Farriers use it, with good Success, in Diseases of
Horses, and other Cattle.

Creeping Mouse-ear, in Latin Philosella repens.
It grows every where in barren Pastures: It creeps on the Ground by Strings
that root, and so it spreads; they contain a bitter Milk. The Leaves are like
the Ear of a Mouse, with long Hairs on them; above they are green, below white;
they taste dry. Pale yellow Flowers are placed on each Stalk, which is small,
hairy, and about an Hand and an half high. It flowers in June and July, and
sometimes in May.

It Is very Astringent, Drying, and Vulnerary; wherefore it is used successfully
in Wound-drinks, Plasters and Ointments. It cures Dysenteries, and other Fluxes
of the Belly, and stops Vomiting, and cures Children's Ruptures, and is
excellent in the Stone. Some commend it for the Jaundice, and Swellings of the
Spleen, and at the Beginning of a Dropsy. It Is also commended for a
Chin-cough. Take Wild-Thyme one Handful, Sassafras sliced one Ounce,
Hyssop-water two Pints and an half; infuse them on a gentle Heat for six Hours,
afterward strain it, and sweeten it with Syrup of Mouse-ear: Give some
Spoonfuls of it often in a Day. Or, Take Cupmoss powdered one Ounce, White
Sugar Candy two Ounces; make a Powder: Give one Scruple, twice in a Day, in a
Spoonful of Syrup of Mouse-ear. Let the Children continue the use of these
things nine Days at least, if the Cough does not go off before.

Mug-wort, in Latin Artemisia.
The Root is about the bigness of a Finger, and creeps awry, sending down
sometimes large, white Fibers, of an Aromatic Taste, and somewhat sweet. The
Stalks are four or five Foot high, of the thickness of a Finger, round,
channel'd, strong, and stiff, of a purple Color, and with short Down on them,
and full of Pith. They have many Leaves, placed alternately; at the tops they
are branchy; the Leaves have an Aromatic Smell, somewhat like Lavender; they
are jagged, white above, hoary underneath. The Flowers are yellowish. The Seeds
are small, and enclosed in round Heads.

It Is frequently used by Women, inwardly and outwardly, in all the Diseases
peculiar to them. Three Drams of the Powder of the dried Herb taken in Wine, is
an excellent Remedy for the Hip-Gout. The green Herb, or the Juice of it, taken
in some convenient Liquor, is of great use for those that have taken too much
Opium. The Syrup of Mug-wort is made in the following manner: Take of Mug-wort
two Handfuls, of Pennyroyal, Calamint, Wild-Marjoram, Balm, Unspotted Ar^mat,
Cretick, Dittany, Savine, Marjoram, Ground Pine, Germander, St. John's* wort,
Feverfew with the Flowers, the Lesser Centaury, Rue, Betony, Vipers, Bugloss,
each one Handful; the Roots of Fennel, Smallage, Parsley, Asparagus, Knee-holm,
Saxifrage, Elecampane, Cyperus-grass, Madder, Flower-de-luce, and Peony, of
each one Ounce; of Juniper Berries, of the Seeds of Lovage, Parsley, Smallage,
Annise, Nigella, of Cubebs of the true Costus, Woody-Casia, the Sweet Smelling
Flag, the Roots of Asarabacca, Pyrethrum and Valerian, each half an Ounce;
having cleans'd, cut and beat these things, infuse them twenty four Hours in
twelve Pints of clear Water; distill them in B. M. and draw off eight Pints of
Water; put what remains in the Still into a Press, and strain it; boil six
Pounds of White Sugar in a sufficient quantity of the strained Liquor,
clarified with the White of an Egg, to the Consistence of Tablets; then add the
Water before distilled, and make a Syrup according to Art, and Aromatise it
with Cinnamon and Spikenard.

Mulberry-tree, in Latin M^rus.
The Leaves are much used in Italy, Sicily, Spain and France, to nourish
Silkworms. The Fruit of the Black Mulberry, before it is ripe, cools, dries,
and is very astringent; and therefore proper for a Looseness, the Bloody Flux
the Flux of the Courses, and for Spitting of Blood; and is good for
Inflammations and Ulcers of the Mouth and Throat. When it is ripe it loosens
the Belly, quenches Thirst, and excites Appetite. The Syrup of it is much in
use for Gargarisms; as is also Honey of it. Take of Spring Water a Quart, Julep
of Roses one Ounce and an half, Honey of Mulberries six Drams, Rose-Vinegar one
Dram, of Spirit of Vitriol a sufficient quantity to sharpen it: Make a
Gargarism.

White Mullein, or High-Taper, in Latin Verbascum album vulgar.
It has many large, woolly Leaves at the Root. It has most commonly but one
Stalk, four or five Foot high, round, hairy, stiff, and full of Pith. The
Flower has but one Leaf, divided into five obtuse Jags; they stand in a long
Spike, and are commonly of a yellow Color. The Seed is small, and brownish.
The Root is white, single, woody, and sends forth some large Fibers from the
Sides.

It Is used for Diseases of the Breast, for a Cough, and Spitting of Blood, and
for the Gripes. Outwardly the Leaves and Flowers are used for easing Pain,
especially of the Piles. The Leaves applied to the Soles of the Feet a few Days
before the usual Time of Purgation, gently provokes the Courses. The following
Drink was prescribed by a learned Physician, for a Lady that was afflicted with
the King's Evil. Take of Mullein, St. John's-wort, Agrimony, and Betony, each
three Handfuls; Shavings of Firr six Handfuls; boil them in six Gallons of Ale.
She drank of it constantly.

Dusty Mushrome, or Puff-balls, in Latin Fungus pulverulentus.
The Dust is very drying, and astringent. It stops Blood in Wounds, and dries
old Ulcers, and stops the Flux of the Hemorrhoids. It certainly cures
Chilblains when they are broken: The Sore being dried with a Rag, apply the
dusty Side, and let it lie on till they are well; if it chance to rub off,
apply it again. This I have often used, and it never failed me. The Dust is
very prejudicial to the Eyes.

Mustard, in Latin Sinapi.
It provokes Appetite; is good for Mother-fits, the Falling Sickness, Lethargy,
Palsy, and all other Diseases of the Head, being put up the Nostrils, or
applied in the manner of a Clyster. It provokes Urine, and the Courses; and is
an Incentive to Venery. It cures Catarrhs, and removes Hoarsness. It loosens
the Belly, and discusses Tumors. The Seed of it beat in a Mortar, and mixed
with White Wind, preserved the Lives of many Hundreds that were highly
Scorbutical, and in a languishing Condition, in a certain Town that was long
besieged, and reduced to so great Want, that the Inhabitants were forced to eat
nasty and unwholsom Things, whereby they became diseased; and many died before
they thought of Mustard, which grew plentifully in the Town-Ditch; which being
used as abovesaid, recovered them all. Take of Mustard Seed bruised two Drams,
of the Roots of Garlic one Ounce, of Black-Soap two Ounces, of Black-Salt one
Ounce; make a Cataplasm to be applied to the Soles of the Feet. This is useful
in Fevers, to draw the Humors from the Head.

Hedge- Mustard, in Latin Erysimum.
The Root is white, woody, and single, and tastes acrid; seldom so thick as the
Little-Finger. The Leaves are jagg'd and hairy, and like Shepherd's-purse, but
they are blunt at the Ends. The Stalk is about three Foot high, hairy, and
branchy. The Flowers are small and yellow, and consist of four small Leaves;
they are placed on long Spikes, flowering by degrees. The Cods are short,
scarce a Finger long, round, hairy, and grow flat to the Stalk, upon short
Footstalk; they end sharp. It grows upon Walls, and among Rubbish, and in
Hedges.

A Decoction of it in Wine is good in the Cholick. The Syrup of it is much in
use, and is made in the following manner: Take of fresh Hedge-Mustard, Roots
and all, six Handfuls; of the Roots of Elecampane, Colt's-foot with the Juice
in it, of Liquorish, each two Ounces; of the Leaves of Borrage, Succory, and
Maidenhair, each one Handful and an half; of the Cordial-Flowers of Rosemary,
and Betony, each half an Handful; of Anise-seeds half an Ounce; of Raisins of
the Sun cleansed two Ounces; infuse them a whole Day in Water and Mead, each
two Pints and an half; of the Juice of Hedge-Mustard clarified eight Ounces;
boil them in B. M. To two Quarts of the Juice, pressed out hard, and clarified,
add four Pounds and an half of Fine Sugar: Make a Syrup in B. M. according to
Art. This is an excellent Medicine for Coughs, and other Diseases of the Lungs.

Myrtle-tree, in Latin Myrtus.
It Is astringent. The Leaves and Berries are seldom used inwardly nowadays;
yet they may be used for a Looseness, and Spitting of Blood. The distilled Water
of the Flowers has a delicate Scent. The Syrup of Myrtles is made in the
following manner: Take of the Berries two Ounces and an half, of White and Red
Sanders of Sumach, Balaustians of Haw-thorn-berries, and Red Roses, each one
Ounce and an half; Medlars sliced half a Pound; beat them, and boil them in
eight Pints of clear Water till half is consumed; strain it, and add of the
Juice of Quinces, and acid Pomegranates, each six Ounces; then make a Syrup
with four Pounds of Sugar; the Juices must be put in at last. Take of
Plantane-water, and Cinnamon Water, hordeated, each four Ounces; of distilled
Vinegar half an Ounce; of true Bole and Dragon's-blood, each half a Dram; of
London-Laudanum three Grains, of Syrup of Myrtles one Ounce and an half; mingle
them, and make a Julep: Take five or six Spoonfuls every Night, at Bedtime.
This is commended for Bleeding at the Nose.

N.
Navel-wort, in Latin Umbilicus veneris.
It has a tuberous Root, and small Fibers. The Leaves are fat, thick and round,
and full of Juice, and taste clammy. It has two or three Stalks that are half a
Foot high, or higher. The Tops sometimes divide themselves into Branches. It
has Flowers almost from Bottom to Top; they are hollow, like a Bell, and of a
whitish Color. The Seeds are small, like the Seeds of Purslain. It grows
commonly on old Walls.

It Is cold and moist, and somewhat astringent. It Is good for Inflammations, and
St. Anthony's Fire. The Leaves and Roots eaten, are supposed to be good in the
Stone, and to force Urine. It Is also good for the King's Evil, Kibes and
Chilblains, being used in an Ointment.

Nep-Calmint, in Latin Mentha Cattaria.
It has a woody Root. The Stalks are three or four Foot high, or higher,
foursquare, hairy, and reddish near the Earth, in other parts hoary; they are
full of Branches, and bear at every Joint two broad Leaves, like Balm, but
longer pointed, softer and whiter; they taste hot, and smell like Mint. The
Flowers come from the Wings of the Leaves, on the top of the Stalks and
Branches, many together, in large Tufts, and are of a light purple Color.

It Is hot and dry. It Is chiefly used for Obstructions of the Womb, for
Barrenness, and to hasten Delivery, and to help Expectoration. It Is used
outwardly in Baths for the Womb, and the Itch.

Cats tear it to pieces when it is first set in Gardens, unless it be covered
with Thorns; but when it has flourished a while they do not injure it, nor that
which is sown; according to the following Rhyme:

If you set it,
The Cats will eat it:
If you sow it,
The Cats cannot know it.
Nettle, in Latin Vrtica.
It Is Diuretic, and Lithontriptick. Eaten with Pot Herbs, it loosens the
Belly, expels Gravel, and promotes Expectoration. The Buds are used in Broths,
in the Sprin-time, to purify the Blood. The bruised Herb, or the Juice, put up
the Nostrils, stops Bleeding at the Nose. It does good in Putrid and Malignant
Ulcers, and discusses h^^d Swellings. The Seed is Diuretic, and provokes
V^n^^y, and is used in Diseases of the Lungs. Take of the clarified Juices of
Nettles and Plantain, each six Ounces; of Aqua lactis Alexiteria four Ounces,
of Cinnamon Water hordeated three Ounces, of White Sugar a sufficient quantity;
mingle them, make a Julep: Take four Ounces Morning and Evening, daily, for
three Days. This is commended for Bleeding at the Nose. Oil of Roses, or Juice
of Nettles, cures the Stings of Nettles presently.

Woody- Nightshade, or Bitter-sweet, in Latin Solanum lignosum.
It sends forth small, woody, brittle Twigs, five or six Foot long* that
encompass any thing that is near; others lie on the Ground. The Bark of the
young Twigs is green; but the Bark of that which is old is rough and whitish
without, within it is very green, having a Pith in the middle. The Leaves are
placed alternately; they are somewhat broad, long, and pointed; with two small
Leaves, or rather pieces of Leaves, at the bottom of most of them. At the Tops
and Sides of the Branches come forth many Flowers; they consist of fine, narrow
and long Violet-purple colored Leaves. The Berries are red when they are ripe,
soft, and full of Juice; of a bitter, unpleasant Taste. The Root is fibrous. It
grows in Hedges, near Water commonly.

It Is said to provoke Urine, and to be good in a Dropsy, and for the Jaundice.
The Juice of the Leaves, says Parkinson, purges much. The Leaves are used
outwardly, with good Success, in Inflammations, and itching Tumors of the
Hands and Feet. Take four Handfuls of the Leaves cut, and four Ounces of
Flax-seed powdered; make a Cataplasm with Lard; apply it hot. This asswages
Tumors, and cures great Contusions.

Nipple-wort, in Latin Lampsana.
It has a white* single Root, with Twigs and Fibers. The Stalk is two or three
Foot high, or higher, round, hairy, reddish, concave and branchy. The Leaf is
like the Leaf of South-thistle. The Flowers are small, and yellow. The Seed is
oblong, blackish, and a little crooked. The whole Plant being cut, yields a
bitter Milk. It flowers in June and July, and grows frequently in Gardens.

It Is reckoned good for the Nipples, when they are sore.

O.
OAk-tree, in Lat. Quercus.
The whole Oak is astringent, but especially the Bark. A Decoction of it is
given for the Bloody Flux, and for Spitting of Blood. The Acorns are Diuretic.
The Water distilled from the Leaves of a young Oak, cures the Whites. Those
that Cut for the Stone use a Bath made of the Bark, to heal the Wound. Galls
grow on Oaks, but not in England. The best Ink is made in the following manner:
Take of Galls four Ounces, of Copperas two Ounces, of Gum-Arabeck one Ounce;
beat the Galls to a gross Powder, and infuse them nine Days in a Quart of
Claret, set it near the Fire, and stir it daily; then put in the Copperas and
the Gum, and when it has stood a Day the Ink will be fit for use. Take of the
Water of Oak-buds and Plantain, each three Ounces; of Cinnamon Water hordeated,
and Syrup of dried Roses, each one Ounce; Spirit of Vitriol a sufficient
quantity to make it pleasantly sharp: Take six Spoonfuls Morning and Evening.
This is good for an immoderate Flux of the Courses.

Oats, in Latin Avenae.
They dry, and are somewhat astringent. When Corn is dear, poor People live
chiefly on Water Gruel: And it is, indeed, very proper Diet for Sick and Well,
and yields a good Nourishment. The Common People in the North, and in Wales,
make Bread of Oats, and eat no other; and no People in the World enjoy more
Health, nor live longer: And, without doubt, this sort of Bread is most
wholesome, though it is not pleasant. Beer is also made of it. Flummery is made of
Oat-meal, boiled in Water to a Gelly: It Is eaten hot, being cut into Slices,
and put into Milk or Beer, or into White Wind, and sweetened with Sugar. It Is
an excellent Diet for weakly People. Our Physicians scarce order any Diet but
Water Gruel in Acute Diseases. The Meal is used outwardly in Cataplasms, for it
dries and digests moderately. In the Cholick, Oats fried with a little Salt,
and applied hot, in a Bag, to the Belly, gives great Ease, if the Gutts are not
stuffed with Excrements; if they are, a Clyster must first be given. A Bath
made of Malt-flower, Hops and Oat-straw, is much commended for those that are
afflicted with the Stone; for it wonderfully mitigates the Pain, and forces
away Urine, and many times the Stone too.

Onion, in Latin Caepa.
Onions are hot and flatulent: They are proper for those that abound with cold,
viscid Humors; in whom they procure Sleep, help Concoction, and prevent sour
Belchings. They open Obstructions, force the Courses and Urine, and promote
insensible Transpiration. But they injure those that are Choleric; they
especially disturb their Heads, and cause troublesome Dreams, and offend their
Eyes. Old Women cut a raw Onion, and infuse it in Water all Night; and the next
Morning give the Water to Children, to kill the Worms, with good Success. A
large Onion hollowed, and filled with Venice-Treacle, and covered, and then
roasted under hot Ashes, and applied (the outward Skin being pulled off) in the
manner of a Cataplasm, mollifies effectually hard Swellings, and opens them. A
raw Onion pilled, and applied presently, with a little Salt, cures Burns, if
the outward Skin is not ulcer'd; for it draws out the Fire, and prevents
Blisters.

Orpine, in Latin Telephium.
It Is Vulnerary, and Astringent. It Is chiefly used for healing Ulcers of the
Bowels, occasioned by the Bloody Flux; for Ruptures, and Burns. It Is excellent
for Easing Pain, both in fresh Wounds, and old Ulcers. The Herb roasted under
Ashes, and mixed with Lard, cures Fellons.

P.
HErb Paris, True-Love, or One-berry, in Latin Herba Paris.
The Root is small, knotted, and creeping. The Stalk is pretty thick, round and
solid, and about half a Foot high, reddish near the Earth, green above. It has
four Leaves, set directly one against another; they shine under, above they do
not; they are somewhat like the Leaf of Nightshade, but broader. It has one
Flower, like a Star, composed of four small, narrow, long, pointed Leaves, of a
yellowish green Color, having four other lesser Leaves lying between them. The
Berry is of a black, purplish Color, full of Juice, and of the bigness of a
Grape; having within many white Seeds.

The Berries and Leaves are Cooling, and Drying. The Berries are used inwardly
in the Plague, and Malignant Diseases, and upon being poisoned. The Leaves are
used outwardly in Pestilential Buboes, and other hot Tumors, and in old Ulcers.

Parsley, in Latin Petroselinum.
The Root and Herb expel Wind, provoke Urine and the Courses, and open
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and are good in the Dropsy and Jaundice.
The Seed is good for the same Diseases, and for an old Cough, and against
Poison. The whole Herb, outwardly applied, dissolves hard Tumors; and dries
away Milk, being applied to the Breasts. Take of Parsly-seeds three Drams, of
Winter-Cherry-berries N. vi. boil them in a Pint of Milk, and make
Posset Drink: Take six Ounces at a time, sweetened with an Ounce of Syrup of
Marshmallows. This is good in the Stone.

Parsly-piert, in Latin Percepier.
The Root is woody, small, and has a few small Fibers. It has many small,
round, hairy Stalks, about an Hand high. The Leaves are roundish, divided into
three Parts, and are deeply jagged, somewhat like Dove's-foot, though less, and
hairy; they are placed alternately; the lower Leaves have Footstalk, the
upper have none at all, or those that are, are very short; above they are of a
light Green, below they are whitish. The Flowers are so small, they can scarce
be seen: And the Seed is very small. It delights in Sandy and Fallow Grounds,
and amongst Corn.

It forces Urine violently, and expels Gravel, a Dram of the dried Herb being
taken in White Wind. It may be also eaten raw, as a Sallet; or pickled, and
eaten in Winter, for Sauce.

Garden- Parsnip, in Latin Pastinaca latifolia sativa.
The Root is very nourishing, and palatable: It fattens, and is a Provocative
to Venery. It opens, attenuates, and cleanses.

Cow- Parsnip, in Latin Sphondilium.
The Root is white, and single, and grows deep in the Earth; of a sweet Taste,
and somewhat acrid. It has a great Nerve within. The Leaves that come from the
Root are placed on long, hairy Footstalk; they are long and large, and deeply
cut about the Edges. The Stalk is single, round, channel'd, and about four Foot
high. The Flowers grow in Tufts; they are white, and consist of five Leaves. It
grows in moist Pastures, and near Hedges.

The Root is Emollient, and asswages Tumors. The Seed is excellent for
Hysteric Fits.

Peach-tree, in Latin Malus Persica.
The Fruit has a sweet and pleasant Smell, and refreshes the Spirits. The
Leaves boiled in Beer or Milk, kill Worms, and expel them. The Water of the
Flowers takes Spots from the Face. The Syrup is a very proper Purge for
Children; and is made in the following manner: Take of the fresh Flowers one
Pound, infuse them a whole Day in three Pints of warm Water, then press them
out; add the same quantity of Flowers five times to the same Liquor, and infuse
them as before; then add two Pounds and an half of Fine Sugar, and boil it to a
Syrup.

The Pear Tree, in Latin Pyrus.
Pears are agreeable to the Stomach, and quench Thirst: But they are best
baked. Dried Pears stop Fluxes of the Belly. The following Pears are most
esteemed in England: The Bon-Christien, Summer and Winter; the Butter-Pear, the
Green-Bury, the Violet, the Dove, the Great Musk, Amadot, Rounselet, Messieur
Jean, Great Sovereign, Blood-Pear, Windsor-Pear, Green-field-Pear, Dionier,
Great Bergamot, Virgalous, Roshea, Red-Catharine, Double-flower'd Pear.

Pease, in Latin Pisum.
All sorts of Pease are windy, and therefore are injurious to all that have
windy Stomachs, and are troubled with Spleen-wind. Raw Green Pease are good for
the Scurvy.

Pellitory, in Latin Parietaria.
It cleanses and cools. It Is used for the Stone, and Difficulty of Urine, and
for Coughs; and in Clysters, for Pains in the Belly, Womb and Reins. It Is
outwardly used for Tumors, St. Anthony's-fire, and for Burns. Take of the
Juice of Pellitory three Ounces, of the Juice of Limons, and Oil of Almonds,
each half an Ounce; mingle them: Take it Morning and Evening for two Days. This
is good for the Stone in the Kidneys.

Pennyroyal, in Latin Pulegium.
It Is used to provoke the Courses, and to help Delivery. It Is good for Coughs,
for the Gripes, the Stone, Jaundice, and Dropsy. A Spoonful of the Juice given
to Children, is an excellent Remedy for the Chin-Cough. For an Hoarsness, take
six Ounces of the Decoction of it, sweetened, at Bedtime. The fresh Herb
wrapped in a Cloth, and laid in a Bed, drives away Fleas; but it must be renewed
once a Week.

Peony, in Latin Paeonia.
The Roots and Seeds of Male-Peony are much used in Physic: They are used for
Diseases of the Head, and for Obstructions of the Courses, and
Child-bed-Purgations, and to ease the After-pains. The Roots are hanged round
the Neck, to cure the Falling Sickness. The Compounded Peony-water, and the
Syrup of it, are much in use. The Compounded Water is made in the following
manner: Take of the Leaves of Lillies of the Valley, fresh, one Pound; infuse
them in four Gallons of Spanish Wine: Take of the Flowers of the Lime-tree half
a Pound, of Peony-flowers four Ounces; infuse them two Days, then distill them
till they are dry in B. M. in the distilled Water infuse two Ounces and an half
of the Roots of Male-Peony; of White Dittany, and Long Birth-wort, each half an
Ounce; of the Leaves of Misleto of the Oak, and Rue, each two Handfuls; of the
Seeds of Peony ten Drams, of Rue three Drams and an half, of Castor two
Scruples of Cubebs and Mace, each two Drams; of Cinnamon one Ounce and an half,
of Prepared Squills three Drams, of Rosemary-flowers six Pugils, of Stechas and
Lavender, each four Pugils; of Betony, July-flowers and Cowslips, each eight
Pugils; add four Quarts of the Juice of Black-Cherries, and distill them in a
Glass. The Syrup is made in the following manner: Take of the fresh Roots of
both Peonies, at Full Moon, each one Ounce and an half; slice them, and infuse
them in white wind for the space of a Day; of Contrayerra half an Ounce, of
Sermountain six Drams, of Elk-hoof one Ounce, of Rosemary with the Flowers one
Handful, of Betony, Hyssop, Wild-Marjoram, of Ground Pine and Rue, each three
Drams; of the Wood of Aloes, of Cloves, of the Seeds of the Lesser Cardamoms,
each two Drams; of Ginger and Spikenard, each one Dram; of Stechas and Nutmegs,
each two Drams and an half; infuse them warm, a Day, in three Quarts of the
distilled Water of the Roots of Peony; boil them to four Quarts; strain it, and
add four Pounds and an half of Fine Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup.

Pepper-wort, in Latin Lepidium.
The Root is of the thickness of a Finger, or thicker; it is white, it has an
acrid, hot Taste; it creeps in the Earth. It has many Stalks, about four Foot
high, round, smooth, and full of Pith; they are branchy, and less than the
Little Finger, and are covered with a gray Powder that is easily rubbed off. The
Leaves are long, broad, and end sharp; they are smooth, fat, and of a dull
green Color; they are placed alternately, and are indented about the Edges:
Those that come from the Root, and are at the bottom of the Stalks, have long
Footstalk. The Flowers are very small; they are white, and consist of four
Leaves; they are placed on very small Footstalk. It grows near the Banks of
Rivers, but it is rare.

The Leaf is acrid, and hot. The Herb bruised, and applied, cures the Hip-Gout.
Boiled in Beer, it hastens Delivery. It Is commended for a Leprosy. Take of
Garden-Scurvy-grass-leaves, and of the Leaves of Rocket and Pepperwort, each
six Handfuls; of the Roots of Sweet Smelling Flag, the Lesser Galangal*
Zedoary, Florentine, Iris, Elder, and Wake-Robin, each four Ounces; of the
Winteran-Bark, and Jamaica-Pepper, each three Ounces; of Juniper Berries four
Ounces; of Cloves, Ginger and Nutmegs, each one Ounce; bruise and cut them, and
pour on them four Quarts of Rhenish-wine; distill them in a common Still, and
mix all the Water together: Take three Ounces Night and Morning. This is
commended in an Anasarca.

Periwinele, in Latin Vinca per vinca.
It spreads it self much by its Twigs, that creep on the Ground. The Root is
fibrous; many small, round, green, and jointed Twigs root again by Fibers that
come from the Joints. The Leaves grow out of the Joints by Pairs opposite to
one another, like the Leaves of Laurel, but much less; they are sharp, stiff
and smooth, and hang on short Footstalk; above they shine, and are of a deep
green Color; they taste astringent, and bitterish; below they are of a lighter
Color. The Flower is placed on a Foot-stalk that comes from the Joints, two
Inches long, one Flower on one Foot-stalk: It Is like the Jessamine-flower in
shape, and is of a Violet-colour. A Milky Line runs from Bottom to Top, through
all the Jags. A forked Cod succeeds the Flower, and contains oblong Seeds. It
grows in Hedges and Ditches.

It Is a famous Vulnerary. It Is used in Fluxes of the Belly, for Dysenteries,
the Piles, Bleeding at Nose, and for Wounds with Fluxion. It Is used outwardly
for Overslowing of the Courses, for Looseness and Pains of the Teeth. The Leaves
of this Herb put upon Paper that will easily receive Moisture, and sowed to it,
with fine Flax betwixt, and perfumed with Frankincense, cured a Scrophulous
Tumor in a short time, which continued obstinate under the Use of other
Remedies, for the space of a whole Year.

Male- Pimpernel, in Latin Anagallis mas.
It has a white, single Root, with small Fibers. The Stalks are an Hand, or
half an Hind high, apiece, smooth, encompassed by two Leaves opposite to
one another; they are placed by Intervals, and without Footstalk; the
Underside of the Leaf is spotted with many dark-brown Specks. The Flowers come
out singly from the Wings of the Leaves, and are placed upon oblong
Footstalk, and are divided, almost to the bottom, into five sharp Pieces,
resembling so many Leaves. The Cup is also compounded of five acute Pieces. The
Seminal Vessels are almost spherically round; they are pretty large, and full
of Seeds. The whole Plant has an acrid Taste. It grows in Gardens and Fields.
It flowers late, about the midst of Summer.

It Is moderately hot and dry: It Is counted Vulnerary, and is used inwardly and
outwardly. It does much good in the Plague, being boiled in Wine: But the Sick
must go to bed, and must be well covered, as soon as he has drank a moderate
Draught of it, that he may sweat. A Woman cured many that were troubled with a
Pin and Web in their Eyes with the distilled Water of it. In a Consumption, and
for Purulent Spitting, let the Sick drink every Day, Morning and Evening,
twelve Spoonfuls of the distilled Water, mixed with an equal quantity of Red
Cows Milk, and sweetened with Fine Sugar: This is an approved Remedy. It Is
frequently used for the Gripes of Newborn Children. It also moves the Courses.
Willis commends the Decoction of it as a Specific for Madness.

The Pine Tree, in Latin Pinus.
The Bark and Leaves cool and bind; wherefore they are good in Dysenteries, and
Fluxes of the Courses. A Decoction or Infusion of the Tops in Beer, or some
other proper Liquor, is reckoned very good for the Stone of the Kidneys and
Bladder, and for the Scurvy, and Diseases of the Breast. The Nuts have a
delicate Taste, and are good for Coughs and Consumptions, and for Heat of
Urine. They increase Milk, and provoke Venery.

Plantain, in Latin Plantago.
It Is a Vulnerary Herb. It Is used in Fluxes of the Belly, for Spitting of
Blood, Running of the Reins, involuntary Urine, and for immoderate Fluxes of
the Courses. It Is outwardly used to cleanse and heal Wounds and Ulcers. The
Juice by it self, or mixed with the Juice of Limon, is an excellent Diuretic.
Half a Dram of the Seeds taken daily in Broth, or in an Egg, is good to prevent
Miscarriage. Take twelve Handfuls of Plantain-leaves, six Ounces of the fresh
Roots of Comfrey; press out the Juice of the Leaves, and beat the Roots in a
Stone-Mortar; mix the Roots and the Juice, and with a sufficient quantity of
Sugar make an Electuary: Take the quantity of a Nutmeg Night and Morning, This
is an excellent Remedy for Spitting and Vomiting Blood. Take of Plantain-water
two Ounces, of Rubarb powdered two Scruples, of yellow Myrobalans powdered one
Scruple, Syrup of dried Roses half an Ounce; mix them, and give it in the
Morning; two Hours after let some Broth be taken. This is excellent for an
immoderate Flux of the Courses.

Plum-tree, in Latin Prunus.
There are several Kinds of them; the Sour bind, the Sweet move the Belly. The
Electuary of Plums, called Electuarium Diaprunum, is made of Damascenes, in the
following manner: Take of fresh and ripe Damascenes, one Hundred, boil them in
a sufficient quantity of Water till they are soft, then pulp them through a
Sieve, boil an Ounce of Violet-flowers in the Liquor gently; then strain it,
and add two Pounds of Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup; then add a Pound and an
half of the Pulp abovementioned, of the Pulp of Cassia and Tamarinds strained,
and dissolved in a small quantity of the Liquor, each one Ounce; boil it again,
stir it continually, adding the following Powders; Sanders, Red and White,
Rubarb, of each three Drams; of Red Roses, Violets, of the Seeds of Purslain,
of Endive and Barberries, of Gum-Tragacanth, and the Juice of Liquorish, each
two Drams; of the Greater Cold Seeds, each one Dram: Make an Electuary
according to Art. This Medicine is cold and moistening, and good in Fevers.

Polypody, in Latin Polypodium.
The Root is reckoned among Purging Medicines; but it purges very gently. It Is
very proper in Obstructions of the Mesentery, Liver and Spleen; for the Scurvy,
and Hypochondriack Diseases. It Is generally used in Decoctions, with other
purging Medicines. Take of the Root of Polypody of the Oak half an Ounce, of
Dodder of Thyme three Drams, of Sena half an Ounce, of Tamarinds six Drams, of
Coriander-seeds three Drams, of Yellow Sanders two Drams; boil them in fourteen
Ounces of Fountain Water till four Ounces are consumed; add two Drams of
Agarick, and one Dram and an half of Rubarb; strain it, and clarify it, and
add two Ounces of the purging Syrup of Apples: Take six Ounces once in three or
four Days. This is proper for Melancholy People. Take of the Roots of Polypody,
Bugloss, Scorzonera, Bark of Tamaris, and Roots of Cappars, each half an Ounce;
of Spleen-wort one Handful and an half; of Agrimony, Maidenhair, Balm, Dodder,
and Tops of Hops, each half an Handful; of Flowers of Broom and Borage, each
two Pugils; the Parings of four Pippins; boil them, with a Chicken, in
Spring Water, for thin Broth: Take a good Draught Morning and Evening, with
fifteen Grains of Cream of Tartar dissolved in it, and fast two Hours after.
This is good in Hypochondriack Diseases.

The Poplar-tree, in Latin Populus.
The Bark of Poplar, especially of the White Poplar, or Abele-tree, is used
inwardly and outwardly for the Hip-Gout, for the Strangury, and Burns. Women
use the Buds of Black Poplar to beautify and thicken their Hair: They are good
also to ease Pain. The Ointment is good for hot Swellings, to ease the Pain of
them: And being applied to the Nostrils and Temples, it disposes to Sleep. It Is
made in the following manner: Take of the fresh Buds of the Black Poplar a
Pound and an half, of the Leaves of Violets and Navelwort, each three Ounces;
of new and unsalted Lard, cleared from the Skin, and washed, two Pounds; beat
them, and mingle them, and infuse them together in May; add the following Herbs
bruised, of the tender Tops of Brambles, of the Leaves of Black Poppy,
Mandrake, Hen-bane, Nightshade, Lettice, Houseleek Greater and Lesser,
Bur-dock, each three Ounces; after the Tenth Day pour on them a Pint of
Rose Water, boil them over a gentle Fire, stirring them continually, till all
the superfluous Moisture is consumed, then strain it, and keep it for use.

Red- Poppy, or Corn-Rose, in Latin Papaver Rheas.
The Flowers cool, and assuage Pain, and dispose to Sleep. They are chiefly
used in Fevers, for Pleurisies and Quinsies, and other Diseases (especially of
the Breast) that need Cooling Medicines. And for immoderate Fluxes of the
Courses, the Powder, the distilled Water, the Syrup* and the Conserve of them,
are in use; but the Syrup is most in use, and is made in the following manner:
Take of the fresh Flowers of Red Poppies two Pounds, pour upon them two Quarts
of hot Fountain Water; press them out the next Day, and infuse the same
quantity of Flowers in the Liquor as before, strain it, and with a quantity of
Sugar equal in weight to the Liquor, make a Syrup according to Art.
Surfeit-water is made in the following manner: Take what quantity of Brandy you
please, steep a good quantity of Red Poppies therein, the black Bottoms being
first cut off; when the Color is extracted press them out, and put in fresh,
and so do till the Brandy has a very deep Tincture; then put in Nutmegs,
Cloves, Ginger and Cinnamon, of each two Drams to a Quart of the Brandy; you
may add some Fine Sugar if you think fit: Keep it close stopped. It Is good for
Surfeits, for Wind, or Illness of the Stomach.

White- Poppy, in Latin Papaver album.
The Seeds are used in Emulsions. The best Diacodium is made of the Heads and
Seeds in the following manner: Take fourteen Ounces of the Heads of
White-Poppies well dried, infuse them twenty four Hours in eight Pints of
Fountain Water, boil them well, then press them out, and put a Pound and an
half of Sugar to the Liquor, then boil it to a Syrup.

The Juice of Poppies thickened is called Opium: I mean, that which flows out
of it self, the Head being cut; for the Juice that is press' out is called
Meconium, which is much weaker than Opium. The Turks sow White-Poppies in
Fields, as we do Wheat; and every one carries some about him in War and Peace.
A certain Jew declared, that forty Camels laden with it come yearly from
Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Galatia and Cilicia. A Turk can take a Dram at a time
without any Injury. The best Opium is bitter and hot, and of a yellow Color:
It recreates the Spirits, and provokes Venery. Liquid Laudanum is made in the
following manner: Take of Spanish Wine one Pint, of Opium two Ounces, of
Saffron one Ounce, of Cinnamon and Cloves powdered, each one Dram; infuse them
together in B. M. for two or three Days, till the Liquor has a deep Tincture;
strain it, and keep it for use: The Dose is sixteen Drops. Matthews's Pill is
made in the following manner: Take of Salt of Tartar, prepared with Niter, four
Ounces; of Oil of Turpentine eight Ounces; mix them, and let them stand in a
moist and cold place eight, nine or ten Months, or more, till the Salt has
taken up thrice its weight of Oil, and is become one thick Mass, like Soap; in
the mean time you must stir it often, and add the Oil as it incorporates: Take
of this Soap six Ounces, of the best Opium two Ounces, of Black and White
Hellebore powdered, and of Liquorish, each two Ounces; mix them exactly, adding
as much Oil of Turpentine as is sufficient to make a Mass for Pills, which must
be kept moist with Oil of Turpentine: The Dose is ten Grains. The Opiat-plaster
is made in the following manner: Take of the Great Diachylon four Ounces, of
Quicksilver two Ounces, of Opium one Ounce; mingle them according to Art. This
is good to ease Pain.

Primrose, in Latin Primula veris.
It Is hot and dry, and of an astringent Taste. It Is very good for Phlegmatic
and Melancholy Diseases, and for Fluxes of the Belly, and to strengthen the
Stomach.

English- Prunes, or Plums, called Bullace, in Latin Prunus.
The White and Black are Cooling and Astringent: They are good for Fluxes of
the Belly. The Flowers are Cathartick. The Gum dissolved in Vinegar, cures
Tetters. Ropy Wine is cured in the following manner: Take the Fruit, beat and
dry it in the Air; put more or less of it into the Vessel, according to the
quantity of Wine; it must be well stirred about, and then the Vessel must be
stopped up for eight or ten Days, and you will find it soon recovered. The
following Plums are most esteemed: The Red, Blue and Amber Primordian; the
Violet-Plum, Red, Blue and Amber, the Matchless, the Black and Green Damascene,
the Morocco, the Barbary, the Myrobolane-Plum, the Apricock-Plum, the
Cinnamon-Plum, the Great Mogul and Tawny-Plum, the White, Red and Black
Pear-Plum, the Green Osterly-Plum, the Muscle-Plum, the Catalonia-Plum, the
White and Black Prunella, the Bonum Magnum, the Wheaten-Plum, the Cluster-Plum,
the Queen-Mother-Plum, the Maiple-Plum, the Imperial-Plum, the Peach-Plum, the
Pease-Cod-Plum, the Date-Plum, White, Yellow and Red; the Nutmeg-Plum, the
Turky-Plum, the Prince-Plum, ripe last; the Lammas-Plum, the White Pear-Plum,
and Damascens.

Pumpion, in Latin Pepo.
It Is cold, and very moist: It provokes Urine, the Nourishment of it is very
small. The Seed is one of the four greater Cold Seeds.

Purflain, in Latin Portulaca.
It Is cold and moist. It provokes Appetite. It cures Heat of Urine, and Running
of the Reins. The Juice mixed with Oil of Roses, cures Burns and Inflammations.
It Is good for Coughs, and Shortness of Breath.

Q.
QVince-tree, in Latin Malus Cydonia.
The Fruit is very agreeable to the Stomach. It Is astringent, and cures
Spitting of Blood, the Bloody Flux, and all other Fluxes. The Mucilage of the
Seeds extracted with Spawn of Frog's-water, is an excellent Gargarism in
Fevers. The Syrup of Quinces is made in the following manner: Take of the Juice
six Pints, boil half away, add three Pounds of Sugar, and make a Syrup: The
Dose is one Ounce in some proper Water. Marmalade of Quinces is made in the
following manner: Pare the Quinces, cut them, and take out the Core; weigh
them, and put them into cold Water; take the same quantity of Sugar, and
dissolve it with a little Water; boil it, and take off the Scum; then put in
the Quinces, and set them on a gentle Fire, close covered, till they are of a
good Color, then uncover them; then increase the Fire, and boil them to a
Jelly.

R.
RAdish, in Latin Raphanus sativus.
It Is oftener used in the Kitchen than for Medicine; but it is good for the
Stone, and to force Urine. It strengthens the Stomach, and helps Concoction.

Horse- Radish, in Latin Raphanus Rusticanus.
It provokes Appetite, but it hurts the Head. It expels Gravel, and forces
Urine, and is commended for Coughs; and is reckoned a Specific in the Scurvy.
The Compounded Water of it is much in use, and is made in the following manner:
Take of the Leaves of Garden and Sea-Scurvy-grass, gathered in the Springtime,
each six Pounds; beat them, and press out the Juice; mingle with it the Juice
of Watercresses and Brook-lime, each a Pint and an half; of the best
White Wind four Quarts, twelve Limons sliced, of the fresh Roots of Briony four
Pounds, of Horse-Radish-roots two Pounds, of Wake-Robin-roots half an Ounce, of
Winteran Bark, and Nutmegs, each four Ounces; infuse them three Days, and then
distill them: The Dose is two Ounces. Take one Spoonful of the Shavings of
Horse-Radish-roots, twelve Leaves of Scurvy Grass, twenty Raisins of the Sun
stoned, put them into a Quart of Beer; let them stand close stopped all Night,
drink of it the next Day, at Meals, and at any other time. This has done much
good in the Scurvy.

Common Rag-wort, in Latin Jacobaea vulgaris.
The Root has many large, white Fibers, that stick fast in the Ground. It has
many times several Stalks, and sometimes but one; they are round, channel'd,
sometimes smooth, sometimes downy, three Foot high, and sometimes higher,
divided at the top into Branches. It has many long and large green Leaves,
lying on the Ground, of a dark-green Color, rent and torn in the Sides into
many Pieces: The Leaves on the Stalks are the same. The Flowers are yellow, and
consist of many Leaves; when they are ripe they turn into Down. The Seed is
very small.

It cures Ulcers, Inflammations, and a Fistula. Being applied hot to the Belly,
in form of a Cataplasm, it cures the Gripes.

Raspberry-bush, in Latin Rubus Idaeus.
The Berries are very cordial, and taste very well. The Syrup of it is very
good in Fevers, and is made in the following manner: Take of the Clarified
Juice, and of Sugar, equal Parts; make a Syrup. Take of the Syrup of
Rasp-berries and July flowers, each two Ounces; of the Juice of Kermes one
Ounce; make a Mixture: Take a Spoonful every Morning. This is a Cordial for
Women before Delivery.

Rest-harrow, or Camock, in Latin Anonis.
It spreads its Root far and near; they are white, and hard to break. The
Stalks are woody, and three or four Foot high, round, hairy, and reddish;
sometimes it has Prickles, and sometimes not. The Flowers grow at the top, like
Pease-blossoms. Small, round Cods contain the Seeds.

The Bark of the Root, and the Root it self, provokes Urine, and expels Gravel,
and eases the Pain of the Teeth, and opens Obstructions of the Liver, being
infused in Wine, or boiled in Posset Drink, and taken inwardly for some time.

Rye, in Latin Secale.
It Is the next Corn in goodness to Wheat. Bread made of it is black and heavy,
and hard to digest; and it purges and gripes those that are not used to it; but
it keeps moist longer than Wheaten Bread. The course Flower of it put into a
Cloth, and applied to the Head, cures inveterate Headaches; and so applied, is
good for Mad People.

Rocket, or Winter-Cresses, in Latin Barbarea.
It has an oblong, white, thick, Perennial Root, of an acrid Taste. The Stalks
are a Cubit high, channel'd, strong, and full of Pith; with many Wings, wherein
the Leaves are; lesser than those of Radish, and resembling the Leaf of Cresses
at the Extremity of it, by extreme Jags; they are of a dark-green Color, and
shine; they do not taste so quick as the Root. From the Wings of the Leaves,
toward the Top-stalks, come many small Branches, whereon, as also on the
Top-stalk, small yellow Flowers, consisting of four Leaves, run up into long
Ears. The Cods are small, round, and about an Inch long, pressed to the Stalks,
wherein are small Seeds, of a brown Color. The whole Plant is smooth. The
Flowers are placed on short Footstalk. It grows near Ditches, and Rivers, and
Running-waters; and sometimes also on plowed Grounds. It flowers in May and
June.

It Is acrid and hot, and much of the same Virtue with Cresses. It Is mixed with
Sallets, especially in the Wintertime, when Cresses are scarce; wherefore it is
called Winter-Cress. It Is good in the Scurvy. The Juice of it is mixed with
Ointments, to cleanse sordid and impure Ulcers. The Seed is Lithontriptick, and
Diuretic.

Wild- Rocket, in Latin Eruca sylvestris.
The Root is white, thick and long, and has many Stalks, with many Wings; they
are channel'd, and a little hairy. The Leaves are cut in like Dandelion; they
are smooth, and of a deep green Color, and taste hot. The Flowers are yellow.
It has long, angled, upright Cods. The Seeds are like the Seeds of Wild
Mustard; they are acrid, and bitterish. It grows upon and about Walls, and
among Rubbish.

It Is hot and dry. It Is chiefly used to stimulate Venery, and for Preservation
against Apoplexies. Outwardly applied, it extracts Splinters of Bones.

The Rose, in Latin Rosa.
There are several sorts of Roses: The Red Rose, the Damask-Rose, the
Damask-Province-Rose, the Dog-Rose, the Pimpernel-Rose, the Greater Apple-Rose,
the Single Cinnamon-Rose, the Double Cinnamon-Rose, the Wild Briar, or Muscovy,
the Virginian Briar-Rose, the White Rose, the Musk-Rose, the Ever-green Rose,
the Single Yellow Rose, the Double Yellow Rose, the Monthly Rose, the
Monday-Rose, the Franc-fort-Rose, the Hungarian Rose, the York and Lancaster.

The Red Rose is astringent, and bitter: It comforts the Heart, and strengthens
the Stomach. It cures the Whites, and an immoderate Flux of the Courses. It
stops Eruptitions of the Blood, and Fluxes of the Belly. A Decoction of it is
used for the Headache, and Pains in the Eyes, Ears, Throat and Gums. The
distilled Water of it is Cordial, and refreshes the Spirits. The following
Medicines are made of Red Roses: 1. The Vinegar of Roses, which, mixed with the
distilled Water, is good for Redness or Inflammations of the Eyes; and is used
to bathe the Temples in the Headache, and to procure Sleep. 2. Aromaticum
Rosatum; which is Cordial. 3. Conserve of Roses; which is much in use for
stopping Catarrhs, and Running of the Reins, and Fluxes of the Belly. It Is made
in the following manner: Take of Red Roses one Pound; they must be gathered in
a dry Season, before they are quite spread; clip off the yellow Bottoms, beat
them well in a Stone-Mortar, till they come to a Mass, like a Pulp; then add
two Pounds of White Sugar, beat it with the Roses till it is well mixed; then
put it into a Pot, covered only with a Paper, and let it stand in the Sun a
Fortnight or three Weeks, stirring it once or twice a Week. Take of Conserve of
Red Roses Vitriolated four Ounces, of the Electuary of Sassafras one Ounce, of
Olibanum powdered one Dram, of Diacodium a sufficient quantity; make an
Electuary: Take the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning and Evening. This is excellent
for stopping Tickling Coughs. 4. The Tincture of Roses, made in the following
manner, is commended for a Rheumatism: Take of dried Red Roses one Ounce, of
warm Water three Pints, of Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitriol, one Dram and an
half; infuse them six Hours; to the strained Liquor add half a Pound of White
Sugar: Take a Draught twice or thrice a Day. 5. Strained Honey of Roses; which
is good to wash the Mouth and Throat when they are sore, or any other Part. 6.
Sugar of Roses; which is good for Coughs. 7. Syrup of dried Roses; which is
much in use, and is, indeed, an excellent Medicine: It comforts the Heart,
re^^^^s Putrefaction and stops Fluxes of all sorts. It Is made in the following
manner: Take two Quarts of hot Water, infuse in it half a Pound of Red Roses,
dried in the Sun; the next Day press it out, and with two Pounds of Sugar make
a Syrup. 8. Oil of Roses. 9. Electuary of Roses. 10. Ointment of Roses. Of
Damask-Roses are made Syrup of Roses Solutive, a distilled Water, Aloes Rosat,
and Honey of Roses Solutive. The Syrup is much in use, and is made in the
following manner: Take of hot Fountain Water two Quarts, of fresh Damask-Roses
as many as the Water will contain; infuse them in a close Vessel twelve Hours,
then press it out, and heat the Liquor again, and put the Roses in as before,
and infuse them again; and so do three or four times, increasing the Quantity
of Roses as the Liquor increases; then add to six Parts of the Liquor, four
Parts of Sugar, and make a Syrup according to Art. It purges gently: It may be
taken, from one Ounce to four. Honey of Roses Solutive is also Purging and
Opening, and is often given in Clysters; and so is the Syrup. See Eglantine, or
Sweet- Briar.

Rosemary, in Latin Rosmarinus.
The Leaves, the Flowers and Seeds are in use: They are Cephalic, Uterine, and
proper for the Nerves. They are chiefly used for Diseases of the Head and
Nerves; for Apoplexies, Palsies, Falling Sickness, and Giddiness. They quicken
the Sight, and help the Memory, and cure a Stinking Breath. They are used for
the Whites, and Jaundice. And they comfort the Heart, and open Obstructions of
the Liver, Spleen and Womb. The Herb burnt, corrects the Air, and renders it
wholesome in the time of a Plague. A Decoction of it in Water, taken before
Exercise, cures the Jaundice. The Seed taken in Wine, does the same. The Tops
of it infused in Wine or Beer, and taken daily, cure the Palsy, and other
Diseases of the Nerves. The Flowers dried, and taken in a Pipe, like Tobacco,
are good for a Cough and Consumption. The Chemical Oil of it, taken in a proper
Decoction, has cured many Tertian Agues: Four or six Drops are the Dose. A
desperate and long Diarrhaea has been cured with Rosemary-wine. The Queen of
Hungary's Water is made of Flowers infused in Spirit of Wine.

Rue, in Latin Ruta.
It digests and cuts clammy and gross Humors. It expels Wind, and is a
Preservative against the Plague, and other Malignant Diseases. It quickens the
Sight, and suppresses Venery. It does good in a Pleurisy. It strengthens the
Stomach, and cures the Cholick, and the Biting of a Mad Dog. It also provokes
the Courses, and Urine. It Is used outwardly for the Biting of Serpents, for
Carbuncles, and to drive away the Fits of Fevers. For an Epilepsie, take of the
Juice of Rue one Ounce and an half, an Ounce of Oxymel of Squills mixed. The
distilled Water of it is much in use for Hysteric Fits, and Uterine Diseases.

Rupture-wort, in Latin Herniaria.
It covers the Ground with many Branches, which rise from a small Root; the
Branches are round, and full of Joints. It has small Leaves, lesser than those
of Thyme; they are of a yellowish green Color, and of an acrid Taste. It has
abundance of small, yellowish Flowers.

It Is good for the Biting of a Viper. It wonderfully cures Ruptures, a Dram of
the Herb, in Powder, being taken several times; or a Decoction of the Herb in
Wine.

S.
SAffron, in Latin Crocus.
The moderate use of it is good for the Brain. It renders the Senses brisk: It
shakes off Sleep and Dullness, and chears and strengthens the Heart. It concocts
the Crude Humors of the Breast, and opens the Lungs, and frees them from
Obstructions: And it is such an effectual Remedy for the Breast and Lungs, that
it sometimes revives Consumptive People, when they are, in a manner, worn out.
It Is frequently used in Faintings, for Apoplexies, in the Jaundice, and for
Obstructions of the Liver, in the Plague, and other Malignant Diseases. It Is
also good in an Asthma, mixed with Oil of Almonds. It provokes Urine, and the
Courses, and hastens Delivery. Half a Scruple, or a Scruple at most infused in
Canary-wine, is very effectual in the Jaundice. It Is much used to drive out the
Small Pox; but, undoubtedly, it does many times much hurt, by inflaming the
Blood, and occasioning Frensies, and making them Flux. But you may see at large
the Mischiefs of hot Medicines and Methods, by Dr. Sydenham's Treatise of the
Small Pox and Measles, which I translated several Years ago. Tincture of
Saffron is made in the following manner: Take of Saffron two Drams, of
Treacle-water eight Ounces; digest them six Days, and strain out the Tincture,
and keep it close stopped for use.

Sage, in Latin Salvia.
It Is counted very wholesome; and therefore the Leaves are eaten in the Spring,
with Butter, to purify the Blood, and to preserve Health: But because Toads
are wont to harbor under it, it ought to be well washed before it be eaten.
And to drive them away, and other Venomous Animals, the Italians plant Rue near
it, or among it. It Is Diuretic, and provokes the Courses. It Is excellent for
Diseases of the Head. For the Whites, take of Sage, Sarsaparilla and
Balaustians, each one Dram, in Broth, in the Morning, for some Days. Being
given with Honey, it stops Spitting of Blood. A Palsy in the Hands has been
cured by washing them with Wine* wherein Sage was infused. A Palsy of the
Muscles serving for Swallowing, is cured by washing of the Mouth and Throat
with a Decoction of Sage, made in Wine. The same cures the Heart-burning, taken
inwardly.

Wood- Sage, in Latin Salvia agrestis.
It provokes Urine, and the Courses; and is used for the French Pox. It Is a
good Wound-herb, either taken inwardly, or outwardly applied. It Is excellent
for the Scurvy.

Sampire, in Latin Crithmum marinum.
It Is a very juicy Herb, it spreads much, and is about a Foot high. The Leaves
are broader and shorter than those of Fennel; and they are thicker, and not so
much cut; they are of a deep green Color, and of a saltish Taste. The Stalk is
as green as a Leek. The Root is thick, long, and lasting; and of a sweet, acrid
and Aromatic Taste.

Sampire pickled is very palatable, and agreeable to the Stomach. It provokes
Urine moderately, and opens Obstructions of the Bowels, and excites Appetite.

Sanicle, in Latin Sanicula.
The Root is bitter, hot, white within, black without, and is fibrous. The
Leaves are of a shining Green, stiff, and almost round; they are divided into
five Parts, and neatly indented. The Stalk is about two Foot high, smooth, and
without Knots. The Flowers are placed at the top, as it were in Umbels; they
are small, and white, or a little reddish. Two Seeds succeed each Flower. It
grows in Hedges and Woods, and flowers in May.

It Is an excellent Wound-herb; and is boiled in Vulnerary Decoctions, for
outward and inward Wounds, for Eruptions of Blood, for Ulcers, and the
Bloody Flux. Take of the Leaves of Sanicle, and Millefoil, each one Dram and an
half; Leaves of Ground Pine one Dram, of the Species of Diatragacanth frigid
four Scruples, of Sal Prunella two Scruples; make them into a Powder, and with
a sufficient quantity of Lucatellus's Balsam, make a Mass of Pills: Take four
Morning and Evening. These Pills are good for an Ulcer in the Bladder. The
Starting of the Navel has been cured in many Children, with a Cataplasm made
with Wine and this Herb, and bound close on; Comfrey, bruised, being applied to
the Small of the Back at the same time.

Savine, in Latin Sabina.
The Leaves dry and heat much. Being powdered, and mixed with Honey, and
applied, cure Ulcers that run much; and cleanse those that are Sordid; and stop
those that are Eating. Mixed with Cream, they cure Children's Scabby Heads. It
forces the Courses, and causes Miscarriage: Upon which Account they are too
well known, and too much used by Wenches. The Water of it takes off Spots from
the Face. The Leaves of it bruised and applied to Children's Navels, kill
Worms. The Oil of it used to their Bellies, does the like. A Spoonful of the
Juice of it, mixed with Milk, and sweetened with Sugar, has been given, with
great Success, to Children that have had Worms: And it is really an
extraordinary Medicine, and no way dangerous. It Is also frequently given to
Horses, and other Cattle, for the same purpose. Take of the Leaves of dried
Savine, of the Roots of Round Birth-wort, of Troches, of Myrrh, of Castor, each
one Dram; of Cinnamon half a Dram, of Saffron one Scruple; mingle them, make a
Powder: Give a Dram in Savin-water. This is used to expel a dead Child.

Savory, in Latin Satureia.
It Is hot, and acrid. It provokes Urine, and the Courses. It Is good to season
Meats and Broths, and procures Appetite. It Is good for Diseases of the Breast
and Womb: And it quickens the Sight. It Is used outwardly to discuss Tumors,
and to ease the Pains of the Ears.

Meadow- Saxifrage, in Latin Saxifraga Anglica facie seseli pratensis.
It has a long, wrinkly Root, black without, white within, of a sweet and
Aromatic Taste, and somewhat acrid. It has several Stalks, three or four Foot
high, of the thickness of the Little Finger; they are round, channel'd, full of
Pith, and reddish near the Earth; they are branchy from the bottom, the
Branches coming, at great distances, from the Wings of the Leaves. The Leaves
that come from the Roots, and those on the Stalks, are smooth, and of a dull
Green, and are much cut in; they are somewhat like the Leaves of Fennel. At the
top are Umbrels of Flowers, they are small, and consist of five Leaves, and are
of a light yellowish Color. The Seed is channel'd, and short. It smells like
Parsnep. It grows in Meadows, and moist Pastures.

The Juice of it, the Decoction, the distilled Water, and the Powder of the
Seed, provoke Urine, expel Gravel and Wind, and ease the Cholick. Take of the
Water of Pellitory, Saxifrage, and Cowslips, each one Ounce; of London-Laudanum
one Grain, of Diacodium six Drams; mingle them, make a Draught to be taken at
Bedtime. This is used to expel Gravel.

Common Field- Scabious,in Latin Scabiosa major communior.
It has many soft, hairy, whitish green Leaves, some are much jag'd, some but
little; they have small Threads in them, which may be seen by breaking them. It
has many round, hairy, green Stalks, two or three Foot high; they have hairy,
green Leaves on them, deeply and neatly divided. At the top of the Stalks stand
round Heads of Flowers, of a pale bluish Color, many placed together. The Root
is white and thick, and grows deep in the Earth. It grows frequently in
Pastures, and amongst Corn.

The Herb boiled in Wine, the Juice, or the distilled Water, cures Imposthumes,
a Pleurisy, a Cough, and other Diseases of the Breast. It Is also good for a
Quinsie, and the Plague: And it cures the Itch, and little Pocky Ulcers in the
Fundament, and other Parts, called Rhagades.

Scordium, or Water-Germander, in Latin Scordium.
The Stalk is an Hand high, or higher, and branchy. The Branches take Root in
several places, and so it increases much. The Leaves grow two at a Joint; they
are long, wrinkly, soft, whitish, hairy, and indented; and they smell like
Garlic, and taste bitter; they are like Germander-leaves. The Flowers are like
Germander-flowers; they are red.

Scordium is Alexipharmick, and Sudorifick. It Is chiefly used in the Plague,
and Malignant Diseases, and for Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Lungs.
Outwardly applied, it cleanses Wounds and Ulcers, and eases the Pain of the
Gout. Diascordium is made of it, and has its Name from it. Many Pestilential
Buboes have been broken and cured with Scordium. The Compounded Scordium-water
is much in use; and is made in the following manner: Take of the clarified
Juice of Goats-Rue, Sorrel, Scordium and Citron, each one Pound; of
London-Treacle two Ounces; infuse them three Days, and then distill them in
Glass. You may give two or three Ounces at a time.

Scurvy grass, in Latin Cochlearia.
It Is hot and dry, and abounds with a Volatile Salt: Upon which Account, it
renders the fixed and crude Humors more Spiritous and Volatile. It cures those
Diseases that proceed from too great a quantity of fixed Salts, but especially
the Scurvy; upon which Account it is called in English, Scurvy Grass. But,
because the Parts wherein the chief Virtue of this Plant consists are very
Volatile, and soon dissipated by boiling, the Juice, or an Infusion of the
Herb, is much more effectual than the Decoction. The Scurvy is a Disease very
frequent among those that live on the Seashore, especially in the North; and
among such as feed chiefly upon Salt-fish. Solenander says, such kind of Plants
grow in every Region, by the Appointment of God Almighty, which most agree with
the People and Animals that are there bred. Nay, he says, he could tell what
were the Diseases of any Country, by seeing the Herbs that were most common in
it. As, Among the Danes and Dutch, with whom the Scurvy is very frequent,
Scurvy Grass grows plentifully. Take of Conserves of Scurvy Grass, Roman
Wormwood, and Fumatory, each two Ounces; of the Powder of the Winteran-bark,
and of the Root of Angelica, and of Wake-Robin, each two Drams; of the Species
of the three Sanders one Dram and an half, of Crab's-eyes powdered one Dram, of
Salt of Wormwood two Drams; make an Electuary with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Citron-bark: Take the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning and Evening, for
the space of three Weeks, drinking presently after it a quarter of a Pint of
the following Anti-scorbutick Wine: Take of the Leaves of Scurvy Grass four
Handfuls, of Horseradish sliced four Ounces, of the Winteran-bark half an
Ounce, the outward Rinds of four Oranges, and four Limons; put them all into a
Glass well stopped, add to them six Quarts of White Wind; keep the Bottle in a
cool place, and pour the Liquor out as you use it. Provide four Gallons of
Small Ale, and, instead of Hops, boil three Handfuls of Pine-tops: When the
Beer has done Working in the Vessel, hang in the Vessel a Canvas-bag, with
three Handfuls of Scurvy Grass in it, four Ounces of the Roots of Sharp-pointed
Docks prepared, and the Rinds of four Oranges; when it is clear, drink of it
for your ordinary Beer; you must put Stones or Bullets into the Bag, to make it
sink: But before you begin to take of these Medicines, you must bleed once, and
purge twice. The Spirits of Scurvy Grass, Golden and Plain, as they are called,
are much used by some Country People; but they are not near so effectual as the
Anti-scorbutick Wine abovementioned; for indeed, the best parts of the
Scurvy Grass, I mean the the Volatile Salts, fly away, and are lost, in
preparing the Spirit; so that scarce any thing remains, but Phlegm, and an empty
Name. See Dr. Willis of the Scurvy, page 263. Says he there, The Virtue
evaporates by Boiling.

Self-heal, in Latin Prunella.
The Root grows awry, and has some pretty large Fibers. The Stalk is nine
Inches or a Foot high, or higher, hairy, and foursquare, and creeps by Fibers
that come from the lower Joints. The Leaves are placed by Intervals, upon long
Footstalk; they are like the Leaves of Marjoram, or Basil, but larger, and
hairy; they are so finely indented about the Edges, that it is scarce visible.
The Flowers are purple, and are placed upon a Spike at top; the Flower varies
sometimes. It grows every where among Pastures, and flowers in June.

It Is much of the same Virtue with Bugules. It Is used outwardly in Wounds, and
often in a Quinsie, and other Diseases of the Mouth and Jaws. A Gargarism being
made of the Decoction, or distilled Water of it.

Shepherd's-purse, in Latin Bursa pastoris.
It Is sometimes an Hand, a Foot, sometimes three or four Foot high, or higher.
It has a small, strait, white, fibrous Root; it tastes sweetish, but nauseous.
The Leaves that come from the Root are oblong, and sometimes whole, but most
commonly jagg'd deep, the Jags ending in an Acute Point; they are a little
hairy, and have Footstalk an Inch long; or they are rather enlarged by
degrees, from a narrow Beginning; for the uppermost upon the Stalks, with a
broad Basis, grow without those Footstalk, and are not jagg'd at all; they
have an Ear at each Side: From the middle of the Leaves, one, two, three, or
four, or more Stalks rise, divided into Branches, placed alternately. The
Top-stalks and Branches run up, as it were, into long Ears of Flowers, which
are placed on small Footstalk, about half an Inch long: The Flowers are small
and white, composed of four small, undivided Leaves, with Threads, bearing
yellow Tufts. When the Flowers fall, the Footstalk increase to the length of
an Inch, and bear the Receptacles of the Seeds, that are sharp at the
Beginning, and end in a large Purse, divided into two Parts; a great many small
Seeds are contained in each Vessel; they are reddish when they are ripe.

It Is astringent, and thickens; wherefore it is good for Bleeding at Nose, a
Tent made of Cotton, being dipped in the Juice of it, and put up the Nostrils.
It Is also proper in a Dysentery, a Diarrhaea, and for Bloody Urine, and the
immoderate Flux of the Courses. It Is outwardly used by the Common People, to
heal Wounds, with good Success. It Is also put into Febrifuge Cataplasms for the
Wrists.

Silver-weed, in Latin Argentina.
This Plant takes its Name from the soft and Silver-Down of its Leaves. The
Root is sometimes single, covered with a blackish Bark, sometimes fibrous; it
tastes astringent. It has many Leaves near the Earth; they are like the Leaves
of Agrimony, and are deeply indented about the Edges. It sends out, on every
Side, Shoots, whereby it increases wonderfully, like Straw-berries. The Flowers
are yellow, and consist of five roundish Leaves, not indented, and are placed
single, on long, hairy Footstalk. It grows frequently near Foot-paths, and in
moist Places, where the Water has stagnated all the Winter.

It cools moderately, and is very astringent: Upon which Account it cures
Spitting of Blood, and the immoderate Flux of the Womb and Belly. It Is good for
the Stone in the Kidneys; and is very useful in curing Wounds and Ulcers' It Is
much commended for easing the Pain of the Teeth, and for removing the
Putrefaction of the Gums. It Is good to assuage the Heat of Fevers; which it
does very powerfully, being beaten with Salt and Vinegar, and applied to the
Soles of the Feet, and the Arm-wrists. The Women in England use the distilled
Water of it to take off Freckles, Spots and Botches from the Face, and when
they are Sunburned. The Root of it, which they call Moors, in Yorkshire, about
Settle, are eaten by the Boys in Winter; for they taste sweet, and are as
pleasant as Parsnips. Hogs dig them up, and eat them greedily. It Is affirmed,
that being worn in the Shoes, it will cure the Bloody Flux, Bleeding at Nose,
and all immoderate Fluxes of the Belly. Hartman says, That having used it this
way, it has done good when all other Means signified nothing.

Smallage, in Latin Apium.
It Is hot and dry. It incides, and opens; upon which Account it is reckoned
among the five Opening Roots: It provokes Urine and the Courses, and expels
Gravel: It cures the Jaundice. The Seed is reckoned among the Lesser Hot Seeds.
The use of this Herb certainly injures those that are afflicted with the
Falling Sickness: But being translated into Gardens, it becomes more gentle,
and less ungrateful; for in Italy and Spain they eat the tender Leaves of it,
and the upper part of the Root, with Oil and Pepper.

Sneez-wort, in Latin Ptarmica.
The Root grows awry, and is, as it were, jointed, and has many long Fibers
that are pretty large; it tastes acrid, and hot. It has several brittle Stalks,
a Yard high, or more, and sometime not near so high; they are divided into
several Branches, whereon are placed narrow, long Leaves, pointed, and finely
indented about the Edges. At the top grow many white Flowers in a Tuft, with a
yellowish Thrum in the middle. It grows in moist places, and flowers in July.

It tastes hot and acrid. The Powder of it provokes Sneezing. The Root chewed
cases the Pain in the Teeth, by evacuating Phlegm. The Herb is mixed with
Sallets, to correct cold Herbs.

Solomon's-seal, in Latin Polygomaton,
The Root is a Finger thick, unequal and tuberous, with a great many Fibers,
and of a sweetish Taste. The Stalk is two or three Foot high, round, and smells
ill if it be rubbed or cut; it is bent like a Bow. The Leaves are placed one
above another; they are large, and like the Leaves of the Lilly of the Valleys;
they are nervous, and of a shining dark Green above, of a grayish Color
underneath. At the Foot of every Leaf, almost from the bottom to the top, hang
long, white and hollow Flowers; and after them, small, round Berries, green at
first, and bluish when they are ripe, wherein are small, stony Seeds; they are
white.

It Is Astringent, and Vulnerary: It stops all Fluxes; it cements broken Bones.
And the Root boiled in Wine and drank, is excellent for Contusions and
Ruptures. Used outwardly it takes off Spots, and whitens the Skin. Fourteen or
fifteen of the Berries purge Phlegm, upwards and downwards. For the Whites, take
Candied Roots of Solomon's-seal; and it is an excellent Remedy. It Is also
counted good for the Falling Sickness.

Sope-wort, in Latin Saponaria.
It creeps in the Ground, with small-jointed Roots. The Bark of the Root is
reddish. The Stalks are three Foot high, or higher, round, smooth and reddish;
they have many Joints, are full of Pith, and can scarce sustain themselves. The
Leaves are placed by Pairs, at the Joints, opposite to one another, three large
Nerves running all along them; they are like Plantain-leaves; they are smooth,
have a nitrous Taste, and short or no Footstalk at all. The Flowers are
placed in Tufts, on the top of the Stalks, every one on a short Foot-stalk;
they are of a pale-red Color, sweet, and composed of five Leaves. The small,
roundish Seeds are contained in an oblong Vessel that is thick about the
Middle. It grows near Rivers, and Standing-waters. It flowers in June, July,
August and September.

The Root and Leaves are used in Physic, but it is but seldom. It Is used for
an Asthma, and to provoke the Courses. And a Decoction of it is much commended
for the French Pox. Outwardly applied, it discusses Tumors. Clothes are
cleansed from Greasy Spots, by washing them with this Herb.

The Sorbe, or Quicken-tree, in Latin Sorbus sylvestris.
It Is a Tree of a middle stature. The Bark is of a light Red, and spotted. The
Leaves are sharp, indented, and smooth; above green, below whitish. The Flowers
are many, white* and sweet; and are placed in Umbels. The Berries are green at
first; when they are ripe, of a dark Red; they taste ill.

The Berries yield an acid Juice, which purges Water excellently well; and is
very good for the Scurvy. The Liquor which drops from the wounded Tree in the
Spring, cures the Scurvy, and Diseases of the Spleen.

Common- Sorrel, in Latin Acetosa vulgaris.
It grows in Pastures and Meadows.

It Is cold and dry. It provokes Appetite, suppresses Choler, and quenches
Thirst; wherefore it is frequently used in Fevers. The Juice may be mixed with
Broths, or the Leaves boiled in them. In Summer it is good Sauce for most Meats.
The Roots of it dried, and boiled, give a delicate Tincture to the Water.

Sheep's- Sorrel, in Latin Acetosa arvensis lanceolata.
It grows in Sandy and dry Grounds.

It has the same Virtues with Common Sorrel.

Roman or French- Sorrel, in Latin Acetosa rotundifolia.
The form of the Leaf sometimes varies; being sometimes round, like
Scurvy Grass, or the Lesser Celandine; sometimes, like Spinache, pointed like
an Arrow; of a Sky or pale Color, and of a delicate sharp Taste. The Stalks
are bare, and above two Foot high. The little Flowers are composed of yellow
and red Threads. The Root is small, and creeps; and is less acid, and drier
than the Leaves. It Is common in Gardens.

It has the same Virtues with the former.

Wood- Sorrel, in Latin Trifolium acetosum vulgar.
It grows commonly in shady places, in Woods and Hedges.

It has the same Virtues with the former. The Syrup, the Conserve, and the
distilled Water of it are in use. The distilled Water is used to wash the Mouth
in the St. Anthony's Fire, and to cleanse Sordid Ulcers. It Is observed, that
when it bears a great many Flowers, the Year will be very rainy; but dry when
there is a few.

Sothernwood, in Latin Abrotanum.
It Is somewhat astringent, and discusses much. It resists Putrefaction and
Poison. It cures the Biting of Venomous Creatures, kills Worms, and forces
Urine. It cures Hysteric Fits, and the Jaundice. The Tops of it boiled in Wine
or Water, and sweetened with Honey or Sugar, do much good in an Asthma, and
Difficulty of Breathing; and helps Expectoration. It Is used outwardly to
strengthen Bones.

Marsh- Sparagus, in Latin Asparagus palustris.
It Is found in many places: As, in the Marshes near Bristol, and about Harwich
in Essex, etc. It differs only from the Garden-Sparagus by the Place of its
Growth, and the Accidents that proceed from thence; for the saltness of it, and
the thickness of the Leaves, and the largeness of the Berries, are to be
imputed to the Sea; for the like is wont to happen to other Plants that grow
near the Sea.

The Root is Diuretic, and Lithontriptick; and is one of the five Opening
Roots. It opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and especially of the
Kidneys; and therefore it is frequently used in Diuretic Decoctions. The
Stalks boiled gently, according to Custom, and eaten, loosen the Belly, and
provoke Urine; but they make it smell ill. A Decoction of the Root drunk,
relieves those that make Water difficultly, and those that have the Jaundice,
and others that are afflicted with Nephritick Pains, or the Hip Gout. But the
frequent use of Diuretics occasions Ulcers in the Bladder.

Spatling, or White Poppy, in Latin Behen album.
The Root is woody, thick and white. The Stalks are two or three Foot high, or
more, small, round, smooth and jointed, and divided into Wings at the top. At
every Joint are two Leaves, opposite to one another, like Campian, but smooth,
very acrid and bitterish, with a certain Sweetness. The Flowers are white, or
of a light Purple Color. It grows amongst Corn.

It Is commended for Fomentations, and Sweating-baths. The Juice takes off
Inflammations of the Eyes, and eases the Pain of them. The Seed purges Phlegm,
and is used in the Falling Sickness.

Male- Speed-well, in Latin Veronica mas supina and vulgatissima.
It creeps upon the Ground, and sends down Roots from the Joints. The Stalks
are small, round, long, hairy, and jointed. The Leaves are set by Pairs at the
Joints; they are hairy, and indented about the Edges; they taste bitterish and
acrid. The Flowers are placed upon a Spike; they are composed of four light
purple Leaves. The Seed is contained in small Husks, like Shepherd's-purse. It
grows plentifully in dry Pastures, and amongst Heath.

It Is Vulnerary, and Sudorifick. It Is used in Obstructions of the Lungs, and
Spleen; for the Cholick, Consumption, Plague, Wounds, and Itch. A large Dose of
the Decoction, taken for some time, expelled a Stone from the Kidny of a Woman,
that had been there sixteen Years. A Woman that had been barren seven Years,
conceived by taking the Powder of it in the distilled Water of the Herb for
many Days. The Syrup of it is of great use in Diseases of the Lungs. One that
had an incurable Ulcer in his Leg, found present Ease by dipping Rags in the
Water, and applying them; for it took off the Inflammation, and all the
Symptoms that accompanied it. One that had a Fistula in the Breast, and had
used several Medicines in vain, was cured by the inward use of this Water.
Scabby Children have been cured by Rags dipped in this Water, and pressed out,
and applied over the Scabs, when other Medicines would do no good: But it is
convenient for the Nurse to take Fumatory in Whey at the same time.

Common- Spignel, in Latin Meum.
It has sometimes one, sometimes many Roots, above nine Inches long: From the
Sides of which grow most commonly oblique Roots, which are pretty long, of a
dark brown Color without, white within; it smells like a Parsnip, but more
Aromatic. It has several long Stalks of Leaves, as small as an Hair; they are
placed thick on both sides of the Stalk; they smell well. It has also round,
stiff Stalks, like those of Fennel, but much less; they are channel'd, empty
and branchy; and have Umbels of white Flowers on them, like Dill. The Seeds are
large, great, and channel'd. It grows plentifully in Westmorland, near
Sidleberg.

It expels Wind, and forces Urine and the Courses; and is used for Mother-fits,
for the Gripes, Catarrhs, and to help Expectoration. It Is an Ingredient in
several Compositions; in Treacle, and many other. Those that have vowed
Chastity must not use it, for it is a great Provocative to Venery. And it
causes the Headache.

Spinache, in Latin Spinachia.
It Is much used in the Kitchen. It Is good in Fevers; and it loosens the Belly.
It cools, and moistens; and is good in a dry Cough.

Spindle-tree, in Latin Euonimus.
It Is a little, branchy Tree, or rather Shrub, eight or ten Foot high. The
Suckers are of a pleasant green Color, and the young Branches are apiece;
the Wood is whitish, it has diverse Branches. The Leaves are oblong, sharp, and
indented. Soon after the Beginning of Spring the pale Flowers come forth; they
are composed of four Leaves. After the Flowers, come forth red Berries, divided
into four parts; and in each is a white, hard Seed. The whole Tree has a strong
and unpleasant Smell. It Is common in Hedges.

Three or four of the Berries vomit and purge. Women use the Powder of the
Berries to kill Lice.

Spleen-wort, in Latin Asplenium.
The Root consists of Capillary Threads, that are blackish and Perennial. The
Leaves are many, but not a Finger long; they are placed upon short Footstalk;
they are somewhat fat above, and downy under, and cleft, like Polypody; they
are seldom an Inch broad. It grows frequently in the West, upon old Walls, viz.
about Bristol, and the Stones at St. Vincent's Rock, etc.

It Is called Spleen-wort, because it is effectual in curing Diseases of the
Spleen. It Is chiefly used for Swellings of the Spleen, for Spitting of Blood,
and a Looseness. Outwardly used, it cleanses Wounds and Ulcers. One Dram of the
Golden Powder on the Under-side of the Leaves, with half a Dram of White Amber
powdered, drunk in the Juice of Purslain, or Plantain, relieves those
wonderfully that have a Gonorrhaea.

Straw-berry, in Latin Fragraria.
The Fruit cools and moistens. The distilled Water of it comforts the Heart,
purges the Blood, and cures Ulcers of the Mouth; and is good in a Quinsie, the
Mouth being gargled with it. It Is Diuretic, and expectorates. Those that are
troubled with hot Pushes in the Face, or a dry Itch in the Body, should take
two Spoonfuls of the Water every Morning. The same quantity, at the same time,
is good for those that have the Stone; for it cools the Reins, and expels
Gravel. A Decoction of the whole Herb is very good for the Jaundice. Take of
the Waters of Wood Sorrel, of the whole Citron, of Strawberries, each four
Ounces; of the Syrup of the Juice of Citron one Ounce, of Prepared Pearls one
Dram; make a Julap: Take four Spoonfuls three or four times a Day. This is good
in Fevers, to attemperate the Blood.

Succory, in Latin Cichoreum.
The Root is as thick as the Thumb, and full of Milk. It has many Stalks, which
are round and hairy. The Stalks of the Wild Succory are crooked, and sometimes
four Foot high. The Branches at top are much divided. Some of the Leaves are
cut deep, like Dandelion; others are whole, or but little indented: Those on
the Stalks are placed alternately, without Footstalk; they are long, and end
acute, and are hairy on both sides. The Flowers are blue, sometimes white, and
reddish; many come out together from the Wings of the upper Leaves. The whole
Plant is very bitter.

It Is counted cold by some Authors; but its bitter Taste argues Heat. It Is
Diuretic: It attenuates, and cleanses. It Is chiefly used in Obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen, and for Fevers. The Water distilled from the blue Flowers
is an excellent Remedy for Inflammations and Dimness of the Eyes. The Leaves
boiled, and eaten with Vinegar, cure a Gonorrhaea. The Flowers of this Plant
open and shut at Sunrising and Sunsetting, whether the Heavens are clear or
cloudy. The Roots of Succory, the middle Bark of the Elder, the Twigs of
Bitter-sweet, Wormwood, and the Roots of Sharp-pointed Dock, cure a Dropsy and
Obstructions with expedition, and expel Wind. Syrup of Succory, with Rubarb, is
much in use, and is an excellent Purge for Children, and is made in the
following manner: Take of Whole Barley, of the Roots of Smallage, Fennel and
Sparagus, each two Ounces; of Succory, Dandelion, Smooth South-thistle, and
Endive, each two Handfuls; of Garden-Lettice, Liverwort, Fumatory, and the Tops
of Hops, each one Handful; of Venus-hair, White Maidenhair, Spleen-wort,
Liquorish, the Seed of Winter-Cherry, and Dodder; each six Drams; boil these in
six Quarts of Fountain Water, till two Quarts be consumed; strain the Liquor,
and put in six Pounds of White Sugar; boil it a while, then add six Ounces of
Rubarb, and six Drams of Spikenard, put into a Bag, which must be infused a
while in the hot Liquor; then strain it, and boil it to the Consistence of a
Syrup. Succory-water is also in use.

Sun-dew, in Latin Ros solis.
Many Leaves come from a small, fibrous Root; they are placed on long
Footstalk, that are hairy above; they are almost round, like an Ear-picker, a
little concave, and of a pale-green Color, with a small, red Fringe round
them; they have always a Dew on them in the hottest Day. From the middle of the
Leaves rise up two or three round, small, reddish Stalks, of an Hand or half a
Foot high; they have no Leaves on them. It has many whitish Flowers, placed one
above another, on short Footstalk. Oblong Seminal Vessels, in shape and
bigness like Wheat, succeed the Flowers; they are full of Seeds. It grows
plentifully in Sir William Goring's Park, near Petworth, in Sussex; and in many
other places.

Botanists differ about the Virtue of this Plant: Some commend it for a
Consumption, the Plague-wounds, and the Falling Sickness: But others, with good
Reason, forbid the inward use of it; for it is so Caustic, that being put on
the Skin, it will cause Ulcers. It Is very injurious to Sheep, for it burns up
their Lungs, and gives them a deadly Cough. Upon which Account it is called the
Red-Rot. A Strong-water made with it was formerly much in use. Many
superstitious Things are reported of this Plant, which I designedly omit.

T.
TAmarisk, in Latin Tamariscus.
It Is excellent for Diseases of the Spleen. A Decoction of the Bark stops the
Courses, and an immoderate Flux of the Hemorrhoids: It settles the Teeth when
they are loose, and eases the Pain of them; and is good for Ulcers of the
Mouth, for the Leprosy, Itch, and other Ulcers; for Melancholy, the
Black-Jaundice, and a Dropsy, occasioned by an hard and obstructed Spleen.
Take of Steel one Ounce, of the Middle-bark of the Ash, Tamarisk, Roots of
Capers, each half an Ounce; of Sassafras, and Juniper, each six Drams, of the
Roots of Elecampane, Angelica, Galangal, Sweet Smelling Flag, each two Drams;
Shavings of Hartshorn, Ivory, Yellow Sanders, each* three Drams; the Leaves of
Wormwood, Ground Pine, Spleen-wort, Dodder, Balm, Germander, each two Pugils;
the Flowers of Bugloss, Borage, Scabious, Broom, each one Pugil; of Cinnamon
half an Ounce; Cloves, Ginger, Mace, Nutmegs, each two Drams; beat them grossly,
and pour on them two Quarts of White Wind, and infuse them in a Glass well
stopped, in B. M. three or four Days; strain it, and take four Spoonfuls every
Morning. This is good for Melancholy, and Pains in the Stomach.

Common Tansie, in Latin Tanacetum.
It Is Vulnerary, Uterine, and Nephritick. It Is used for the Worms, the Gripes,
and the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder; for Obstruction of the Courses, Wind,
and a Dropsy. The Juice of it applied to the Hands and Feet, cure the Chaps of
them, Scabby Ulcers, and the Itch. A Conserve of the Leaves and Tops resists
Putrefaction, purifies the Blood, and opens Obstructions. One was cured of an
Obstinate Dropsy by the Decoction of it. Take of the Conserve of Tansie,
Fumatory, Wood Sorrel, each two Ounces; of the Compounded Powder of Wake-Robin
three Drams; of Ivory, Crab's-eyes, and Coral prepared, each one Dram; of Yellow
Sanders powdered, and of the Wood of Aloes, each half a Dram; of Salt of Steel
one Dram, of Salt of Wormwood one Dram and an half, of the Syrup of the Five
Opening Roots a sufficient quantity; make an Electuary: Take the quantity of a
Chestnut Night and Morning. This is good for the Scurvy, and to strengthen the
Blood.

Tarragon, in Latin Dracunculus hortensis.
It Is used frequently in Sallets, to correct cold Herbs, and the Crudities of
them. It Is good for those that have cold Stomachs. It procures Appetite, and
expels Wind. It provokes Urine, and the Courses, and opens Obstructions. Being
chewed, it evacuates Phlegm, and so eases the Pain of the Teeth. It Is also
Sudorifick.

Teasel, Fuller's-Thistle, or Venus's Basin, in Latin Dipsacus.
The Roots of it boiled in Wine, cure Ulcers of the Fundament, called Rhagades,
and Warts. The Water that is received in the hollowness of the Leaves, is good
for Inflammations of the Eyes: It also takes off Spots from the Face, and
beautifies it. Boiled in Wine, it purges by Urine. But Cloth-workers use it
chiefly.

Dwarf-Carline- Thistle, in Latin Carduus acaulis.
The Leaves lie on the Ground, in a Circle; they are of a green Color, and
very prickly; they are cut in deep, and are hairy; they have either no Stalks
at all, or but one, an Inch, or an Inch and an half high. The little Heads are
oblong, and not at all prickly. The Flowers are purple. The Root is as long as
the Little Finger, and has some thickish Fibers, and grows awry: It Is of a
reddish Color, especially within, and tastes somewhat Aromatic. It grows
commonly on Hills, and in dry Places, and on Stony Grounds, on the Downs in
Sussex.

It Is Alexipharmick, and Sudorifick. It prevents and cures the Plague, if it be
taken in time. It Is Diuretic, and good in a Dropsy. Philip Melancton, when he
was afflicted with Hypochondriack Pains, used this Herb, and commended it much.

Milk- Thistle, or Ladies-Thistle, in Latin Carduus Mariae.
The Leaves have white Spots; they are long, and broad, and very prickly. The
Stalk is channel'd, downy, and five or six Foot high; and is divided into many
Branches. The Brush is so prickly, that it cannot be handled. The Root is long,
and thick. It grows frequently in Hedges and Ditches.

It Is supposed to have the same Virtue with the Blessed Thistle, called
commonly Carduus. But it is oftener used in the Kitchen, than for Medicine. The
Decoction of it is used with good Success, in Obstructions of the Liver, of the
Bowels, and of Urine; wherefore it is good in the Jaundice, for the Dropsy,
and the Stone in the Kidneys. The distilled Water of it cures the Diseases of
the Sides. It Is chiefly used outwardly, in Eating Ulcers, Rags being dipped in
the Water, and applied to the Sores. The Seed is frequently used in Emulsions,
with other Seeds, for a Pleurisy. The tender Leaves, the Prickles being cut
off, are boiled with Pot Herbs, and eat very well. It Is kept in Gardens, and is
used in Sallets, and the like. Take of the Water of Ladies-Thistle ten Ounces,
of Eratick Poppy-water three Ounces, of the Syrup of the same one Ounce, of
Prepared Pearl one Dram; mix them: Take six Spoonfuls every fourth Hour. This
Julap is used in a Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs.

The Blessed Thistle, in Latin Carduus Benedictus.
The whole Plant is very bitter, except the Root. This Thistle was called
Blessed, or Holy, for its excellent Virtues. It was sent out of India, to
Frederick III. Emperor; though it was afterward found to grow of its own accord
in Europe. The Decoction of it is best. It Is commended for the
Falling Sickness, for Giddiness in the Head, and Deafness; also for the
Cholick, for the Stone in the Kidneys, and for the Hip-Gout. But it is chiefly
praised for its Virtue against the Plague; either taken inwardly, for
Prevention, or to cure it by provoking Sweat; or outwardly applied, to break
the Buboes. Our People use it commonly in Posset Drink, to promote Sweating:
And, by taking a large quantity of it, they cleanse the Stomach by Vomiting.
There is scarce any thing better for curing Putrid Ulcers. A Woman, whose
Breasts were quite consumed by a Cancer, was restored to Health by the
distilled Water of it, and by sprinkling the Powder of the Leaves on the
Ulcers. A Girl that took Poison, was cured by the use of this Water, when
Treacle, and other Alexipharmicks would do no good. It Is also much commended
for the Scurvy. Take of Carduus-water compounded, and Scordium-water, each
three Ounces; Treacle-water two Ounces; make a Julap: Take six Spoonfuls every
sixth Hour. This is good in the Plague.

Thorn-Apple, in Latin Stramonium.
An Ointment made of the Juice of the Leaves, and Lard, is very good for Burns
and Scalds. The Seed powdered, and taken in Beer, occasions Madness for twenty
four Hours. Thieves give it to those they intend to rob. And Wenches give half
a Dram of it to their Lovers, in Beer or Wine. Some are so well skilled in
Dosing of it, that they can make Men mad for as many Hours as they please.

Thorow-wax, in Latin Perfoliata.
The Root is single, white and woody, and tastes sweet. It has one small,
stiff, smooth, round, channel'd, concave, jointed Stalk, a Foot, or two Foot
high, of an Aromatic Smell when it is cut or broken. The Leaves are almost
oval, smooth, and bluish: Little Nerves run obliquely, from the Center of the
Leaf, to the Circumference of it. The Stalk passes through the Leaf, which is
divided into Branches at top, whereon stand Tufts of small, yellow Flowers. The
Seed is small, and blackish.

The Decoction of the Herb in Wine, or the Leaves powdered, are given for
Ruptures and Contusions. It Is also used for the King's Evil, for Fractures, and
an Erysipelas.

Throat-wort, in Latin Trachelium.
The Root is white, and sweet. The Stalks are three or four Foot high, or
higher, about the thickness of the Little Finger; they are channel'd, hairy,
and purplish. The Leaves are placed alternately on the Stalks; they are hairy,
and like the Leaves of Nettles; the Under are placed on long Footstalk, the
Upper on short ones. The Flowers are like a Bell, and of a bluish Color.

The whole Plant, especially the Root, is astringent, and drying; and therefore
the Decoction of it is good to be used at the Beginning of Ulcers and
Inflammations of the Mouth, and Tonsils; and for other Diseases that require
astringent Remedies.

Wild Thyme, in Latin Serpyllum.
It grows on Hills, and dry Grounds.

It Is hot and dry. It forces the Courses, and Urine. It Is Cephalic, Uterine,
and Stomachick. It Is good for Spitting of Blood, and Convulsions, and for
Gripes. Outwardly applied, it cures Headaches, and Giddiness; and disposes to
Sleep.

Toad-flax, in Latin Linaria lutea vulgaris.
It creeps much, with white, hard, woody Roots. It has many Stalks, a Foot, or
two Foot high; they are smooth, and bluish; they have many sharp, narrow
Leaves, placed disorderly; they are branchy at top. The yellow Flowers are
placed on a Spike, at the top of the Branches, each on a short Foot-stalk. The
Seed is round. The whole Plant tastes bitterish, and a little acrid.

A small Glass of the distilled Water, with a Dram of the Powder of
Ground-Elder mixed with it, evacuates Urine powerfully in a Dropsy. The Water
also purges by Stool, and cures the Jaundice; but especially, the Decoction of
the Herb in Wine, which also opens Obstructions of the Liver. The Water or the
Juice dropped into the Eyes, cure Inflammations and Redness of them. Rags dipped
in the Water, cleanse Ulcers: And the Juice takes off Spots from the Face. Take
of the Herb and Flowers a sufficient quantity; boil them with Lard, till it is
very green; and make an Ointment: When you use it, mix a Yolk of an Egg with
it. This is good to take off the Pain of the Piles.

Tobacco, in Latin Nicotiana.
It resists Putrefaction, provokes Sneezing; is Anodyne, Vulnerary, and vomits.
Being smoked, it stops Catarrhs, disposes to Rest, takes off Weariness, and
suppresses Mother-fits, and is a good Preservative against the Plague. A
Gargarism of it cures the Toothache, and dissolves Tumors of the Uvula. A Bath
of it, or the green Leaves applied, cure a Leprosy, the Itch, and Lice: It
heals Wounds, and cleanses Ulcers, and cures Burns. The Smoking of Tobacco
strengthens the Stomach, helps Concoction, and gently moves the Belly: But it
is not good for People of an hot Constitution. The Pain of the Teeth is cured,
by stopping those that are hollow with Calcined Tobacco. For the Palsy, Take
the green Leaves, and infuse them in Malaga-Wine, and rub the Parts well with
it after Sweating. This is the best outward Remedy for a Palsy. A Nobleman
that was extremely fat, was reduced to an ordinary Size, by chewing Tobacco;
which also does good in an Asthma. It Is of great use in Camps, where there is,
many times, Scarcity of Victuals; and Cholicks, and the like. The Fume of
Tobacco blown up into the Bowels, is a most effectual Clyster in the Cholick.
It also cures Mother-fits, and Fainting, being blown upon the Matrix.

The Greater Tooth-wort, in Latin Dentaria major.
The Root is soft, white, and juicy, and consists of many Scales. The Stalk is
about as thick as the Little Finger, nine Inches high, or higher, round, and
juicy, easily broken, covered with a thin Membrane, and full of a juicy Pulp.
It has some Membranaceous Ears, like Leaves, placed by Intervals. It has many
gaping, light, purplish Flowers, that hang on short Footstalk. The Seed is
round.

It Is excellent for Ruptures, for inward Wounds, and for Diseases rising from
Defluxions, two Drams of the Powder being taken in Broth for forty Days
together.

Tormentil, in Latin Tormentilla.
The Root is sometimes as thick as the Thumb; sometimes it grows straight,
sometimes awry; it has reddish Fibers, and is of an astringent Taste. The
Stalks lie on the Ground, having many short Leaves; sometimes they grow
upright, and are two Foot high; they are small, hairy, and reddish. The Flowers
are small, and yellowish, and consist of four Leaves. Note, the Leaves are like
the Leaves of Cinquefoil, but longer, and less dented.

It dries, and is very astringent; wherefore there is no Remedy more proper for
Fluxes of the Belly and Womb, than the Roots of Tormentil. Besides, they are
Diaphoretick, and Alexipharmick; wherefore they are used in all Medicines for
the Plague, and Malignant Diseases, especially when Fluxes of the Belly
accompany them. Moreover, they are mixed with Vulnerary Potions, Ointments, and
Plasters; for they cure old and putrid Ulcers. Half a Dram, or a Dram of the
Extract of Tormentil is much commended for curing an Epidemick Dysentery;
Rubarb being used before, if there be occasion. A Woman that was wont to
miscarry after the Second Month, was cured in the following manner: She was
purged, and took Sage with her Meat and Drink, and as much of the following
Powder as would lie on a Groat was given at a time: Take of Cochinele, Prepared
Pearl, and Tormentil-roots, each one Dram; of Mastick half a Dram; mingle them,
and make a Powder. The following Plaster was applied to the Loins, and the Os
sacrum: Take of the purest Labdanum one Ounce and an half; of Galls, Oak-Moss,
Bole-Armoniack, Cypress-Nuts, Seal'd-Earth, Mirtles, Red Roses, Dragon's-blood,
and Balaustians, each half an Ounce; of Ship-Pitch two Ounces, of Turpentine
six Ounces; make a Plaster. After the use of these things, she went out her
Time, and had a lusty Child; and after that more.

Marsh- Trefoil, or Buckbeans, in Latin Trifolium palustre.
It grows commonly in Marshes, and watery Places; and is much commended in the
Scurvy, and for Pains in the Limbs. The Leaves are boiled in Beer, and it is
taken twice or thrice a Day; but because it is very bitter, it is best taken in
a Syrup.

Turnep, in Latin Rapum.
It forces Urine, and is a Provocative to Venery. The Juice and Broth wherein
they are boiled cure Quartan-Agues. Raw Turnips cure the Scurvy-Roasted under
Ashes, and applied behind the Ears, they cure the Headache, and the Pain of the
Teeth. They are applied to Ulcers of the Legs, and to Swellings of the Breast,
and for Scrophulous and Scorbutic Tumors, with good Success. The Broth of
them makes a good Gargarism for Sore Mouths. Half a Dram of the Seed is used at
a time to excite Venery; and in Malignant Diseases, to expel Venom. Take of
sliced Turnips, and of White Sugar, each half a Pound; put them into an Earthen
Pot, making a Lay of one, and a Lay of the other; cover it with Paper, and bake
it with Bread; when it is drawn press out the Juice, and keep it for use: Take
a Spoonful Morning and Evening. This is good for Coughs, and at the Beginning
of Consumptions.

Tutsan, in Latin Androsaemum vulgar.
The Root is thick, woody, reddish, and has long Fibers. The Stalks are woody,
three or four Foot high, round, reddish, smooth, and crested. They have two
large Leaves at every Joint, green above, whitish below. The Flowers are
yellow, and consist of five Leaves; they are placed on long Footstalk. After
the Flowers, come Heads of Seeds, first greenish, then reddish, and last of a
purple Color. The Juice is reddish.

It stops Blood, and is an excellent Vulnerary Plant, taken inwardly, or
outwardly applied.

V.
GArden- Valerian, in Latin Valeriana hortensis.
The Root and Herb are very Diuretic. Half a Spoonful of the Powder of the
Root, before the Stalk springs, taken once or twice, in Wine, Water, or Milk,
relieves those that are seized with the Falling Sickness. And Sylvius reckons
it more effectual in this Case, than the Roots of Male-Peony. The Leaves
bruised, are commonly applied to slight Wounds; upon which Account it is called
Cut-finger. It purges upwards and downwards.

Common Vervain, in Latin Verbena vulgaris.
So many Virtues are attributed by Authors, to this Plant, that it would tire
one to reckon them up. It Is Cephalic, and Vulnerary. It Is used for
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and in the Stone; for Diseases of the
Eyes, and Breast; for the Gripes, the Bloody Flux, a Tertian Ague, to heal
Wounds, and to hasten Delivery. It Is outwardly used for the Headache, Pain of
the Teeth, Redness and Weakness of the Eyes, for a Quinsie, and for Swellings
of the Glandules of the Jaws, for the Falling of the Fundament, for cleansing
Ulcers, and for Pains of the Spleen, It Is reckoned a Specific for Pains of the
Head, from whatever Cause they proceed. The distilled Water is applied
outwardly to the Head; and four Ounces are taken inwardly, with four Drops of
Spirit of Salt. Forestus says, he knew Two who were cured of the Headache, only
by hanging the green Herb about their Necks, when many other Medicines were
used to no purpose.

Violet, in Latin Viola.
The Leaves are cooling. The Flowers moisten, cool and mollify. They are
reckoned among the Cordial-Flowers. They are chiefly used in Fevers, to abate
the Heat, and to ease the Pain of the Head occasioned by it; and for Coughs and
Pleurises. The Seed is Lithontriptick. The Syrup is most in use, and is made in
the following manner: Take of the Flowers of fresh Violets one Pound, of clear,
hot Water two Pints and an half; keep it close covered, in an Earthen Glazed
Pot, a Day; then press it out, and add to two Pints of the strained Liquor,
four Pounds of Sugar; take off the Scum as it rises, and make a Syrup without
boiling.

Viper's-grass, in Latin Scorzonera.
The Root is eaten with Meat, and is as sweet as Parsnips. It Is much used for
the Biting of Venomous Creatures, in Pestilential Fevers, for Melancholy,
Palpitation of the Heart the Falling Sickness, Giddiness, Obstructions of the
Bowels, Diseases of the Womb, for the Jaundice, and at the Beginning of a
Dropsy. Take of the Roots of Scorzonera and Angelica, each six Drams; of the
Leaves of Wood Sorrel, with the Roots, two Handfuls; of Rasp'd Hart's-horn and
Ivory, each half an Ounce, of Liquorish two Drams; boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Barly-water, to one Pint and an half; to the strained Liquor add of
Compounded Scordium-water, and of the cold Cordial-water of Saxony, each three
Ounces; of Syrup of Rasberries three Ounces; mingle them; make an Apozem, of
which take three Ounces, or four, at pleasure. This is much used in Fevers.

W.
WAlnut-tree, in Latin Juglans.
The outward Bark dried, vomits strongly: The Catkins are a gentler Vomit. The
fresh Nuts move the Belly: The Dry are hot, and hard to digest; they increase
Choler, and cause a Cough. The Juice of the outward Bark gargl'd in the Mouth,
is very useful in a Relaxation of the Almonds, and for an Inflammation of the
Throat. A Decoction of the outward Bark of the green Nut forces Worms out of
their Holes. The green and unripe Nuts candied with the Bark on, gently move
the Belly, two or three being taken at Bedtime. The Tree tap'd in the Spring,
yields a great quantity of Liquor, but it is not so pleasant as that of the
Birch-tree. It Is said to be peculiarly proper for Obstructions of the Courses.
The Nuts being infused in Water till the Skin of the Kernels comes off, then
infuse them two Days in Aqua vitae: Take two or three of them daily, in the
Morning fasting, for ten Days before the usual time of their Flowing. The Oil
of the Nut, mixed with Oil of Almonds, is excellent in the Stone; two or three
Ounces of it may be taken inwardly at a time. See Mr. Boil, of Specific
Remedies, page 163.

Wall-flower, in Latin Leucoium luteum.
It grows every where on Walls.

The Flowers are cordial, and good for the Nerves: They ease Pain, provoke the
Courses, expel the Secundine, and a dead Child. The Conserve of the Flowers,
the distilled Water, and the Oil made of the Flowers by Infusion, are in use for
Apoplexies, and Palsies. The Oil is very Anodine in Wounds, and Inflammations
of the Nervous Parts.

Way-faring-tree, in Latin Viburnum.
It sometimes spreads much, though it is not high. The Wood of it is fungous and
pithy. The Branches are about a Finger thick, and four Foot long, or longer.
The Bark is of a dark-gray Color; but the Bark of the Branches is whitish. The
Leaves are somewhat like the Leaves of the Alder; they are broad, longish and
thickish, and indented about the Edges; they are hairy and white, like Meal,
especially below. The Flowers are placed in Umbels, and smell like the Flowers
of Elder; they are white, and consist of five Leaves. The Berries are first
green, then red, and lastly black; they are sweet, and clammy. Some
Country People eat them. It grows commonly in Hedges.

The Leaves and Berries are dry, and astringent. They are used for
Inflammations of the Throat and Almonds, and for the Relaxation of the Uvula,
and to settle the Teeth when they are loose, and also for Fluxes of the Belly.
A Decoction of the Leaves makes the Hairs black, and prevents their falling.

Wheat, in Latin Triticum.
The Juice of it is good to take off Spots. The Flower mixed with
Bean-shell-water, takes out Wrinkles from the Face. A Cataplasm made with Water
and Oil, and the Flower, takes off the Hardness of the Breast, and ripens
Swellings. The Bran cleanses the Hands, and makes them soft and white.

Common Whitlow-grass, in Latin Paronychia vulgaris.
It has a small, fibrous Root, and many Leaves, that lie on the Ground; they
are scarce an Inch long; they are pointed, hairy, sometimes green, sometimes
reddish, and a little indented; and taste somewhat astringent at first,
afterward acrid. It has sometimes one, sometimes two or three Stalks, or more;
they are round, and about an Hand high, and sometimes not so much; they have no
Leaves on them, but they have many little, white Flowers, which consist of four
Leaves; they have small, flat Pouches. It grows on Walls and Houses.

Rue Whitlow-grass, infused in Small Beer, and drank for some Days, cures
King's-Evil-Swellings, without any sensible Evacuation. See Mr. Boil, of
Specific Remedies, page 155. Take of Whitlow-grass half an Handful, fry it
with Flower, and an Egg: Take it in a Morning fasting, for two Days. This cures
the Whites.

Winter-cherry, in Latin Alkekengi.
The Berries are Diuretic, Nephritick, and Lithontriptick. They are also good
for the Jaundice; they may be either infused in Wine, or boyl^d in
Posset Drink, or powdered, and taken in any Liquor. One that took eight of the
Cherries every Change of the Moon, was cured of the Gout; though before, he was
miserably afflicted with it. Take of Chios-Turpentine two Drams, of the Balsam
of Tolu half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of the Troches of Alkakengi;
make Midling Pills: Take four at Bedtime. These Pills are good for the Stone
in the Kidneys.

Winter-green, in Latin Pyrola.
Five or six of its Leaves lie on the Ground; they are like the Leaves of a
Pear; they are thick, of a dark Green, smooth, and shining above. The
Footstalk are near an Hand long. The Stalk is nine Inches high, and angled,
and has on it some small, sharp Leaves; and a Spike of fine, white Flowers,
consisting of five Leaves. The whole Plant tastes bitter. It grows in the
North, near Halifax.

It Is an excellent Vulnerary Herb, either taken inwardly, or outwardly applied.

Woodroof, in Latin Asperula.
It Is divided into many Joints. The Root is small, and creeps on the top of the
Earth, sending down Capillary Fibers. The Stalks are small, foursquare, an Hand
or nine Inches high. The Leaves are placed on the Joints, like those of Madder;
they are larger than Cleaver-leaves, and of a lighter Green; they shine a
little, and are a little hairy. The Stalk is divided at the top into two or
three Branches, upon which the Footstalk sustain the little Flowers, that
smell sweet, and are composed of four small Leaves. The Seeds are small, and
very hairy, and in shape like a Kidny; they stick to the Clothes, as the Seeds
of Clevers do. It grows in hilly Woods, and among Bushes. It flowers in May.

It Is used for Obstructions of the Liver, and Gallbladder; and to cool an hot
Liver. It procures Mirth, as they say, being put into Wine, and gives it a
pleasant Taste; for which Reason it is frequently used among the Germans.

Common Wormwood, in Latin Absinthium vulgar.
It strengthens the Stomach and Liver, excites Appetite, opens Obstructions,
and cures Diseases that are occasioned by them; as, the Jaundice, Dropsy, and
the like. It Is good in long, putrid Fevers, it carries off vicious Humors by
Urine, it expels Worms from the Bowels, and preserves Clothes from Moths. The
Juice, the distilled Water, the Syrup, the fixed Salt, and the Oil of it are
used; but the Wine or Beer seems to be the best. It strengthens the Stomach,
creates an Appetite, opens Obstructions, and provokes Urine. The Simple Water
is more Languid, and of less Virtue. The fixed Salt, if it be wholly separated
from the other Parts, by the force of the Fire, differs nothing, in my Opinion,
neither in Taste nor Virtue, from the Fixed Salt of any other Plant. A Scruple
or half a Dram of the Salt, according to the Strength and Age of the Sick,
taken in a Spoonful of the Juice of Limon, scarce ever fails to cure Vomiting.
Green Wormwood bruised, and mixed with Lard, and applied, cures Tumors of the
Kernels of the Throat, and the Quinsie.

THE Exotic or Foreign PHYSICAL PLANTS.
AC
ACacia.
It grows in Egypt.

The Juice of it pressed from the Cods, before they are ripe, or from the
Flowers or Leaves, is used to strengthen the Eyes, and to take off the
Inflammation of them; and to cure Ulcers of the Mouth and Ears; and for Chaps
of the Lips. The Juice reduced to a Powder, after it has been washed in a
Decoction made with the Juice, or the Leaves or Flowers, and sprinkled on the
Gums, and rubbed on the Teeth, fixes the Teeth when they are loose. A Dram of it
dissolved in some Liquor, and taken every morning, stops all Fluxes of Blood.
Many Women that have been almost destroyed by an immoderate Flux of their
Courses, have been cured by it. Clysters made of the Decoction of the Leaves
and Flowers, and injected into the Womb, are used for the same purpose: As is
also the Juice powdered, and dissolved in Decoctions, and used in the same
manner. In Fluxes of the Belly are often used Clysters, made in the same
manner: And the Juice is frequently taken inwardly. A Decoction made of the
Leaves and Flowers, and the Juice dissolved in it, is excellent for the Falling
of the Womb, and Anus. A Fomentation made of the Juice, Leaves and Flowers, is
very good for Weakness of the Limbs, and for Fluxions Swellings and
Inflammations of the Joints. Some make a Liniment of Vinegar and the Juice of
it, which strengthens wonderfully the Joints when they are weak. The Juice
powdered, and well washed with Water, cures obstinate Ulcers of the Privy
Parts, and of other weak Parts. The Decoction is also used to dry Pocky
Pustules; but then Guiacum is mixed with it. The Powder and Decoction of it are
used for the Breaking out of Children's Heads. Ancient and Modern Physicians
all agree, that Acacia is very astringent; and by that Means it does what it
does.

Agarick, in Latin Agaricus.
It Is a white Fungous, or Mushroom, that grows on the Larix-tree. The White,
Light, and Brittle is the best.

It purges Phlegm and Choler. It Is used for the Jaundice, and for those that are
Short-breathed; and also in the Stone of the Kidneys, in Difficulty of Urine,
and for Mother-fits; the Falling Sickness, and for the Hip-Gout. It also
provokes the Courses; wherefore Women with Child ought not to take it. It Is
given in Substance, from one Dram, to two Drams; and in Infusion, from two
Drams to five. But the Troches of it are most commonly used, and are made in
the following manner: Take of Agarick powdered and sifted three Ounces; infuse
it with two Drams of Ginger, in a sufficient quantity of White Wind; and make
Troches: The Dose is one Dram. The Pills, in the London-Dispensatory, of
Agarick, are made in the following manner: Take of Agarick three Drams; of our
Sky-colour'd Orris-roots, Mastick, Hore-hound, each one Dram; Turbith five
Drams, Species Hiera Picra half an Ounce, Coloquintida and Sarcocol, of each
two Drams; Myrrh one Dram, of Sapa as much as is sufficient to make a Mass.

Note, Sapa is Wine boiled till two Thirds of it are consumed. Half a Dram of
this Pill is a sufficient Dose: It Is used to purge the Breast, and to carry off
Phlegm. The Pill De Hiera cum Agarico is made in the following manner: Take of
the Species of Hiera Picra, and of Agarick, each half an Ounce; of the best
Aloes half an Ounce; of Honey of Roses a sufficient quantity to make a Mass: A
Scruple, or a Scruple and an half may be taken at a time, made into four or six
Pills. It Is good for Shortness of Breath, and Obstructions of the Lungs, and to
provoke the Courses, and for Mother-fits, and in Melancholy Diseases, and to
purge Phlegm and Choler, and to open Obstructions of the Liver or Spleen, and
for Diseases of the Head; but the use of them must be continued for the space
of eight or ten Days. You may take them at Bedtime, if you eat no Supper. They
are easy in their Operation. Agarick is either Male, or Female; the Male is
not used. It comes from Agaria, a Region of Sarmatia; and from thence it takes
its Name. It grows also in Dauphine in France; but the best comes from the
Tridentine Woods. It grows in many other places.

Agnus Castus, or The Chaste Tree.
The Athenian Matrons, when they attended on the Divine Mysteries of Ceres,
used to lie on the Leaves of this Tree, to keep them chaste. The Seed of it, by
reason of the Likeness, is called by some Eunuch's-Pepper. It suppresses
Nocturnal Imaginations of Venery, and cures the Incontinency of Seed. The Fruit
of it relieves those that are bitten by Serpents; and is good for those that
are troubled with the Spleen and Dropsy. It increases Milk, and provokes
Urine, and the Courses. Take of the Conserve of Agnus Castus, of the Flowers of
Water-Lilly and Violets, each half an Ounce; of Conserve of Red Roses half an
Ounce, of the Stalks of Lettice candied one Ounce, of Prepared Coral two Drams;
with Syrup of Violets, and of Water Lillies, make an Opiat. This is used in the
Uterine Fury. Give the quantity of a Nutmeg, Morning and Evening.

Alcali.
Every pure Salt is so called, that is without an Acid. It Is drawn from the
Ashes, or the Calx of any Matter extracted by a Lee. It Is proper to all things,
liquid and solid. The Word is derived from Kaly, the Name of a Plant, with
which Glass is made. It easily ferments with an Acid; and, together, they are
the Cause of all Intestine Motion: Nothing grows, or increases, without these
two. Alcali is Threefold; viz. Volatile Alcali, which is made of Animals, viz.
of Hartshorns, of Urine, and the like. Fixed, which is extracted from the Ashes
of Plants; as, from Wormwood, Tartar, and the like. Metallic and Stony; for
Metals and Stones ferment with an Acid Menstruum. Mixed Alcalies are added to
these; as, Nitre, Alum, the several sorts of Vitriol, Fossile, and Sea-Sealt,
and the like; which participate of Alcali, and Acid.

Almond-tree, in Latin Amygdalus.
There are many sorts of Almonds; but in Practice they are distinguished only
into Bitter and Sweet. The Jordan-Almonds are most esteemed amongst us; which
are larger, longer and narrower, rounder and thicker, than the Valentian; and
of a better Taste.

Sweet Almonds nourish much, and make the Body fat. They mitigate the Acrimony
of the Humors, and increase Seed. They are good for Lean People, and for such
as are Consumptive. But they are chiefly used in Emulsions. Take of Sweet
Almonds blanched number Three, of the Seeds of Melon, Lettice and White
Poppies, each one Dram; of the Pulp of Barley three Drams; beat them in a
Marble-Mortar, and pour on them a sufficient quantity of Barly-water; to seven
Ounces of the strained Liquor add five Drams of Diacodium; mingle them, and
make an Emulsion. This is good in the Stone, and for Heat of Urine. Take of
Sweet Almonds prepared, and infused in Rose Water, two Ounces; of the four
Greater Cold Seeds, of Plantain and Purslain-seeds, each one Dram; of the Seeds
of Marshmallows and White Poppies, each one Scruple; beat them according to
Art, and pour on them a sufficient quantity of a Decoction of Barley and
Liquorish; make an Emulsion for two Doses; add to each an Ounce of Syrup of
Water Lillies, of Sal Prunellae half a Dram. This is good for Pleurisies, and
Heat of Urine, and the like. Oil of Almonds is good for Hoarsness, and Coughs:
Take of Oil of Almonds fresh drawn, of Syrup of Maidenhair, each one Ounce and
an half; of Sugar Candy two Drams; mix them in a Glass-Mortar: Make a Linctus,
to be taken often with a Liquorish-stick. Oil of Almonds is good in the
Cholick: Take two Ounces of Oil of Almonds, and one Ounce and an half of Manna,
mixed together in fat Chicken-broth. This relieved a Person that had the
Cholick, after he had taken thirty Clysters to no purpose. Oil of Almonds is
very good for the Stone in the Kidneys: Take of White Wind, and Compound-water
of Horseradish, each one Ounce and an half; of the Juice of Limon one Spoonful
and an half, of Tartar vitriolated one Scruple, of Oil of Sweet Almonds one
Ounce, of Syrup of Marshmallows two Ounces, of Nutmeg powdered one Scruple;
make a Draught to be taken hot. For the Gripes of Infants, the following
Medicine was prescribed by Dr. Lower: Take of Manna two Drams, dissolved in two
Ounces of the Aqua lactis alexiter; strain it, and add three Drams of Oil of
Almonds: Give half in the Morning, and the rest three Hours after, if it do not
work. Bitter Almonds are hot and dry; they attenuate, open and cleanse; they
are Diuretic; they open the Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery and
Womb. Outwardly used, they take off Freckles. The Oil of Bitter Almonds is more
agreeable to the Ears, than any other Oil. The Italians eat Almonds whole,
before the Stones are hard, for Second Course; and they taste very pleasantly,
and are very agreeable to the Stomach. They grow in Germany, Italy, and France.

Aloes, in Latin Aloe.
There are three sorts of it, viz. Succotrine, Hepatick, and Caballine.
Succotrine is so called, from the Island Succotra in India. This sort is the
best of all; it is clear and transparent, and colored somewhat like the Liver.
It has an Aromatic Smell, like Myrrh; upon which Account it was formerly mixed
with Perfumes. It has a bitter, an Aromatic, and an astringent Taste. It Is
light, and yet the Substance of it is compact. Being handled in the Sun, or
near the Fire, it grows soft; and when it is cold it breaks easily: Which are
the Signs of the best Aloes. The Hepatick is so called, it being like the Liver
in Color and Consistence. It Is not so pure as the former, it is not
transparent, it smells stronger, and tastes more bitter, and is more
astringent. The Caballina is more impure, sandy, and filthy; and fit only for
Horses.

Aloes, besides its Purgative Virtue, is hot and drying, and opens
Obstructions: It purges Choler and Phlegm. Aloes, contrary almost to all other
Purging Medicines, strengthens the Stomach. But it is to be noted, That the
frequent use of Aloes opens the Haemorrhoidal Veins; and, to be sure, it has a
Faculty of opening the Orifices of the Veins: Wherefore those that are subject
to Haemorrhages must not use it. Bartholinus mentions an Observation of one
that rendered a Bloody Urine, by taking Aloes too often. But, outwardly
applied, it is very astringent. Aloes kill and expel Worms: Being mixed with
Vinegar, and the Gall of an Ox, and applied to the Navel, it does the same. It
cures the Jaundice, and prevents Putrefaction. And, mixed with Myrrh, it
preserves dead Bodies a long time from Corruption. Some think the Virtue of
Mummy proceeds wholly from the Aloes, wherewith Bodies were wont to be
embalmed. The Powder of Aloes, used outwardly, stops the Flux of the
Haemorrhoidal Veins. Dissolved in Wine, it prevents the Falling of the Hair.
Mixed with Medicines for the Eyes, called Collyria, it quickens the Sight.
Mixed with Honey, it cures Ulcers of the Privy Parts, and a Fistula, and Sore
Mouths and a Stinking Breath. It shuts the Orifices of the Veins, and so stops
Bleeding. Outwardly applied, it thickens and dries; and the Powder of it
conglutinates fresh Wounds, and skins them soon. In prescribing Aloes, the
following Cautions are to be observed. First, It is not to be given to those,
whose Diseases proceed only from a simple Intemperies, without Matter; for such
do not want Evacuation, nor a Medicine that is so drying; for, instead of
Evacuation, it occasions a Consumption in such: But, on the contrary; it is used
with very good Success in those that are of a cold and moist Constitution.
Secondly, It ought not to be prescribed to Old People. Thirdly: It ought not to
be used too frequently; especially, not daily, as some order it. And Fourthly,
Women with Child must not take it; for it provokes the Courses powerfully.
Those things which are added for the Correction of it are, Mace, Nutmegs,
Cloves, Cinnamon, Spikenard, Sweet Smelling Flag, Saffron, and the like. The
Operation of it is quickened by washing it in a Decoction of Rhubarb, or in an
Infusion of Roses. It Is said, that Mastick, Tragacanth, Bdellium, and the like,
mixed with it, prevents its opening the Orifices of the Veins: Or, if it be
washed in Endive, or Succory-water, the same may be prevented. Many excellent
Medicines of the London-Dispensatory are compounded of Aloes. The Pills called
Pilulae Aggregativae are made in the following manner: Take of Citron,
Myrobolans, and Rhubarb, each half an Ounce; Juice of Agrimony, and Wormwood
thickened, each two Drams; Diagridium five Drams; Agarick, Coloquintida and
Polypodium, of each two Drams; Turbith and Aloes, of each six Drams; Mastick,
Red Roses, Sal Gemmae, Epithimum, Annise, Ginger, of each a Dram; with Syrup of
Damask-Roses, make a Mass for Pills: They purge Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy;
they are good for a foul Stomach: The Dose is half a Dram. Pilulae
Aloephanginae are made in the following manner: Take of Cinnamon, Cloves,
Cardamoms the Lesser, Nutmegs, Mace, Sweet Smelling Flag, Carpo-balsamum, or
Juniper Berries, Squinanth, Wood of Aloes, Yellow Sanders, Red Roses dried,
Wormwood, of each half an Ounce; draw a Tincture from these, in Spirit of Wine,
they being first grossly powdered: In three Pints of this Tincture strained,
dissolve a Pound of Aloes; then add of Mastich and Myrrh powdered; each half an
Ounce; Saffron two Drams, of Balsam of Peru one Dram; bring it to a Mass for
Pills, by evaporating the superfluous Moisture over Ashes, or in a Bath. These
Pills are good for the Headache, and Giddiness of the Head: They strengthen the
Brain and Stomach. Half a Dram, or a Dram, may be taken at a time. Pilulae de
Aloe lota are made in the following manner: Take of Aloes, dissolved in the
Juice of Red Roses, and boiled up again, one Ounce; of Agarick trochiscated
three Drams, of Mastick two Drams, of the Species of Sweet Diamosk half a Dram;
with Syrup of Pale Roses make a Mass for Pills. Pilulae Aloe Rosata is made in
the following manner: Take of Succotrine-Aloes powdered four Ounces, of the
Juice of Damask-Roses clarified, one Pint; mingle them, digest them in the Sun,
or in a Bath, till the superfluous Moisture is exhaled; repeat the Digestion
and Evaporation four times; make a Mass for Pills. This purges gently, cleanses
the Stomach, opens Obstructions, and cures the Jaundice. Half a Dram of it may
be taken at Bedtime. Pilulae Cochiae minores are made in the following manner:
Take of clear Aloes, of pure Scammony, and of the Pulp of Colaquintida, each
one Ounce; powder them, and make a Mass with equal parts of Syrup of Wormwood
and Syrup of Buckthorn; adding to it two Scruples of Oil of Cloves. These Pills
purge much: The Dose is a Scruple, or half a Dram. Pilulae Faetidae are made in
the following manner: Take of Aloes, Troches of Alhandel, Opopanax, Ammoniacum,
Sagapenum, Myrrh, Seeds of Rue, Dodder, of each five Drams; Scammony three
Drams, of the Roots of Turbith half an Ounce, of the Lesser Spurge prepared,
and Hermodactyls, each two Drams; of Ginger one Dram and an half, Spikenard,
Cinnamon, Saffron and Castor, each one Dram; of Euphorbium prepared one
Scruple, of Oil of Amber rectified half a Dram; dissolve the Gums in Juice of
Leeks, strain them, then add the Powders, and mix them well; make a Mass with a
Syrup made of the Juice of Leeks and Sugar. These Pills are of excellent use in
Women's Obstructions. Pilulae de Gutta Gamandra are made in the following
manner: Take of the best Aloes two Drams and an half, of the Resm of Gutta
Germandra a Dram and an half, of Scammony one Dram, of Gummoniacum one Dram and
an half, of Tartar Vitriolated half a Dram; with Syrup of Roses Solutive make a
Mass. Pilulae de Hermodactylis are made in the following manner: Take of
Sagapenum six Drams, of Opopanax three Drams; melt them in a sufficient
quantity of the Juice of Coleworts, strain them, and boil them presently, to a
moderate Consistence; then take of Hermodactyls, Aloes, Yellow Myrobalans,
Turbith, Troches of Alhandel, of soft and fresh Bdellium, each six Drams; of
Euphorbium Prepared one Dram; of the Seeds of Rue and Smallage, of Castor and
Scarcocol, each three Drams; of Saffron one Dram and an half; with the Syrup of
the Juice of Coleworts, made with Honey, make a Mass. They are used in the Gout,
and in cold Diseases of the Joints. Two Scruples, or a Dram, may be taken at a
time. Pilulae Imperiales are made in the following manner: Take of Aloes two
Ounces, of Rhubarb one Ounce and an half, of Agarick, and the Leaves of Sena
cleansed, each one Ounce; of Cinnamon three Drams, of Ginger two Drams; of
Nutmegs, Cloves, Spikenard, and Mastich, each one Dram; with Syrup of Violets,
make a Mass. They strengthen the Stomach and Bowels; and are good for such as
are of a cold Constitution. Pilulae Macri are made in the following manner:
Take of the best Aloes two Ounces, of Mastich half an Ounce, of the Leaves of
dried Marjoram two Drams, of Salt of Wormwood one Dram; powder them all, and
make a Mass with a sufficient quantity of the Juice of Coleworts, sweetened
with Sugar. It strengthens the Stomach, Brains, and the Nerves; and opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. Half a Dram of them may be taken at a
time. Pilulae Mastichichinae are made in the following manner: Take of Mastich
two Ounces, of Aloes four Ounces, of Agarick trochiscated, of the Species
Hierae Picrae simple, each one Ounce and an half; with Syrup of Wormwood make a
Mass according to Art. They purge gently, and strengthen the Head and Reins.
Half a Dram may be taken at a time. Pilulae de Opopanace are made in the
following manner: Take of Opopanax, Sagapenum, Bdellium, Ammoniacum,
Hermodactyls, and Coloquintida, each five Drams; Saffron, Castor, Myrrh,
Ginger, Woody-Cassia, White Pepper, and Yellow Myrobalans, each one Dram;
Scammony two Drams, Turbith half an Ounce, clear Aloes an Ounce and an half;
dissolve the Gums in clarified Juice of Coleworts, and make a Mass with Syrup
of Juice of Coleworts. It Is good for Palsies, and Diseases of the Joints. The
Dose is half a Dram: They work strongly. Pilulae Rudii, or Extractum Rudii, are
made in the following manner: Take of Coloquintida six Drams; Agarick,
Scammony, the Roots of Black Hellebore, Turbith, of each half an Ounce; of
Succotrine-Aloes one Ounce; of Cinnamon, Mace, and Cloves, each two Scruples;
having cleans'd the Coloquintida from its Seeds, cut it small, grate the
Agarick, powder the Hellebore, the Turbith, and the Spices grossly, and infuse
them four Days in a gentle Heat, in a sufficient quantity of the best Spirit of
Wine, so as it may rise five Fingers breadth above the Ingredients; then strain
it, pressing it out hard, and dissolve in it the Scammony, and the Aloes; then
pour the Liquor into a Glass-Alimbeck, distill it till that which remains in the
Alimbeck is as thick as Honey; afterward pour it out, and evaporate it till it
come to a Mass fit for Pills. It purges Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy. Half a
Dram is a sufficient Dose for a strong Man, for it works violently. Pilulae
Ruffi are made in the following manner: Take of Aloes two Ounces, of choice
Myrrh one Ounce, of Saffron half an Ounce; make them up into a Mass, with Syrup
of Wormwood. They cleanse the Stomach, and are good after Surfeits, and
Excessive Drinking, A Scruple, or half a Dram, or more, according to the
Strength of the Patient, may be given. Pilulae sine quibus are made in the
following manner: Take of Aloes dissolved in the Juice of Roses, and then dried
again, fourteen Drams: of Prepared Scammony six Drams; of Agarick, Rhubarb, of
the Leaves of Sena cleansed, each half an Ounce; of Wormwood, Red Roses
exungulated, Violets* Dodder, and Mastick, each one Dram; of Salt of Wormwood
half a Dram; powder the Scammony, the Aloes, the Agarick, and the Mastich
apart; add the other things, and make a Mass with a Syrup made of the Juice of
Fennel and Honey. Pilulae Stomachicae cum Gummi are made in the following
manner: Take of the purest Aloes one Ounce, of the Leaves of Sena cleans'd five
Drams, of Gum Ammoniack, dissolved in Vinegar of Elder, half an Ounce; of
Mastich and Myrrh, each one Dram and an half; of Saffron and Salt of Wormwood,
each half a Dram; make a Mass with Syrup of Buck-thorn. They are good to
cleanse the Stomach. Dose is half a Dram. Pilulae de Succino are made in the
following manner: Take of White Amber and Mastich, each two Drams; of the best
Aloes five Drams, of Agarick trochiscated half a Dram, of Long Birth-wort, and
Calcined Hart's-horn, each half a Dram; Nutmegs half a Scruple; with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Wormwood make a Mass. They are chiefly used for
Diseases of the Head. Half a Dram, or more, may be taken at a time, according
to the Strength of the Person. Hyera Picra Simple is made in the following
manner: Take of Cinnamon, Mace, the Roots of Asarabacca, Spikenard, Saffron,
Mastick, each ten Drams; of Aloes washed twelve Ounces and an half, of
Clarified Honey four Pounds three Ounces; make an Electuary according to Art.
The Species are also kept apart in the Shops. Tinctura Sacra is made in the
following manner: Take of the Species of Hyera Picra one Ounce, of Canary-wine
one Pint; keep them close stopped in a Glass, and shake it every Day, till it
is deeply tinctured; let it stand till it is clear. Four or five Spoonfuls,
more or less, may be taken at a time, according to the Strength of the Body. It
strengthens the Stomach, quickens the Appetite, opens Obstructions, and purges
Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy. Pulvis Thuraloes is made in the following
manner: Take of Frankincense one Dram, of Aloes half a Dram; make it of the
Consistence of Honey, with the White of an Egg, when you use it; mix with it
Hare-down, apply it to the Wound, and bind it on. This is frequently used to
stop Bleeding.

Amomum.
It heats, dries, and is astringent. It disposes to Rest, takes off Pain. Being
applied to the Forehead, it concocts and discusses Inflammations, and the
Tumor called Meliceres. Mixed with Basil, and applied, it relieves those that
are bitten by Vipers; it cases those that have the Gout; it takes off
Inflammations of the Eyes. The Decoction of it is also good in the Stone of the
Kidneys, and the Gout. It Is mixed with Antidotes, and Precious Ointments; and
that was the chief Use the Ancients made of it. Take of the Seeds of Angelica
skinned one Pound and an half; of Sweet Fennel and Liquorish, each four Ounces;
of Raisins stoned one Pound; of the Leaves of Mugwort and Balm, each four
Handfuls; of Carduus and Pennyroyal, each two Handfuls; of the Seed of Amomum
four Ounces, of Milk and Wine six Quarts; distill them according to Art. This is
a Prolifick Water.

Anacardium Occidentale, Cajou dictum.
It Is called by some Cajou, or Cassu-tree. From the Fruit of it is pressed out
a Liquor, which being duly fermented, becomes Vinous, and Intoxicating. The
Fruit roasted, is much better than Chestnuts, and tastes as pleasantly as
Almonds. When it is raw it cannot be eaten safely; for it takes off the Skin of
the Mouth, and occasions great Pain, it being very acrid and rough: But when
Water or Wine, with a little Salt, is mixed with it, the Acrimony is much
abated, and it becomes very palatable. It strengthens the Stomach, and helps
Fermentation, and takes off Vomiting and Nauseousness. The Indians use them,
being a little toasted, to provoke Venery. The Juice of it stops a Looseness,
and cures a Diabetes. The Oil of it is much used by Painters, and makes a very
lasting Black. It also cures the Itch, and other Vices of the Skin. It grows
plentifully in Malabar.

Anacardiums, or Malacca-beans, in Latin Anacardium.
The Arabians say, that Anacardiums are hot and dry to the fourth Degree; and
that they are of a Caustic Nature, and will exulcerate the Skin, and take off
Warts: But Experience contradicts them. They strengthen the Brain, and Animal
Spirits; and dry and heat gently. They comfort the Stomach. They are counted by
all an excellent Medicine to quicken the Memory. It grows in many Parts of
India.

Anime Gummi.
It Is twofold, Oriental and Occidental: The Occidental is the Tears, or White
Resin of a Tree growing in New-Spain. It Is somewhat like Frankincense; it has a
pleasant and sweet Smell: It Is not so clear and shining as the Oriental.

The chief use of Anime Gummi is External, in cold and painful Diseases of the
Head and Nerves; for Catarrhs, and Flatulent Diseases; also for Diseases of the
Joints, the Palsy, Contusions, and the like. It Is mixed with Plasters for the
same use.

Anise, in Latin Anisum.
The Seed is chiefly used; the Herb it self but rarely; and the Root of it
never. It heats, dries, is Cephalic, Epatick, Pneumonick and Stomachick. It Is
used for Wind in the Stomach, a Cough, and the like. It Is more agreeable to the
Stomach, than any other Medicine that is used to expel Wind; it has less
Acrimony, and is sweeter. The Ancients extolled it wonderfully for a cold and
moist Stomach; wherefore they used it in Pains of the Head proceeding from the
Stomach, for Watchings, and a Looseness occasioned by Crudities. It provokes
Urine, and stimulates Venery. It Is baked with Bread, and candied, and so used.
It expels Wind, and cures a Stinking Breath. The Oil of it is used against
Wind, and for a Cough proceeding from a cold Cause. Anise-seed-water is good
for those that are Short-breathed, and that are troubled with Heart-burning.
Heurnius says, That the Powder or Decoction of it is better in the Cholick, and
Difficulty of Urine, than the Oil; which they are to take notice of, that value
nothing but Chimical Preparations. A Scruple of the Seed, powdered grossly, is
good for the Gripes in Children. In Flatulent Hickups let the Sick always chew
the Seed. The same is good for the Cholick. Take of the double Flowers of
Camomile thirty Handfuls, cut them, and beat them, and infuse them in five
Quarts of Camomile-water, and eight Quarts of Spanish Wine mixed, twenty four
Hours; press them out, and infuse again twenty Handfuls of the Flowers, as
before; press them out, infuse again, a third time, twelve Handfuls of the
Flowers; add two Ounces of the yellow Pill of fresh Oranges, two Ounces and an
half of the Leaves of Roman Wormwood, Centory, Pennyroyal, Wild Marjoram; of
the Seeds of Dill two Ounces; of the Seeds of Annise, Fennel, Caraways, Cummin,
Blessed Thistle, Mary's Thistle, each one Ounce and an half; of the Berries of
Laurel and Juniper, each half an Ounce; of Nutmegs three Ounces; having
digested them a sufficient time, distill them according to Art: Two or three
Spoonfuls of this Water may be taken at a time, for the Cholick, and Wind in
the Stomach. Take of the Flowers of Brimstone one Part, of Oil of Annise-seeds
four parts; digest them till the Brimstone is dissolved, and till the Balsam is
red. This is called Balsam of Sulphur annisated. It Is good for Coughs, and
Obstructions of the Lungs, and Consumptions. If the Sick has not a Fever, five
or six Drops may be taken at a time, mixed with Sugar. The following Electuary
was frequently used by Dr. Coish, who was an excellent Practitioner, and a Man
of good Reputation in London: Take of Annise-seeds finely powdered, of the
Powder of Liquorish each three Drams; of the Flower of Sulphur one Dram and an
half; with two Ounces and an half of the best Honey make an Electuary; to which
add fifteen Drops of Balsam of Sulphur, and ten Drops of Oil of Annise-seeds.
This is excellent for Coughs, and at the Beginning of Consumptions: Take two
Drams of it in the Morning, and at Bedtime. Balls for Colds in Horses are made
in the following manner: Take of the Powders of the Seeds or Fenugreek, Annise,
Cummin, Bastard-Saffron, Elecampane, of the Leaves of Colt's foot, and Flower
of Sulphur, each two Ounces; of Juice of Liquorish (dissolved in half a Pint
of White Wind) one Ounce; of Oil of Olives and Honey, each eight Ounces; of
Januen's Treacle twelve Ounces, of Oil of Annise-seeds one Ounce; mingle them
all together, and with a Pound and an half of Wheaten Flower, or as much as
will suffice make Balls.

Asa Foetida, or Devil's Dung.
No Simple Medicine is so much in use all over India, as Asa Foetida, for
Medicines, and for Sause for Meat; and they usually mix it with their Broths.
They use it as a Medicine to quicken the Appetite, to strengthen the Stomach,
to discuss Wind, and to excite Venery: But in Europe it is chiefly used
inwardly, for Mother-sits, a Peripneumonia, and for Wounds. It Is used outwardly
for Swellings of the Spleen, Mother-fits, and the like. If any one is subject
to the Falling Sickness, let Asa Foetida be held to his Nose as soon as the Fit
comes. Take of Asa Foetida one Ounce, of the Leaves of Rue one Handful, of the
best Vinegar one Pint; boil them in a Vessel of a narrow Mouth: Let those that
are subject to Vapors and Mother-fits receive the hot Vapor of it into their
Mouths and Nostrils often in a Day. Take of Asa Foetida, Castor, and Myrrh,
each one Scruple; of the Faecula, or Lees of Briony half a Scruple; of the
Seeds of Rue, and of Saffron, each eight Grains; with Syrup of Mugwort make
twelve Pills: Three or four may be taken at a time. But if the Patient cannot
take Pills, they may be dissolved in Mugwort-water. These Pills are very good
in Hysterical Diseases, and for Mother-fits. But when the Fits are very
violent, the following Pills are used very successfully, and do most commonly
take them off: Take of Asa Foetida one Scruple, of Castor six Grains, of
Laudanum three Grains; make three or four Pills, let the Patient take them
presently. The Fetid Pills, though they are Purging, may be conveniently given in
the Fit, for they do not use to work till the Fit is over. The Dose is half a
Dram. The Plant, whereof Asa Foetida is the Juice, (for it is pressed out of a
Root) grows in the Persian Empire.

B.
THE True, Natural Balsam-tree, in Latin Balsamum verum.
The Balsam of it, called Opobalsamum, has been famous in all Ages for curing
of Wounds: And so effectual has it been accounted, that other Vulnerary Oils
and Ointments have taken their Names from it: And therefore Quacks and
Mountebanks grace their Medicines with the Name of Balsam, to make them more
acceptable to the People. There are many Observations of dangerous Wounds that
have been cured in a short time by the use of this Balsam. It cleanses sordid
Ulcers. It does much good in the Bitings of Serpents and Scorpions, inwardly
taken, or outwardly applied. Half a Dram of it taken every Morning, is good in
the Plague, and a good Preservative against it. Two Scruples, or a Dram of it
is very good in Chronical Fevers, occasioned by crude and cold Humors, or by
Obstructions of the Bowels. It clears the Sight, and is good in Diseases of the
Ears. Besides, it is useful in Convulsions that proceed from Cold and Moisture;
also for Giddiness, Falling Sickness, Palfies, and the like; for Coughs that
proceed from a cold Humor; for Difficulty of Breathing, and Catarrhs; for
Crudities, and Wind in the Stomach; for a moist and cold Intemperies of the
Womb; for Barrenness, the Whites, Difficulty of Urine, occasioned either by
Wind or Gravel. Women also make use of it to beautify the Face. Lobelius wrote
a whole Book of the Virtue of it. It grows only in the Land of Judea.

Peruvian Balsam, in Latin Balsamum e Peru.
It Is of great Virtue in outward and inward Diseases. It Is hot and dry. It
dissolves, digests, and discusses. Some Drops of it taken in a Morning fasting,
is good in an Asthma. It Is good for the Intemperies of the Stomach, and
Weakness of the Bowels. It opens Obstructions, and takes off the Chilness of
the Breast, and Hypochondra's, being anointed with a warm Hand. By rubbing of
it on the Head, it strengthens the Brain, and prevents Convulsions, and the
Palsy, and strengthens all the Nerves. When a Nerve is pricked, it takes off
the Acrimony of the Sanies, from whence proceed Pains and Convulsions. When
Animals are wounded, or bit by Venomous Creatures, by Instinct of Nature they
rub themselves on the Bark of this Tree, and so are presently relieved. It Is
commonly used by Dr. Willis, and others, in making of Purging Pills. It comes
from Peru and New-Spain, in Earthen Jars. It Is of a very dark Color, and of a
fragrant Smell.

Balsam- Copaiba.
It Is of the Consistence and Smell of distilled Oil of Turpentine. The Bark
being cut at Full-Moon, it distills in such a quantity, that in the space of
three Hours it drops six Quarts. It Is not only excellent for healing and
cleansing Wounds, especially of the Nerves, and for curing the Biting of
Serpents; but it is also very beneficial taken inwardly: For three or four
Drops taken in an Egg, twice or thrice in a Morning, cures a Dysentery, and
other Fluxes of the Belly, the Whites, and a Gonorrhaea. The Jews experience
the Salutary Virtue of it in Circumcision; for they stop the Blood, flowing
from that cruel Wound, with it, which before was deadly to many of them. This
Tree is wont to be much rubbed by Animals that are bit by Serpents, or hurt by
Wild Beasts; to which they run for Cure by natural Instinct. It grows
plentifully in the Island called Maranhow.

Balsam of Tolu, in Latin Balsamum de Tolu.
The Tree from whence this Balsam drops is like a small Pine Tree: The thin and
tender Bark is cut when the Sun is at its full height: for it will not drop at
all in the Night, by reason of the Cold. The Liquor flowing out is received
into Spoons, made of black Wax. It Is of a Golden Color, and of a moderate
Consistence. It Is very glutinous, tastes pleasantly and well, and has a
curious Scent. It has the same Virtues with the Peruvian Balsam. It comes from
Tolu, and is better than that which is brought from New Spain. It heats and
dries, attenuates, resolves, is vulnerary, and purges the Breast. It Is chiefly
used in an Asthma, and for a Consumption, and also for Crudities and Pains in
the Stomach. It Is outwardly used for all Pains that proceed from a cold Cause,
for Defluxions upon the Eyes, the Palsy, the Weakness, Pain and Wind of the
Stomach. Used with Nard-Oyl, it cures the Weakness of the Spleen; and is good
for all Edematous Tumors, for Swellings under the Ears, and for the
King's Evil. But it is much commended for curing Wounds, especially if the
Bones are broken; for it draws forth the Splinters. It Is also of good use in
Wounds of the Joints, and when the Nerves are cut or pricked, and for
Contusions, and the like. Take of the Balsam of Tolu, of Mecha, or, for want of
it, of Copaiba, of Calamite-Storax, of Belzion the best, of Onibanum, Mastich,
Myrrh, Ammoniacum granulated, Taccamhac, of Gum-Elemi of Chios-Turpentine, of
the Roots of Florentine-Orris, each half an Ounce; of the Pectoral-water made
in the following manner, one Pint and an half: Take of the Leaves of
Ground Ivy, Colt's-foot, Oak of Jerusalem, each three Pounds; Hysop, Rosemary,
Pennyroyal, Horehound, of each one Pound and an half; of the Roots of
Elecampane and Liquorish, each one Pound and an half; of Florentine-Orris
twelve Ounces, of Figs sliced three Pounds, of the best Saffron, of the Seeds
Annise, and Sweet-Fennel, each half an Ounce; of Spirit of Wine five Quarts, of
Fountain Water four and twenty Quarts; infuse them, and distill from a Limbeck
twelve Quarts: Take, as I said, one Pint and an half of this Pectoral-water,
and boil the Ingredients abovementioned in it, in a Circulatory Vessel, well
stopped, and placed in hot Sand for some Hours; strain it, and add a sufficient
quantity of White Sugar to make a Syrup. This is excellent for Coughs, and
Consumptions; and for the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder.

Balsamum de Chili,
is good for Pains that proceed from Cold or Wind. It helps Digestion, creates
an Appetite, and strengthens the Stomach. It Is good for Ulcers in the Kidneys,
Womb, Lungs, or Breast. It stops Spitting of Blood; is good for Coughs, and an
Asthma, and other Diseases of the Lungs. It Is useful in Diseases of the Head
and Nerves; as, Apoplexies, Lethargy, Palsy, Convulsions, and the like. It
cures Bursten Bellies, and kills Worms, and expels Gravel. It cures Deafness,
being dropped into the Ear. It Is good for a Fistula and Ulcers; for Bruises, and
Aches of the Limbs. It opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and provokes
Women's Courses. It grows in America, in the Province of Chili.

Balaustians, in Latin Balaustia.
They are the Flowers of the Wild Pomegranate; some of them are as big as a
Damask-Rose, others much less. They corroborate the Stomach; are drying,
binding, cooling, and astringent. They stop Catarrhs, a Looseness, the
Bloody Flux, a Gonorrhaea, and the like. They settle the Teeth when they are
loose, and cure Bursten Bellies. They are brought from Turkey, and Spain, and
some other Places. Take of the Roots of Bistort, Tormentil, of
Pomegranate-peel, each one Ounce; of the Leaves of Plantane, Knot-grass,
Shepherd's-purse, and Horse-tail, each one Handful, of Cypress-Nuts,
Balaustians, Pomegranate, Myrtle, and Shumach, each one Ounce; boil them in
Smith's Water, and rough Wine; strain it, and make a Fomentation. This is a
good astringent Fomentation. Balaustians are also an Ingredient of the Syrup of
Myrtles in the London-Dispensatory.

Bdellium.
It mollifies, discusses, opens, and cleanses. But it is to be noted, when it
is fresh, it mollifies most powerfully; when it is old, it discusses and
cleanses best. It Is chiefly used inwardly, for a Cough, and an Ulcer of the
Lungs, and to expel Gravel, and to provoke Urine, and the like. Outwardly used,
it discusses Hardness and Knots of the Nerves. Take of Bdellium,
Gum-Ammoniacum, and Opoponax, each two Drams; dissolve them in White Wind,
strain them, and boil them; then add of the Confection of Hamech and
Diaphoenicon, each two Ounces; of the Catholicon Duplicatum half an Ounce, of
Faetid Pill two Drams; make an Opiat; of which take half an Ounce, adding to it
twenty Grains of Mercurius dulcis: Continue the use of it several Days
together, and it will take off the Hardness and Swelling of the Spleen.

Bear's-breech, in Latin Branca Vrsina.
It Is one of the five Emollient Herbs. It Is used chiefly in Clysters, and other
Paregoricks, of whatsoever kind they are; and most commonly in Pultises. The
Roots made into Pultises, and applied, are good for Burns, and Luxations. Being
taken inwardly, they force Urine, and stop a Looseness. They are good for
Consumptive People, and such as spit Blood, and for Contusions. It grows in
Italy, and Sicily. It Is one of the Ingredients of the Majesterial Water of
Worms, in the London-Dispensatory; which is made in the following manner: Take
of Worms well cleans'd three Pounds; of Snails, with their Shells, cleans'd two
Gallons; beat them in a Mortar, and put them into a convenient Vessel; adding
of the Leaves of Stinging Nettles, with their Roots, six Handfuls, of Wild
Angelica four Handfuls, of Bears-breech seven Handfuls, of Agrimony and Betony,
each three Handfuls; of Common Wormwood two Handfuls, of the Flowers of
Rosemary six Ounces, of the Roots of Sharp-pointed Docks ten Ounces, of
Wood Sorrel five Ounces, of Turmerick, of the Inner Bark of Barberries, each
four Ounces, of Fenugreek-seed two Ounces, of Cloves powdered three Ounces, of
Hart's-horn grossly powdered* of Ivory powdered, each four Ounces; of Saffron
three Drams, of Small Spirit of Wine four Gallons and an half; after they have
been infused four and twenty Hours, distill them in Glass Vessels, in B. M. The
first four Pints that distill is to be kept by it self, and is called the
Spirit: The rest is called the Majesterial Water of Worms.

Benjamin, in Latin Benzoinum.
It attenuates: It Is hot and dry. It Is used for Coughs, Rheums, and
Obstructions of the Lungs. It comes from Sumatra, Surat, and several other
Places. Flowers and the Oil of Benjamin are made in the following manner: Take
an Earthen Pot, high and narrow, with a little Border round it; put into it
three or four Ounces of clear Benjamin, grossly powdered; cover the Pot with a
Coffin of Paper, and tie it round about, under the Border; set the Pot into hot
Ashes, and when the Benjamin is heated, the Flowers will sublime; take off the
Coffin every two Hours, and fix another in its place; stop up quickly, in a
Glass, the Flowers you find in the Coffins; and when those which afterward
sublime do begin to appear Oily, take the Pot off the Fire, put that which
remains into a little Glass Retort; and fitting a Receiver to it, distill in a
Sand-heat a thick and fragrant Oil, until no more comes forth; and there will
remain in the Retort nothing but a very spungy Earth. The Flowers are good for
Asthmatical Persons, and to fortify the Stomach. The Dose is, from two Grains
to five, in an Egg, or in Lozenges. The Oil is a Balsam for Wounds and Ulcers.
Tincture of Benjamin is made in the following manner: Take three Ounces of
Benjamin, and half an Ounce of Storax; powder them grossly, and put them into a
Pottle-Matrass, half empty; pour upon them a Pint of Spirit of Wine; stop your
Vessel close, and set it in warm Horse-dung; leave it in Digestion for a
Fortnight; after which, filtrate the Liquor, and keep it in a Vessel well
stopped. Some do add to it five or six Drops of Balsam of Peru, to give it a
better Smell. It Is good to take away Spots in the Face. A Dram of it is put
into four Ounces of Water, and it whitens like Milk: This Water serves for a
Wash, and is called Virgin's Milk. Take of Fat Ammoniacum, dissolved in Vinegar
of Squills, one Ounce; of Extract of Aloes half an Ounce, of Crystal of Tartar
one Dram, of Myrrh, and Saffron, each half a Dram; of Mastich, Benjamin, and
Salt of Ash-tree and Wormwood, each one Scruple; with Oxymel of Squills make a
Mass for Pills. The Dose is, half a Dram, twice a Week; Purging being used
betwixt whiles. These Pills are good for a Scirrhus of the Spleen.

Ben-Nut, in Latin, Balanus Myrepsica.
Discorides, and others of the Ancients, attribute many Virtues to it. It
purges upward and downward, and evacuates Choler and Phlegm. It has an Acrid
Moisture, whereby it subverts the Stomach, occasions Nauseousness, and moves
the Belly. It purges gross and clammy Phlegm by Vomit and Stool; wherefore it is
good for a Phlegmatic Cholick. Mixed with Honey, it resolves hard Swellings, and
the King's Evil. Made up into a Pultis with Barly-Meal and Honey, it does good
in cold Diseases of the Nerves. Mixed with Meal of Lupines, it takes off
Obstructions and Hardness of the Liver and Spleen. The Oil dropped into the Ear,
cures Deafness, and the Noises of it. It cleanses the Skin from Spots. That
which is old is better for inward use than the fresh, because by Time the
Moisture is evaporated, which so much disturbs the Body. The like may by
observed in the Roots and Leaves of Asarabacka; which purge violently upward
and downward when they are green, by reason of such an Acrid Moisture; for when
they are dry they lose that malignant and violent force. The same is also to be
observed in Orris; which, when green, burns and pricks violently; but when it
is dry it does not do so. The same is to be observed in the Roots of
Wake-Robin, which lose their Acrimony when they are dry. Take Bdellium,
Ammoniacum, and Galbanum, of each equal parts; beat them in a Mortar, with the
Oil of Ben and Lillies; then add the like quantity of the Mucilage of the Seeds
of Fenugreek, and Figs: Make an Ointment. It Is of great use in the Scirrhus.

Birth-wort, Long and Round, in Latin Aristolochia.
The Root is hot and dry. Both discuss, attenuate, open, and cleanse: But the
Round is of finer parts, the long of grosser: Both are Cephalic, Epatick, and
Pulmonick. They are good to open the Obstructions of the Lungs, to provoke the
Courses, to break inward Tumors, and to expel Poison. The Infusion of the long
Root is frequently used to cure the Itch, and to cleanse Wounds. It Is good for
Pains in the Stomach, and for the Hickups. But the chief use of both is, to
purge the Womb after Childbirth, and to force the Courses. Take of the Roots
of Round Birth-wort half a Dram, of the Leaves of dried Savin one Dram and an
half, of Dittany of Crete, of the Troches of Myrrh, of Asa Foetida, each one
Dram; of choice Cinnamon two Drams, of White Sugar two Ounces; make a fine
Powder of them all: Take two Drams in the Morning, for some Days, in the Broth
of Red Vetches, wherein two Drams of Cinnamon and half a Dram of Saffron have
been boiled. Birth-wort grows every where in the Hedges, in Italy, France and
Spain.

Bishop's-weed, in Latin Ammi.
The Seed of it is one of the four Lesser hot Seeds. It incides, opens, and
dries. It Is good for the Gripes, Difficulty of Urine, and the Biting of
Venomous Creatures; and also forces the Courses. It Is mixed with Blistering
Plasters to prevent Difficulty of Urine, which usually comes upon the use of
such Medicines: But the use of it, as of Cummin, are Causes of pale Color.
It Is of excellent use for Barrenness, a Dram of it powdered, being taken in
Wine, or fresh Broth, every other Day, three Hours before Meals: But it ought
not to be given above four or five times. It Is an excellent Medicine in this
Case, and has often been found successful. But the Husband must not be
concerned with his Wife on the Days she takes the Seed. To which End, and also
for the Whites, an Uterine Clyster being first used, says Simon Paulus, I have
given the following Powder to many barren Women; whereby they proved with
Child, and were freed from the Whites. The Description of the Uterine Clyster
is as follows: Take of the Roots of Long and Round Birth-wort, each two Drams;
of Gentian, and Zedoary, each one Dram; of Ground Ivy, the Lesser Centory, of
Birth-wort, and Rosemary, each one Handful; of Balm, and Red Mug-wort, each
half an Handful; of the Lesser Cardamoms half an Ounce; cut and beat them for a
Decoction for an Uterine Clyster. The Description of the Powder is as follows:
Take of Speed-well, of the Seeds of Bishop's-weed, each half an Ounce; of the
Lesser Cardamoms, of sharp Cinnamon, each two Drams; of Sugar Candy a fourth
part of the weight of all the rest: Make a Powder according to Art. Take of the
Roots of Elecampane, Smallage, Fennel, and Orris dried, each one Ounce and an
half; of the Roots of Valerian, Gentian, Asarabacca, Squills, each one Dram; of
the inner Bark of the Elder, and Saxifrage, each six Drams; of the Leaves of
Wormwood, Agrimony, Germander, Maidenhair dried, each two Drams; of the Tops
of the Lesser Centuary, and Broom-Flowers, each one Dram; of the Seeds of
Parsley, Bishop's-weed, and Dill, each one Dram and an ha^^; of Cinnamon two
Dram^^ of Spikenard half a Dram; mix them together, and infuse them in two or
three Measures of White Wind: Let the Sick drink of this Wine every Morning.
This is good for a Dropsy. The Seed of Bishop's-weed is also an Ingredient of
the Compound Syrup of Betony in the London-Dispensatory. It comes from
Alexandria.

Bitter-Vetch, in Latin Orobus.
A Water distilled from it, breaks and expels the Stone in the Bladder. The
Root of it is good against Poisons, and the Strangury. The Plant bruised, and
applied hot, eases the Pain of the Side. It grows about Geneva; and frequently
in the Woods in Germany.

Brazile-wood, in Latin Brazilia arbor.
It Is a large and vast Tree; and so very thick sometimes, that three Men, with
their Arms extended, can scarce compass it. The Wood is cold and dry; it
mitigates Fevers; it is Binding, and Strengthening. Infused in the Cold, with
Eye-water, it cures Inflammations of the Eyes. The Wood is much used for making
Handles for Knives and Swords, and Drum-sticks. It Is very dense and ponderous,
and may be polished. Take of Sarsaperilla, of Crude Antimony, and of the Shells
of Nuts, each six Ounces; of the Roots of China one Ounce, of Brazile-wood a
little, of Water nine Pints; boil half away; the Antimony, and the Shells
powdered, must be hanged in a Rag, so that they may not touch the bottom of the
Vessel; strain it: Take a large Draught in the Morning, three Hours before
Dinner; and in the Afternoon, four Hours after Dinner; and three Hours after
Supper, for fifteen Days; Bleeding and Purging being first used. This is
commended in the Gout.

C.
CAmel's-Hay, in Latin Schaenanthus.
It heats, discusses, and is of fine Parts. It Is chiefly used for Obstructions
of the Liver, Spleen, and the like. It Is also used for Vomiting, and the
Hickups; as also for Wind in the Stomach, for Difficulty of Urine, and Pains of
the Kidneys, Bladder and Womb. It cures a Stinking Breath, and strengthens the
Head, and discusses the Swelling of the Uvula, and strengthens the Stomach, it
being outwardly used in a Lotion. A Dram of it powdered may be taken inwardly,
in hot Wine; or it may be boiled in Water. It Is reckoned a Specific for Ulcers
of the Bladder. A Woman evacuated a Stone almost as big as a Walnut, which had
occasioned an Ulcer of the Bladder, and of the neighboring Parts, by using
Camel's-Hay and the Roots of Cypress. Take of the Tops of Roman-Wormwood three
Drams, of Hore-hound and Rosemary, each two Drams; of Red Roses two Pugils, of
the Flowers of Camomile, and the Leaves of Laurel, each half an Handful; of
Orange-Pill, and of Sweet Wood of Aloes, each three Drams; Cypress-roots,
Camel's-Hay, and Spikenard, each half an Ounce; make a Decoction with two parts
of the best Wine, and one part of Agrimony and Wormwood-water; foment the
Region of the Liver with it, with a Sponge pressed out of Wormwood-wine. This
has been used in a Dropsy.

Camphir, in Latin Camphora.
Camphir was unknown to the Ancient Grecians: It began first to be taken notice
of by the Arabians. Whether it is hot or cold, is not agreed on by Authors. The
Ancients counted it cold, because it extinguished Venery, and cured
Inflammations of the Eyes; and for that being put upon Burns, it seemed as cold
as Snow. But Modern Physicians affirm, it is hot, on the contrary: Their
Arguments for it are, the great Inflammability of it; its penetrating,
Aromatic Smell, and Acrid Taste; its readiness to evaporate, by reason of the
Tenuity of Parts. Which Opinion, indeed, seems most probable; for the contrary
Arguments are easily answered. For, if it should be granted that it suppresses
Venery, it does not therefore necessarily follow that it is cold; for so does
Rue, and the chaste Tree, and the like. Yet Breynius says, it does not
extinguish Venery: For, says he, it has been observed, that many who have been
employed in purifying Camphir daily, have had many Children. And then, though it
be of use in many Diseases that require Cooling, as, in Inflammations of the
Eyes, and Erysipelas, Fevers, and the like; yet they say, Cooling in these
Cases, by this Medicine, is not per se, but per accidens; much in the same
manner as the Inflammation of a Member burnt is drawn out by the Heat of the
Fire, or the Flame of a Candle, or, as by the immoderate use of Pepper, the
native Heat is driven out, and is less within; and so the Body becomes cold.
Some mention other Ways whereby these things may be performed; which I omit,
partly because they are not satisfactory, and partly because it is not clear,
whether Camphir does good in these Diseases, or whether it be injurious.
Camphir resists Putrefaction and Poisons; upon which Account it is frequently
used in the Plague, Malignant Diseases, and Putrid Fevers. Balm-water, wherein
Camphir has been extinguished, does good in Mother-fits. It Is most frequently
used outwardly, in cooling Epithems, Frontals, and Paregoricks: And for the
mixing of it with them, it is wont to be dissolved with the Spirit of Wine, or
rubbed with Oily Kernels or Seeds. Camphir dissolves in Spirit of Wine
presently, and swims upon the top of the Spirit, in form of an Oil. Camphir is
mixed with Wash-balls, to smoothen and beautify the Skin. A small quantity of
it used outwardly or inwardly, disposes to Sleep: But if it be held to the Nose
frequently, it dries the Brain, and causes Watching. Camphir is reckoned by the
most learned Men, and not undeservedly, among the strongest Alexipharmicks. It
wonderfully resists Putrefaction, and repels and corrects the putrid Vapors of
a corrupt Member: But it is to be used cautiously in violent Pains of the Head
and Stomach. Camphir is dissolved in Spirit of Wine; and this Dissolution is
called Spirit of Wine Camphoriz'd. It Is good for the Apoplexy, and Hysterical
Diseases. It Is also found to be of excellent use for the Toothache, a little
Cotton being dipped in it, and put into the aching Tooth. The Oil of Camphir is
made in the following manner: Powder grossly three or four Ounces of good
Camphir, put it into a Mattress, and pour upon it twice as much Spirit of Nitre;
stop your Vessel close, and set it over a Pot half full of Water, a little
heated; stir it ever now and then, to help forward the Dissolution, which will
be finished in two or three Hours, and then you will find the Camphir turned
into a clear Oil, which swims above the Spirit; separate it, and keep it in a
Viol well stopped. It Is used for the Caries of Bones, and to touch Nerves that
are uncovered in Wounds. This Oil is nothing but a Dissolution of Camphir in
Spirit of Nitre; for if you pour Water upon it, to destroy the force of the
Spirit, it returns into Camphir, as before. Of all the Resins, this is the only
one that can dissolve in Spirit of Wine. Take of Volatile Salt of Hart's-horn
two Grains, of the Majesterial Cardiac-powder six Grains, of Camphir and
Cochinel, each four Grains; of Venice-Treacle one Scruple, of the Aqua
Coelestis a sufficient quantity: Make a Bolus. This is good in Malignant
Fevers. Take of Camphir and Borax, each one Dram; of White Sugar Candy five
Drams, of White Vitriol one Scruple; powder them very fine, and mingle them by
degrees with half a Pint of Sweet-Fennel-water. This is an excellent Water for
Rheums and Inflammations of the Eyes, a Rag being dipped in it, and applied
often on the Eyelids. It Is gathered from more Trees than one. It distills, Drop
by Drop, from a great Tree, much like a Walnut-tree, in the Island Borneo, in
Asia. Little Cakes of it are likewise brought out of China, but that is not so
good. It must be chosen white, transparent, clean, friable, without Spot, and
such as is hard to quench when once lighted. Camphir is compounded of a Sulphur
and a Salt; so very Volatile, that it is very hard to keep any time; and it
always loses something, let it be never so closely stopped.

Cancamum:
See Gummi Anime.

Canela:
See Cinnamon.

Capers, in Latin Capperis.
They are brought to us in Pickle, and are frequently used for Sauce for Roast
and Boiled Meat, and for Fish. They quicken the Appetite, promote Concoction,
and open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. Lobelius says, the Biggest
Capers are better than the Least. Perhaps he means the Fruit which is sometimes
pickled, and is called Long-Capers: But nowadays they are not used in
England. It is said, that they who eat Italian Capers daily, are not troubled
with the Palsy, nor Pains of the Spleen. They are good for the Hip-Gout, and
Bursten-Bellies. They provoke the Courses, draw Phlegm from the Head, and cure
the Toothache. Being boiled in Vinegar, the Bark, especially of the Root,
softens the Spleen when it is hard. Being taken inwardly, or outwardly applied,
it provokes the Courses, cleanses Ulcers, and dries; does good in the Gout,
digests hard Tumors; it also kills Worms. Take of Oil of Lillies, and of
Capers, each two Ounces; of the Juice of Briony and Smallage, each three
Ounces; boil them to the Consumption of the Juices; then add of Ointment of
Marshmallows and Gum-Ammoniacum, dissolved in Vinegar, and strained, each one
Ounce; of the Seeds of Daucus and Spikenard, each one Dram and an half; of
yellow Wax a sufficient quantity; make an Ointment: When you use it add a
little Vinegar of Roses. This is commended for Obstructions of the Liver. Oil
of Capers of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of
the Bark of the Roots of Capers one Ounce; of the Bark of Tamarisk, of the
Leaves of the same, of the Seeds of the chaste Tree, of Spleen-wort, and of the
Roots of Cyperus, each two Drams; of Rue one Dram, of ripe Oil of Olives one
Pint, of the sharpest Vinegar, and of fragrant White Wind, each two Ounces; cut
them, and steep them two Days, and boil them gently in B. M. and when the Wine
and Vinegar are consumed, strain it, and keep it for use. This Oil is very
proper for Hardness, Pain, and Obstructions of the Liver or Spleen; and also
for the Rickets. Capers grow in Sandy Ground, and amongst Rubbish, at Rome, and
Florence, and other Parts of Italy.

Cardamoms, in Latin Cardamomum.
They have a gentle Heat, that is very agreeable to Nature. They provoke Urine
and the Courses, and open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and especially
of the Mesentery; in which Obstructions they do Wonders; they are also good to
help Concoction. They are an Ingredient in the Compound-water of Wormwood, of
the London-Dispensatory.

Carthamus, or Bastard-Saffron.
The Flowers bruised are used instead of Sauce; and they color the Meat of a
Saffron-colour. They loosen the Belly, and are good in the Jaundice. But the
chief use of the Flowers is, for dying of Silks and Cloth. Some adulterate
Saffron, by mixing it with these Flowers. The Seed of it bruised, and taken in
Broth, purges clammy Phlegm by Vomit and Stool; upon which Account it is
reckoned amongst Flegmagoges. It Is very good for the Breast, and is excellent
for expelling Wind; wherefore it is very good for Cholicks, and an Anasarca.
But it is offensive to the Stomach, and therefore Stomachicks ought to be mixed
with it; as Annise-seeds, Galangal, Cinnamon, and the like. The Operation of it
should be quickened, by adding things that are acrid; as Cardamoms, Ginger, Sal
Gemmae, and the like. The Dose of it, in Infusion, is from three Drams to six.
Hofmannus says, the Husk should be taken off with a Knife, though it be
difficult; for the beating of it with a Pestle, loses the Oily Substance,
wherein the Virtue lies. The Electuary, called Diacarthamum, of the
London-Dispensatory. Take of the Species of Diatragacanth frigid half an Ounce,
of the Pulp of Preserved Quinces one Ounce, of the Marrow of the Seeds of the
Bastard-Saffron half an Ounce, of White Ginger two Drams, of Diagrydium
powdered apart, three Drams, of White Turbith six Drams, of Manna two Ounces,
of Solutive Honey of Roses strained, and Sugar Candy, each one Ounce; of
Hermodactils half an ounce, of White Sugar, boiled to the Consistence of a
solid Electuary, ten Ounces and an half; when it is hot, mix with it the Honey,
Manna, and the Pulp of Quinces; then add the Powders, and make a solid
Electuary, to be formed into Tablets.

Cassia Fistula Alexandrina, in English Ordinary Purging Cassia.
The Egyptians use to walk in a Morning where Cassia grows, especially at
Sunrising, for then the Cassia smells very pleasantly. The Pulp of Cassia
purges Choler, and watery Humors. It Is good in outward and inward Heats. It
attemperates the Blood, and renders it more pure. It wonderfully helps Diseases
of the Breast, occasioned by a Distillation of sharp Humors. The Egyptians use
the Pulp, with Sugar Candy and Liquorish, for Diseases of the Bladder and
Reins. And by the frequent use of it, they preserve themselves from the Stone;
three Drams of it being taken three Hours before Dinner. But Fallopius and
Fabritius Hildanus think it is not safe giving of it in Heat of Urine; for they
say it increases the Disease, by drawing Water to the Part affected. Two
Inconveniences attend the use of it: It dissolves the Tone of the Stomach by
its Moisture, and then it breeds Wind; wherefore it is not to be used to those
that have moist Stomachs, or are Hypondriacal, or troubled with Wind, unless it
be corrected by Carminatives, or Stomachicks; as, with Cinnamon, Mastick, or
the like. But Hofmannus says, it is best not to use it in Hypochondriacal
People, by reason of the Weakness of their Intestines. Cassia is used for all
Coughs, Difficulty of Breathing, and an Asthma. It Is used outwardly in hot
Pains of the Joints. Pains of the Head after Eating are best cured by taking
Cassia after Eating. Cassia is made much use of in the Purging Electuaries of
the London-Dispensatory. Extract of Cassia for Clysters is made in the
following manner: Take of the Leaves of Violets, Mallows, Beets, Mercury,
Pelitory of the Wall, Flowers of Violets, each one Handful; make a Decoction in
a sufficient quantity of Water, (adding at the end the Flowers of Violets)
whereby the Cassia may be extracted, and the Canes washed within; then take of
the Cassia extracted by this Decoction, and boiled to a Consistence, one Pound;
of Brown Sugar one Pound and an half; boil them up to an Electuary, according
to Art. The Electuary called Dia-Cassia, with Manna, is made in the following
manner: Take of Damask-Prunes two Ounces, of the Flowers of Violets one Ounce
and an half, of Fountain Water a Pint and an half; boil them according to Art,
till half is consumed; strain it, and dissolve in it, of the Pulp of Cassia six
Ounces; of Violet-Sugar and Syrup of Violets, each four Ounces; of the Pulp of
Tamarinds one Ounce; of Sugar Candy one Ounce and an half, of the best Manna
two Ounces; mingle them, and make an Electuary according to Art: It Is a good,
cooling Purge. Cassia extracted without Sena: Take of Prunes number Twelve, of
the Leaves of Violets one Handful, of Barley cleans'd, and the Seeds of Annise,
and of Bastard-Saffron, and of Polypody of the Oak, each five Drams; of
Maidenhair, Thyme, and Dodder, each half an Handful; of Raisins stoned half an
Ounce, of the Seeds of Fennel two Drams, of the Seeds of Purslain and Mallows,
each three Drams; of Liquorish half an Ounce; make a Decoction of these in a
sufficient quantity of Water; in the strained Liquor dissolve two Pounds of the
Pulp of Cassia, and one Ounce of Tamarinds; add three Drams of Cinnamon, and
one Pound of the best Sugar; boil it to the Consistence of an Electuary. This
is good when the Body is Feverish; for it cools, and purges gently. An Ounce
and an half of it may be taken at a time. Cassia is an Ingredient in the
Lenitive Electuary of the London-Dispensatory. It Is made in the following
manner: Take of Raisins stoned, of Polypody of the Oak fresh, Oriental Sena,
each two Ounces; of Mercury one Handful and an half; of Jujubes and Sebestenes,
each number Twenty five; of Maidenhair, of Violets, and of Barley cleans'd,
each one Handful; of Damask-Prunes and Tamerinds, each six Drams; of Liquorish
half an Ounce; boil them according to Art, in five Quarts of Water, to the
Consumption of a third part; then strain them out hard: In part of the Liquor
dissolve of the Pulp of Cassia and Tamerinds, and of fresh Prunes, and of
Violet-Sugar, each six Ounces; in the other part of the Liquor dissolve two
Pounds of fine Sugar; Lastly, add an Ounce and an half of the Powder of Sena,
and two Drams of the Powder of Annise-seeds, for every Pound of the Electuary;
and so make an Electuary according to Art. It cools, and purges gently. An
Ounce, or an Ounce and and half may be taken at a time.

Cassidony:
See Stoechas.

Cassummuniar.
To give a Description of the Herb, its Place, its Growth, whether it bears any
Flower or Seed, is not in my power; having received no Account along with it
from my Brother, Factor to the Honorable East India Company. Only, thus much
is most certain; it is a Plant esteemed even by Princes themselves; some part of
what I have being taken out of the King of Golconda's Garden, one of the
greatest and wealthiest Princes in India. And the Priests, who are the
Brackmannes of the Pythagorean Sect of Philosophers, do many and great Cures
with it; for which they are much esteemed, not only by the Natives, but also by
Foreign Merchants that reside there; the English themselves preferring them
before their own Countrymen, when they labor under those Diseases that reign
in the East-Indians. They are very excellent Botanists, admirably skilled in
the Nature and Use of Plants; and having an extraordinary Variety of them, have
improved Galenical Physic to a very great height. I do not understand that
they are acquainted with any of the Chemical Ways, of separating the pure from
the impure Parts; nor are they acquainted with the use of Minerals: But as they
are nourished by the Product of the Earth, so they are cured by the Offspring
thereof: Not feeding upon any Animal killed for their use, fearing they should
eat some of their Ancestors, because they hold a Transmigration of Souls. This
Root, though it might serve to Aromatize their Diet, and is certainly a good
Stomachick, yet they use it only Medicinally; and that in so homely a Way, as
is becoming such plain and simple Men, unacquainted with the Confectioner's or
Apothecary's Art. They cut the Root transverse, or cross-ways; and having so
done, they dry it in the Sun with great Care; and when they have Occasion to
use it, they grind it betwixt two Stones, adding Water to it; after the manner
of Painters grinding their Colors: Being reduced hereby to the Consistence of
an Electuary, they administer two or three Drams of it at a time to their
Patients. As to its Qualities, it is moderately hot, and very astringent. It
consists of very fine Parts; wrapped up in, and tied to an Earthy Matter; and
may be reckoned amongst Aromata, or Spices. It exceedingly recruits the Animal
and Vital Spirits; and may well be imagined to be Aperitive. By the Experience
I have had of it, I find it admirably to agree with the Animal Spirits, and a
proper Remedy against their Irregularities. With Spirit of Wine I have drawn a
good Spirit from it, and with the remaining Faeces made a very good Extract;
and conceive, its Extract made with Fountain Water may be better than the
Powder in the Bloody Flux, for which it is an excellent Remedy. The Spirit is
good to mix with Cordials. It is a very good Medicine, outwardly used; and will
lay Scents better than any thing yet found out. It Is much commended by Doctor
John Peachie of Gloucester, (who wrote this Account of it) for Apoplexies,
Convulsions, Fits of the Mother, and the like. He used to foment the Head with
the Spirit, and to give inwardly the following Medicine: Take of Cassummuniar
powdered two Ounces, of the Conserves of the Flowers of Betony one Ounce; make
an Electuary according to Art, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Peony:
Let the Patient take the quantity of a Nutmeg thrice a Day, drinking upon it
four Ounces of the following Julap: Take of the Waters of the Flowers of the
Lime-tree, and of Black-berries, each half a Pint; of the Compound Spirit of
Lavender three Ounces, a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Peony; mingle them. He
says, many have been cured of Head-diseases by this Medicine. Mr. Marlow, in
King Street, near Guild Hall, an excellent Apothecary, and a curious Man,
showed me Cassummuniar, and confirmed the Use and Virtues abovementioned.

China.
It Is good for the French Pox, which some say, it cures, without observing a
strict Diet, in a short time, and with pleasure; wherefore it is much esteemed
by the Indians. Garsia wrote a whole Book of the Virtue and Use of this Root.
It Is most commonly used in Decoctions; and one or two Ounces is sufficient for
nine Pints of Water. It Is good for all Diseases that require Sweating. It Is
used in the Palsy, for Pains in the Joints, the Hip-Gout, the Gout, Scirrhous
and Edematous Tumors, and for the King's Evil. It strengthens the Stomach when
weak, eases inveterate Pains in the Head, does good for the Stone, and Ulcers
of the Bladder; cures the Jaundice, and Humoral and Windy Ruptures. It Is a
great Provocative to Venery. And Fallopius says, Men grow fat by the use of it.
The Turks, who love to have their Wives in good Case, diet them with a
Decoction of this Root. Take of the Roots of China three Ounces, Sarsaperilla
six Ounces, Saxifrage one Ounce, of Nephritick Wood two Ounces, of Hartshorn
and Ivory rasp'd, each half an Ounce; of White Sanders half an Ounce; of the
Roots of Parsley, Grass, Knee-holm, each one Ounce; of Liquorish two Ounces, of
Dates stoned number Six, of Caraways and Coriander-seeds, each three Drams;
infuse them in seven Quarts of Fountain Water, boil it according to Art, and
Aromatize it with Woody Cassia. This is used for the French Pox. Take of the
Roots of China two Ounces, of Sarsaperilla six Ounces, of all the Sanders, each
three Drams; of Saxifrage ten Drams; infuse them in four Quarts of
Fountain Water for twelve Hours, and then, adding of the Leaves of Agrimony two
Handfuls, of the Leaves of Speed-well three Handfuls, of Scabious one Handful,
of the Seeds of Sweet-Fennel and Caraways, each three Drams; of Raisins of the
Sun stoned six Ounces, boil it to the Consumption of the third part; strain the
Liquor, and use it for your ordinary Drink. This is much used in the King's
Evil. China grows plentifully in China, and in Malabar, and in many other
places.

Chiches, or Chich-pease, in Latin Cicer sativum.
Chich-pease are threefold, White, Red, and Black. The Ancients commonly fed
upon them, as do the Italians now at this Day. They eat them raw, as well as
boiled; but they are best boiled, and when they are green, as are Pease and
Beans, but they are windy. They provoke Venery; they cleanse, open, incide,
digest, provoke Urine, and lessen the Stone; but they hurt the Bladder when it
is ulcerated. They gently move the Belly. The Broth of them does good in the
Jaundice. A Decoction of them kills Worms, moves the Courses, expels the Child,
and breeds Milk. In Cataplasms they cure the Swellings under the Ears, called
Parotides, and Inflammations of the Testicles, and Malignant Ulcers. We most
commonly make use of them only in Difficulty of Urine: But Practitioners should
take care that they do not use them too often to those that have Ulcers in
those Parts. They are sown every where in Italy, Spain and France. Take of the
Root of Liquorish four Scruples, of Marshmallows, Grass and Rest-harrow, each
half an Ounce; of the Berries of Winter-Cherries, number Twenty, of Red
Chick-pease four Ounces, of Currants one Ounce, of the four greater Cold Seeds
one Scruple, of Barley two Handfuls; boil them in the Water of Winter-Cherries,
Rest-harrow, Strawberries, and Flowers of Beans, each one Pint and on half; to
the strained Liquor add four Ounces of the Syrup of Marshmallows. A Person
that was grievously afflicted with the Stone in the Bladder, was much relieved
by taking of this Decoction daily, for the space of seventeen Weeks.

Cinnamon, in Latin Cinnamomum.
The Diversity of the Nature of this Tree is wonderful; for, from the Bark of
the Root is distilled Camphir, and its Oil; from the Bark of the Trunk, Oil of
Cinnamon; from the Leaves' Oil of Cloves; from the Fruit, an Oil like the Oil
of Juniper, mixed with a little of Cinnamon and Cloves. Of these is boiled up a
fat, thick Oil, like Wax, fit to make Plasters, Ointments, and Candles: It Is
hard, and clear, and of a fragrant Smell. The Inhabitants use it in Ointments
to ease Pain, but they dare not make Candles of it; for none are permitted to
use Candles, besides the King of the Country. The Leaves of it smell more like
Cloves than Cinnamon. The Bark of the Root given in a Decoction, or the Powder
of it taken with Sugar and Honey, is good for a Cough. The Bark of the Twigs
used in a Decoction, is good for the Wind. The same given in Powder, with hot
Water, eases the Pain of the Belly, and stops a Flux arising from Cold. Our
People use it successfully, boiled in Milk, or Posset Drink, to stop a
Looseness. A Decoction of it in Red Wine stops an immoderate Flux of the
Courses. The Juice of the Leaves given with Sugar and Pepper, do good for Pains
of the Belly, and the Flatulent Matter of the Reins. The Powder of the Leaves,
with Sugar, are good for Giddiness; of the Head: As also are the Flowers, taken
with Sugar, in cold Water. The Oil which is drawn from the Bark of the Root
has many excellent Virtues: It Is very good in all Paralytick Diseases, being
used outwardly in time. It Is a present Remedy for the Gout, presently asswaging
the violent Pain of the Parts, as soon as they are anointed with it. It does
also good, taken inwardly. It Is also of excellent use, taken inwardly, for
curing an Asthma, and other Diseases of the Lungs. It Is also good to correct
the Malignity of Fevers. It forces Sweat; and is very proper to be used in
Gangrens, Mortifications, and Malignant Ulcers; for Pains of the Limbs, of the
Belly, and of the Eyes; and for Tumors of the Members, proceeding from Cold and
Phlegmatic Humors. It restores the Sense of Parts that are stupefied. It Is
good for Rheums. The Oil of the Bark of the Tree is good for Diseases of the
Stomach, and for the Gripes. The Water of Cinnamon is counted Cordial. The Oil
of the Leaves is good in the Cholick, and very proper in the Palsy. Cinnamon
is good for all Obstructions, and for Diseases of the Breast. Oil or Essence of
Cinnamon, and its Aetherial-water, is made in the following manner: Bruise four
Pounds of good Cinnamon, and infuse it in six Quarts of hot Water; leave it in
digestion in an Earthen Vessel, well stopped, two Days; pour the Infusion into a
large Copper Limbeck, and fitting a Receiver to it, and luting close the
Junctures with a wet Bladder, distill with a pretty good Fire three or four
Pints of the Liquor; then unlute the Limbeck, and pour into it by Inclination
the distilled Waters; you will find at bottom a little Oil, which you must pour
into a Viol, and stop it close; distill the Liquor as before; then returning the
Water into the Limbeck, take the Oil you find at the bottom of the Receiver,
and mix it with the first: Repeat this Cohobation, until there rises no more
Oil; then take away the Fire. Tincture of Cinnamon is made in the following
manner: Take what quantity of bruised Cinnamon you please, put it into a
Mattress, and pour upon it Spirit of Wine, one Fingure above it; stop your
Mattress close, and set it in Digestion in Horse-dung four or five Days; the
Spirit of Wine will be impregnated with the Tincture of Cinnamon, and become
red; separate it from the Cinnamon, and after it is filtrated, keep the
Tincture in a Viol well stopped. It Is an admirable Cardiack; it fortifies the
Stomach, and rejoices all the Vital Parts. It may be used like Cinnamon Water,
in a little smaller Dose. Cinnamon Water is made in the following manner: Take
of bruised Cinnamon a Pound and an half, Spanish Wine a Quart; infuse the
Cinnamon in the Wine twenty four Hours, then distill them in a Limbeck; draw off
three Pints of Strong-water, sweetened with Sugar, and keep it for use. It Is
good in a weak Stomach, and is Cordial. Syrup of Cinnamon of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of the best Cinnamon,
beaten a little, three Ounces; infuse it three Days in hot Fountain Water,
afterward distill it in B. M. take a Pint of this Water; of Clarified Sugar,
boiled over a gentle Fire, to the Consistence of Tablets, have a Pound: Make a
Syrup. The Cinnamon-tree and the Cassia-tree seem to be the same. The
Cinnamon-tree grows as commonly in the Island of Zeiland, in the Hedges and
Woods, as the Hazel-tree does in our Country; and the Inhabitants value it no
more; for they commonly make Fires of it, and cut it for any common use.

Common Cinque-foil, or Five-leav'd Grass, in Latin Pentaphyllum Vulgatissimum.
It Is Vulnerary, and Astringent. It stops Fluxes of the Belly, Bleeding at
Nose, and the Hemorrhoids. It Is good for Spitting of Blood, and a Cough. It Is
also commended for a Palsy, a Consumption, the Gout, and Jaundice. It Is also
reckoned good for the Stone, and Erosions of the Kidneys; for Ruptures and
Fevers. It Is used outwardly for the Eyes, when they are inflamed, the Juice of
it being dropped into them: And also for Looseness of the Teeth, and putrid Gums.
It cleanses also malignant Ulcers. The Astringent Virtue of it is most
remarkable, by means whereof it does what it does. One Dram of the Powder of
the Root, taken before the Fit, cures Agues. Spon. in his Book of Fevers and
Febrifuges, says, that Cinquefoil is a Plant somewhat bitter, and very
astringent; whereby it strengthens the Fibers of the Stomach, relaxed by a
Fever, and fixes and sweetens its Acid. Hippocrates used this Plant to cure
Fevers. But, without doubt, it was more effectual in Greece, where Hippocrates
lived, than here: For, most Plants have more Virtue in hot Countries, than in
cold; especially those that are somewhat Aromatic. It has also been found by
Experience, that the Roots of it cure Ulcers of the Mouth.

Citrons, in Latin Malus Citria.
Every part of the Citron, the outward and inward Bark, the Juice and Pulp, and
the Seeds, are of great use in Physic. The outward yellow Bark has a curious
Aromatic Smell, and bitter Taste. Being dried, it is very Cordial, and
Alexipharmick. It heats and corroborates a cold and windy Stomach. It discusses
Wind powerfully, concocting and digesting crude Humors that are contained in
the Stomach or Bowels. Being chewed in the Mouth, it cures a Stinking Breath,
promotes Concoction of the Meat, and is good for Melancholy. It Is much
commended for Hypochondriacal Diseases, for Vapors, Wind, the Palpitation of
the Heart, Obstructions and Weakness of the Bowels. The Powder of the outward
Bark of Oranges and Limons is reckoned good for the same. Being candied; it is
used for Second Courses: And mixed with Cordial Electuaries, it is used against
Contagion. It loosens the Belly; upon which Account an Electuary is made of it,
called the Solutive Electuary of Citron; good to evacuate Phlegmatic and Cold
Humors. It may be also safely given when Choler is mixed with Phlegm. The Pulp
or Juice, though it be not so acid as the Juice of Limons, yet* is it much more
cooling than that. It Is very proper in Burning and Pestilential Fevers, to
quench Thirst, to suppress too great a Fermentation of the Blood, to recreate
the Spirits, and quicken the Appetite. It Is also reckoned good for a Giddiness
in the Head. The Seeds are Cord^^l and Alexipharmick; are good for the Biting
of Scorpions, and other venomous Creatures. They strengthen the Heart, and
defend it from the Contagion of the Plague and Smallpox. They kill the Worms
of the Stomach and Bowels, provoke the Courses, and cause Abortion. They digest
crude and watery Humors, and dry them up both within and without. There is a
strange Story of two that were condemned to be destroyed by Serpents; and as
they were passing to Execution, by chance, a Person that had a Citron in his
Hand, gave it them to eat, and soon after they were flung to the Serpents, and
were much bit by them, but their Poison made no Impression upon them, and the
Men escaped with their Lives. Upon this, Enquiry was made what they had eat or
drunk? And a Citron being the only thing that had been given them, 'twas
ordered, one of them should eat a Citron the next Day, and that then they
should be exposed again to the Serpents: He that had eaten the Citron escaped,
as before; the other soon perished. And afterward it was found by many
Experiments, that Citron was good against Poison. The Solutive Electuary of
Citron, of the London-Dispensatory, is made in the following manner: Take of
Citron-peel candied, of Conserve of the Flowers of Violets and Bugloss, of the
Species of Diatragacanth frigid, and of Diagrydium* each half an Ounce; of
Turbith five Drams, of Ginger half a Dram, of the Leaves of Sena six Drams, of
the Seeds of Sweet-Fennel one Dram, of White Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, and
boiled up according to Art, ten Ounces; beat in a Brass-Mortar the Turbith and
Ginger, (being first cut small) the Sena, Fennel, and the Diagrydium must be
pounded apart, and must be mixed with a little of the Powder of Diatragacanth
made fresh; the Bark of the Citron must be pounded in a Marble-Mortar; then add
the Conserves, pulp'd through a fine Sieve, and boiled a little in the Sugar
dissolved; take it off the Fire, and when it is just warm put in the Powders,
and last of all the Diagrydium and the Diatragacanth; and of this Paste make
Tablets. Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, of the London-Dispensatory, is made in
the following manner: Take of the Juice of Citrons strained one Pint, let it
stand till it is clear; add to it of White Sugar clarified, and boiled to the
Consistence of Tablets, two Pounds; make a Syrup by boiling of it just up, and
no more. Syrup of the Bark of Citrons is made in the following manner: Take of
the yellow Peel of Citrons, ripe and fresh, five Ounces; of the Grains of
Kerms, or of their Juice, two Drams, of Fountain Water three Pints; infuse them
all Night in B. M. strain it, add two Pounds and an half of White Sugar, and
boil it to a Syrup, according to Art, in B. M. Half of it must be without Musk;
the other half must be Aromatiz'd with three Grains of Musk, tied up in a Rag.

Citruls, in Latin Citrullus.
The Fruit of it is cold and moist, and very fit to quench the Thirst;
wherefore the Italians refresh themselves in Summertime with the Pulp of it.
It Is good in Burning Fevers, and for a dry Tongue. The Seed of it is one of the
Greater Cold Seeds.

Cloves, in Latin Caryophyllus Aromaticus.
Cloves heat and dry. The Indians, two Days before they sell their Cloves,
place a large Vessel of Water in the Room where the Cloves are; and it all soon
evaporates, and goes into the Cloves; and so the weight of them is much
increased. Cloves perfume the Breath; for which Reason the Indian Women
frequently chew them, and such like things. They are said to clear the Sight,
and to take off Clouds from the Eyes. They strengthen the Stomach, and take off
Vomiting and Nauseousness. They provoke Venery, and are good for all cold
Diseases of the Brain; as, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Palsy, or the like. They
are used to correct the Air, by being burnt or eaten. But the chief use of them
is in the Kitchen, for Sauces, and the like. They are also used to perfume
Clothes, an Orange being stuck full of them, and put into the Chest to the
Clothes. Some put them into Wine or Beer, and they impart to it a pleasant
Smell and Taste. They are put into a Bag, or sowed up in a Cloth, and worn upon
the Stomach, to stop Vomiting, and to take off Pains of the Stomach, proceeding
from a cold Cause. Some powder their Heads with the Powder of them, to take off
Dullness and Pains of the Head. Cloves candied, taste very pleasantly, and are
proper for a cold Stomach. Oil of Cloves by Distillation is good for inward and
outward use. Oil of Cloves, per descensum, is made in the following manner.
Take several large Drinking-glasses, cover them with a Linen Cloth, and tie it
round each of them, leaving a Cavity in each Cloth, to put the powdered Cloves
into; set a small Earthen Cup upon each Glass of these Cloves, let it stop so
^^^ly, that it may suffer no Air to enter between its Brim and that of the
Glass; fill the Cups with hot Ashes, to warm the Cloves, and distill down to the
bottom of the Glasses first a little Phlegm and Spirit, and after that a clear
and white Oil; continue the Fire, until there falls no more; separate the Oil
in a Tunnel lined with a Cornet of Brown Paper, and keep it in a Viol well
stopped. Some Drops of it are, with Cotton, put into aching Teeth. It Is likewise
good in Malignant Fevers, and the Plague. The Dose is two or three Drops in
Balm-water, or some appropriate Liquor. You must mix it with a little
Sugar Candy, or a little Yolk of an Egg, before you drop it into the Water,
otherwise it will not dissolve in the Water. I have given you this Preparation,
to serve upon an Emergency, when you want, in haste, the Oil of Cloves. You
must only use hot Ashes to warm the Cloves, if you desire White Oil; for, if
you give a greater Heat, the Oil turns red; and besides, a great part of it
will be lost. You must also take care to lift up the Cup from time to time, to
stir about the Powder. Some do dissolve Opium in Oil of Cloves, and use this
Dissolution for the Toothache; they put one Drop of it into the aching Tooth
and it soon takes off the Pain. The Spirit of Cloves, which is made at the same
time the Oil is made, is a good Stomachick: It helps Concoction, comforts the
Heart, and increases Seed. The Dose is, from six Drops to twenty, in some
convenient Liquor. Cloves grow spontaneously in the Moloca-Islands. Those that
are good are black, solid and weighty, smell well, are hard to break, and bite
the Tongue much; and when they are broken their Liquor sweats out. They may be
kept five Years in a temperate place.

Coccus Baphica.
See Kermes.

Cockle, in Latin Pseudomelanthium.
It grows every where amongst Corn and Flowers, in June and July. It cures the
Itch, and heals Wounds ann Fistula's, and stops Blood. But the Virtues of it
are doubted by some: Yet Sennertus commends it in Stopping of Bleeding.

Coco-Nut-tree, in Latin Palma Coccifera.
A Liquor is drawn from this Tree, called Suri, which intoxicates like Wine* It
has a pleasant, sweet Taste. An hot Water, or Spirit, is drawn from it by
Distillation. Sugar also, and Vinegar is made of it. Fine polished Cups, tip'd
with Silver, are made of the Bark of it. The Liquor, or Wine, is very good for
Consumptions, and excellent for Diseases of the Urine and Reins. A Milk is
drawn from the Kernels beat and pressed, without the help of Fire, which is
very good for killing Worms, eight Ounces of it being taken in a Morning, with
a little Salt. The Liquor contained in the Kernel extinguishes Thirst, cures
Fevers, clenses the Eyes and the Skin, purifies the Blood, purges the Stomach
and Urinary Passages, relieves the Breast, tastes pleasantly, and yields a
great Nourishment. It Is said of it, that it is Meat, Drink and Cloth. Chocolet
is made of it. It grows in the Spanish West Indies, and last an hundred Years.

Coculus Indus.
It Is uncertain where these Berries grow; but the chief use of them is for
catching Fish, a Paste being made for them of White Flower and the Powder of
the Berries: For the Fish, by eating of this Paste, become giddy and stupid,
and so are easily taken: But it is questionable whether Fish so taken may be
safely eaten; perhaps if they are gutted as soon as they are taken, and boiled,
they may be eaten without hurt. A Person who went to buy Cubebs of an
Apothecary, had these Berries delivered to him by a Mistake; and when he had
taken not above four of them, he was presently seized with a Vomiting, the
Hiccups, and Faintness: But a Vomit being presently given him, he recovered
within an Hour.

Coffee, in Latin Caova.
The Decoction of it strengthens a cold Stomach, helps Concoction, and opens
Obstructions of the Bowels, and is good for cold Tumors of the Liver and
Spleen. It heats the Womb, and frees it from Obstructions: Upon which Account,
the Egyptian and Arabian Women use it frequently. But it is most taken notice
of for removing Drowsiness. But tho it be so commonly used, and so very proper
and effectual in some Cases; yet in other Cases perhaps it may be hurtful, or,
at least, not so beneficial: For it is commonly observed, that Coffee-drinkers
are often very lean, and become Paralitick, and impotent as to Venery. But,
indeed, in most Diseases of the Head, as, for Giddiness, Headaches,
Lethargies, Catarrhs, and the like, Coffee is often used with good Success by
those that are of a gross Habit of Body, and of a cold Constitution, and whose
Blood is watery, their Brains moist, and their Animal Spirits dull; for, being
taken daily, it wonderfully clears the Spirits, and dissipates those Clouds of
all the Functions. But on the contrary, they who are of a thin Habit of Body,
and an hot and melancholy Constitution, ought, by all means, to forbear Coffee.
And besides, those that have but weak Spirits, or are subject to a Trembling,
or Numness of the Limbs, ought not to drink Coffee, though they are afflicted
with the Headache: Nor ought they who are subject to the Palpitation of the
Heart. It Is reckoned good in a Scorbutic Gout, and for the Gravel. The
Goodness of Coffee chiefly depends on the exact roasting of it. Bernier says,
there were only two Men that knew how to roast them right in Grand Cayro. For
few know the manner and degree of Torrifaction; for if they are never so little
over or under-roasted, they are spoiled. Coffee is adulterated with burnt
Crusts of Bread, roasted Beans* and the like. It Is commonly boiled in Copper or
Tin-Pots, but Ear^hen are best for it, for it is probable that Metals too often
impart something of their Substance to the Liquor. It has been observed that,
upon Distillation, a Pound of good clean Coffee, the Vessels being well luted,
has yielded four Ounces and an half of Phlegm, with a little Volatile Spirit,
mixed with Salt; and two Ounces and five Drams of a thick, black Oil, which
being rectified, became yellow; the Caput mortuum weighed about four Ounces; so
that about a fourth part evaporated, notwithstanding the Vessels were so
closely cemented. Upon which, we may reasonably conjecture, that Coffee
contains many Particles that are Volatile and Penetrative; whereby it is
probable it keeps Men waking. Many that have been very subject to Nephritick
Pains have been cured by taking Coffee often. Women use it to cleanse the
Teeth. One that was seized with a violent Cholera, and painful Convulsions,
from an Internal Cause, was cured in a short time, by taking a great quantity
of Coffee; which was retained in the Stomach, when the Tincture of Opium,
Mint-water, and the like, were vomited up. This little Tree grows only in that
part of Arabia Foelix which is situated betwixt the Tropicks: And the Arabians
take such Care that it should not be planted any where else, that they destroy
the Vegetative Virtue of the Seed, either by boiling or burning it, before they
will part with it out of their Hands. And they are much in the right; for they
get infinite Treasure by this one Commodity: Upon which Account, at least, it
may be called Arabia Foelix. No one can imagine how many Thousand Bushels of it
are exported yearly. It Is frequently used through all the Provinces of the
Turkish Empire. Vestingius says, there are some Thousands of Coffee-houses in
Grand Cayre. And it is as commonly used in Africa and Barbery, and lately in
Europe. Certainly in England the King has a great Revenue by it, for I believe
there may be now as many Coffee-houses in London as in Grand Cayre. Besides, in
other Parts of England there is scarce a Town of Note, but has one or more
Coffee-houses in it.

Coloquintida, in Latin Colocynthis.
It Is a violent Medicine: It purges thick and glutinous Phlegm, and other
Humors, from the remotest parts of the Body; as, from the Head, Nerves,
Joints, and the like; for which reason it is commended, and is used
successfully for inveterate Headaches, an Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Vertigo,
Asthma, Cough, cold Diseases of the Joints, Flatulent Cholicks, a Dropsy, and
the like. But before it is used it ought to be well powdered, and fat and
Lubricating things ought to be mixed with it, to attemperate the Acrimony of
it. It Is an Ingredient of the Pill Cochiae majores and minores, and of the Pill
Rudii, of the Pill Eduobus, and of the Fetid Pill, and of the Pill of
Hermodactils, and of some others. The Troches of Alhandel are made of it, in
the following manner: Take of the Pulp of Coloquintida that is white and
smooth, and freed from the Seeds, and cut small, and well rubbed with Oil of
Sweet Almonds, and at two Days end finely powdered, ten Ounces; of the Gums
Arabeck, Tragacanth and Bdellium, each six Drams; infuse the Gums for three or
four Days, in a sufficient quantity of Rose Water, till they are quite melted;
and then with the said Pulp, and part of the Musilage of the Gums* make
Troches, which must be dried in the Shade, and made up again with the rest of
the Musilage.

Contrayerva, in Latin Drakena radix.
The Root of it is Alexipharmick. The Powder of it is an excellent Remedy
against all Poisons, except Sublimate: It expels Worms, and cures Agues.
Clusius gave it the Name of Drakena, because Sir Francis Drake gave it him.
Take of the Powder of the Roots of Contrayerna, Virginian-Snakeweed, and
Butter-bur, each one Dram; of Cochinelle, and Saffron, each half a Dram; mingle
them, and make a Powder. The Dose is half a Dram, in a convenient Vehicle. This
is a sweating Medicine, and is proper to expel Malignity.

Coral, in Latin Corallium.
It Is of a stony, dense Substance, and looks very fine when it is polished.
It Is commonly believed that it is soft when it is under Water, but that is a
vulgar Error; for those who fish for it say, that it is as hard and stony under
Water as it is above, only it is covered with a soft, Mossy Bark. It has an
astringent Virtue, especially when it is burnt, and reduced to a Powder. It
stops all Fluxes of the Belly, and of the Womb, and the Running of the Reins;
but whether it comforts the Heart, or prevents Children's Convulsions, as it is
said, is uncertain. It Is used outwardly for Ulcers, which it incarns. It Is also
used to clear the Sight. Nurses in England hang it about Children's Necks, to
promote Cutting of the Teeth; for, by reason it is soft and cold, Children love
to have their Gums rubbed with it; and so the Eruption of the Teeth is rendered
more easy: But we do not believe it does conduce any thing, by an occult
Quality, to the easy Breeding or Cutting of the Teeth. Tincture of Coral is
much commended in Pestilential Fevers. Coral is prepared by grinding it on a
Marble, to a fine Powder; and this is called prepared Coral. It Is used for the
Bloody Flux, a Looseness, the Flux of the Hemorrhoids, and the Courses, and for
all other Distempers that are occasioned by an Acrimony of Humors, this being
an Alcali that destroys it. The Dose is from ten Grains to a Dram, in
Knot-grass-water, or some other proper Liquor. Dissolution of Coral is made in
the following manner: Take what quantity you please of Coral, ground fine on a
Marble, put it into a large Mattress, and pour upon it as much distilled Vinegar
as will rise the breadth of four Fingers above the Matter; there will happen a
great Effervescency, which being over, set it in Digestion in warm Sand for two
Days, stirring the Mattress from time to time; leave the Coral to settle at
bottom, and decant the clear Liquor into a Bottle: Pour again so much distilled
Vinegar on the Remainder as before, and leave it two Days in Digestion;
separate the clear Liquor, and continue to add more distilled Vinegar, and to
draw off the Impregnation, until all the Coral is in a manner dissolved; then
mix your Dissolutions, and pour them into a Glass-Cucurbite, or else into an
Earthen one; evapotate in Sand two thirds of the Liquor, or till there appears
upon it a very fine Skin; filtrate this Impregnation, and keep it, in order to
make the Salt and Majestery, as I shall show by and by. The Dissolution may be
given for the same Purposes as the Salt. The Dose is, from ten to twenty Drops,
in some proper Liquor. Red Coral is generally used, because it is thought to
have more Virtue than the rest. Majestery of Coral is made in the following
manner: Take what quantity you please of the Impregnation of Coral, made with
distilled Vinegar; pour it into a Viol, or Mattress, and drop into it the Liquor
of the Salt of Tartar, made per Deliquium; a Curd will appear, which will
precipitate to the bottom in a very white Powder; decant the clear Liquor, and
wash your Powder five or six times with Water, dry it: It is that which is
called the Majestery of Coral. Great Virtues are attributed to it: It fortifies
the Heart, resists Poison, stops the Bloody Flux, and all other Hemorrhagies.
The Dose is, from ten to thirty Grains, in some proper Liquor. Salt of Coral is
made in the following manner: Take what quantity you please of the Dissolution
of Coral, made of distilled Vinegar, pour it into a Glass-Cucurbite, or Earthen
Pan, and evaporate in Sand all the Moisture; there will remain at hottom a Salt
of Coral; keep it in a Viol well stopped. It Is given for the same Reason as the
Majestery is: The Dose of it is less, being from five to fifteen Grains. Simple
Syrup of Coral of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take
of Red Coral four Ounces, dissolve it with the Heat of a Bath, in a Pint of the
Juice of Barberries clarified; it must be put into a Mattress, well stopped; and
having digested it three or four Days, pour off that which is dissolved, and
pour on more Juice, as before; and so proceed, till all the Coral is dissolved;
add a Pound and an half of Sugar to one Pint of this Juice, and boil it gently
to a Syrup in B. M. Compound Syrup of Coral is made in the following manner:
Take of Red Coral, ground fine upon a Porphyry-stone, with a little Rose Water,
six Ounces; of the clear Juice of Limons, freed from its Phlegm in B. M. sixteen
Ounces; of the clear Juice of Barberries eight Ounces, of sharp White Wind
Vinegar, and of clear Juice of Wood Sorrel, each six Ounces; mingle them, and
put them into a Viol, stopped close with a Cork and a Bladder, shaking it daily
till it has digested eight Days in a Bath, or Horse-dung; then filtrate, and
take of it a Pint and an half, and of the Juice of Quinces half a Pint, of
Sugar of Roses twelve Ounces; mingle them, make a Syrup according to Art, in a
Bath, adding of Syrup of Gillyflowers sixteen Ounces; keep it for use. Syrup of
Coral is very cooling: It Is good in Fevers, for Fluxes, the Running of the
Reins, the Whites in Women, and for Spitting of Blood. Coral grows plentifully
in Spain and Catalonia; sometimes the Branches of it are so large, as to weigh
three or four Pounds.

Coral-tree, in Latin Arbor Corallii.
Sheaths for Swords and Knives are made of the Root of it. The Leaves powdered,
and boiled to the thickness of an Ointment, cure Venerial Buboes, and assuage
the Pain of the Bones. Rubbed and applied to the Temples, they ease the
Headache, and cure Ulcers.

The Cork-tree, in Latin Suber.
The Bark of it rubbed in hot Water, stops a Flux of Blood: The Ashes of it do
the same. But it is chiefly used to Anchors for Ships, and for
Fishing-Tackling, and to stop Bottles, In some part of Spain they make Tiles of
it, to cover their Houses. It grows in Spain, and in some other Places.

Costus.
It heats much, forces Urine and the Courses, and is good for Diseases of the
Womb. Half an Ounce of it taken in a proper Liquor, is good for the Biting of
Vipers. It stimulates Venery, and expels broad Worms, by reason of the
Bitterness that is in it.

Cotton, in Latin Gossipium.
It Is commonly used to line Clothes, to keep out the Cold: And there is no sort
of Flax so soft and white as it is. As to its use in Physic; being burnt it
stops Bleeding, especially Wounds. The Marrow of the Seed wonderfully relieves
those that are subject to Coughs, and Difficulty of Breathing. It increases
Seed, and is a Provocative to Venery. The Oil of the Pith of the Seed takes off
Spots from the Skin. The Down fired, and put under the Nostrils, prevents
Mother-fits. It grows in the Island of Crete, betwixt Jerusalem and Damascus;
where there are whole Fields Sown with it.

Couhage, or Cow-itch, in Latin Phaseolus Zurratensis.
The Bristles of the Cods occasion violent Itching.

Indian Cress, in Latin Nasturtium Indicum.
The Flowers of it smell and look very pleasantly in Sallets. It Is good for a
weak and cold Stomach, and for Wind. It grows in Peru.

Crown-Imperial, in Latin Corona Imperialis.
It came from Constantinople, but it grows now frequently in our Gardens here
in England, and flowers in April, and sometimes in March, if that Season of the
Year be warmer than ordinary. The Turks use the Drops in the Flower to make
them vomit: And some use them to hasten Delivery.

Cumin, in Latin Cuminum.
The Seed of it resolves and discusses Wind; and therefore is good in the
Cholick, for a Timpany* and a Vertigo. Taken in Sweet Wine, it relieves those
that are afflicted with a Difficulty and Heat of Urine. Boiled with Figs, in
Wine, it cures a Cough, and cleanses the Breast. It Is conveniently baked with
Bread, for it helps Concoction, and dissipates Wind. But the frequent use of
it, in a large quantity, renders the Countenance pale. It cures a Stinking
Breath. The Chemical Oil of it is excellent for Wind, and Uterine Diseases. An
Empirick had mighty Success by pouring some Drops of it upon a Toast, and
applying it to the Navel. It Is sown in abundance in the Island of Melita. The
Plaster of Cumin of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner:
Take of the Seeds of Cumin, of Lawrel-berries, and Yellow Wax, each one Pound;
of Rosin of the Pine two Pounds, of common Rosin two Pounds, of Oil of Dill
half a Pound; mingle them, and make a Plaster. It Is good for Windy Ruptures,
and the like.

Cubebs, in Latin Cubebae.
Cubebs are like Pepper, and sometimes a little larger. They heat and dry. They
strengthen the Stomach when it is oppressed with Wind or Phlegm. They purge the
Breast, by carrying off clammy and gross Humors. They relieve the Spleen, and
expel Wind, and cure cold Diseases of the Womb. Being chewed with Mastick
often, they strengthen the Brain, and draw Phlegm from the Head. Being infused
in Wine, they provoke Venery, and heat the Stomach; they cleanse the Urinary
Passages, and expel Gravel from the Reins and Bladder. They are an Ingredient
in the Compound Spirit and Water of Wormwood of the London-Dispensatory.

Sweet Cyperus, in Latin Cyperus longus.
The Root of it is Stomachick and Uterine. It Is chiefly used in provoking Urine
and the Courses. It takes off Crudities of the Stomach, and cures the Dropsy
at the Beginning, and the Cholick; and cures a Stinking Breath, being chewed in
the Mouth. Being bruised, and boiled, or infused in Oil, and applied to the
Reins, it expels Gravel, and provokes Urine. If the Roots are powdered, and
mixed with Honey and Sugar and a little Wine, and boiled together, and then cut
into Slices, and infused in Broth, they taste like Candied Ginger. The Twigs
and Roots dried in the Sun, and sprinkled with Vinegar, and beat to pieces,
perfume Clothes. The Spanish and Italian Women use the Roots of it so prepared,
for Perfumes. One Dram of the Powder of the Root, with a Spike of Lavender,
hastens Delivery, and expels the Secundine. Take of the Roots of Elecampane.
Sweet Smelling Flag, and Cyperus, each half an Ounce; of the Leaves of Mint,
Sage, Marjoram, Calamint, and Wormwood, each half an Handful; of Cyperus-nuts,
Myrtles, Galls and Balaustians, each one Dram; of Red Roses one Pugil; boil
them in equal parts of Smith's Water and Red Wine, to a Quart; in the strained
Liquor dissolve one Ounce of Salt and Alum; foment the Region of the Pubis and
Perinaeum hot, Morning and Evening. This is commended for an Incontinence of
Urine.

D.
DAte-tree, in Latin Dactylus.
It Is astringent, and is used for Fluxes of the Belly, and the Whites. It stops
Bleeding, and cures Wounds. The Fresh are more astringent than the Dry, but
they occasion the Headache; and if many of them are eaten they intoxicate when
they are dry. They stop Spitting of Blood, and are good for the Bloody Flux. A
Decoction of them is a very astringent Gargarism. Boiled in Wine, they take off
Proud Flesh, and Cicatris'd Ulcers. A Decoction of it makes the Hair black. And
being taken inwardly, it cures Diseases of the Reins and Bladder. When they are
ripe they are good for an Hoarsness and Coughs, Difficulty of Breathing, a
Pleurisy, and a Peripneumonia. They are an Ingredient of the Pectoral
Decoction of the London-Dispensatory. Take of Dates cleansed number Ten, of
Raisins of the Sun three Ounces; boil them in Oxycrate, afterward beat them,
and add, of Camomile-flowers, and of the Flowers of Melilot and Red Roses, each
one Pugil; of Spikenard and Camel's-Hay, each one Dram; of the Seed of Smallage
and Parsley, each half a Dram; of Endive and Purslain, each one Dram and an
half; of the Oil of Wormwood and Roses, each one Ounce; of Barly-meal two
Ounces; make a Pultis. This is used for Inflammations and Ulcers of the Liver.

Dittany of Crete, in Latin Dictamnus Creticus.
It has all the Virtues that Pennyroyal has, but it is much more effectual;
for it expels a dead Child, not only by taking of it inwardly, but also by
outward Application, and by Fume. It Is said, that the Goats in Crete, when they
are wounded by Darts, extract them, and so are cured by feeding on it. It has,
moreover, a Purgative Quality. Being applied to the Soles of the Feet, or any
other Part of the Body, it draws out Thorns. It also eases the Pain of the
Spleen. The Root of it tastes hot, and hastens Delivery. And so great is the
Virtue of this Herb, that the Smell of it drives away Venomous Creatures, and
kills them if they but touch it: But this seems improbable. The Juice of it
applied to Wounds made by a Sword, or by the Biting of Venomous Creatures, is a
present Remedy, if, at the same time it be also taken inwardly. Hippocrates
counts it the best Remedy to expel the Secundine, and a False Conception. Being
taken in Wine it provokes the Courses, and hastens Delivery so powerfully, that
it ought not to be kept in the Chamber, or near where Big-belly'd Women are. A
Woman that was in a desperate Condition by reason of a dead Child, was soon
delivered by taking the Powder of the Leaves of this Herb. Take of Dittany of
Crete one Dram, of Saf^ron one Scruple, of Gromwel. Annise-seed, and Misleto of
the Oak, each three Drams; beat them, and infuse them twenty four Hours, and
then boil them a little in good White Wind: Give four Ounces of this Decoction
at a time. This is much commended by Quercetan, for a Suppression of the
Courses.

Dragon's-blood, in Latin Sanguis Draconis.
It Is a Gum, or Rosin, of a deep red Color. Being held to the Fire, it soon
melts: And if it be cast upon the Fire, it flames. If it be rubbed upon any
thing, it makes it red; but it mixes difficulty with Oil, and Water. It Is of an
astringent Virtue, and is frequently used in the Bloody Flux, and for other
Fluxes; for Spitting of Blood, and to settle the Teeth when they are loose.
Goldsmiths and Jewellers make use of it for Foils for their Precious Stones
and Jewels: And Glasiers paint Glass red with it. Take of the Water of
Orange-flowers* of Plantain, and of Roses, each one Ounce; of Syrup of Coral,
or, for want of it, of dried Roses, one Ounce; of Sal Prunella one Dram, of
Dragon's-blood half a Scruple; make a Potion. This is used for an immoderate
Flux of the Child-bed-Purgations. Take of Amber and Mastich, two Drams; of
Dragon's-blood, Lapis Haematitis, and Red Coral, each one Dram; of Balaustians,
and the Seeds of Plantane, of Crocus Matis Astringent one Ounce; powder them
all, and with a sufficient quantity of Peruvian Balsam, and Syrup of Quinces,
make a Mass for Pills. The Dose is half a Dram, or a Dram, Morning, and
Evening. These Pills are used for the Virulent Running of the Reins: But they
must be given only at the Declination of it, when there only appears a little,
thin, waterish Humor, which glues the Entrance of the Vrethra; for, if you
give them sooner, you may stifle the Matter, and so cause an Hernia Humoralis:
if, after the Gonorrhaea be cured, you suspect you have not enough secured the
Patient from the Malignity, you must purge him. Dragon's-blood comes from one
of the Canary-Islands, called Portus Sanctus, near the Madera's.

E.
EBony, in Latin Ebenus.
The Wood is as black as Pitch, and as smooth as polished Ivory. It Is good for
the Diseases of the Eyes. Many sorts of things are made of it; as, Cases,
Chests, Combs, Frames for Pictures and Looking-glasses, and the like. An
English Man that was frequently seized with Flatulent Convulsions, was cured by
using a Decoction of Ebony for the space of forty Days; whereby he did sweat
much.

White Ellebore, or Hellebore, in Latin Helleborus albus.
The Root of White Hellebore, which is only in use in Physic, purges very
violently upward and downward; yet it may be used, says Tragus, being infused
twenty four Hours in Wine or Oxymel, and afterward dried: Half a Dram of it,
so prepared, may be given in Wine to Mad and Melancholy People. But either of
the Hellebores, says Gesn^r, may be used inoffensively, being boiled to a Syrup
with Honey and Vinegar; and are very useful for many Phlegmatic Diseases,
especially of the Breast and Head; as, an Asthma, Difficulty of Breathing, and
the Falling Sickness. They wonderfully purge the Belly, the Urine, and all the
Passages. In the Use of White Hellebore two Things are chiefly to be minded:
First, That the Diseases are very obstinate: And Secondly, That the Patient
has sufficient Strength to bear the Operation. Wherefore the Root ought not to
be given to Old Men, Women, or Children, or to such as are weakly, and costive
in the Body: And the Hellebore ought to be well prepared. The old Way of giving
of it was, with Horseradish, which they used three Ways; for, either they
stuck the Roots into Horseradish, and continued them in it twenty four Hours;
and afterward, the Roots being taken out, they gave the Horseradish: Or they
infused the Horseradish, stuck with the Roots, in Oxymel, in B. M. and gave
only the Oxymel: Or, they left the Horseradish so prepared all Night, and in
the Morning infused it in Oxymel, having first cast away the Hellebore; and
then they gave the Oxymel. But Parkinson says, the best Way of preparing it is,
to infuse it in the Juice of Quinces; or to roast it under Ashes, in a Quince.
If, upon taking Hellebore, there is danger of Suffocation, the eating of
Quinces, or the taking the Juice or Syrup of it, is a present Remedy. The Root
boiled in Vinegar, and retained a while in the Mouth, takes off the Pain of the
Teeth. A Decoction of it made in Lee kills Lice, aad cleanses the Head from
Scurf, it being washed with it: And mixed with some Ointment, it does the same,
and cures the Itch, and other Vices of the Skin. Made up into a Paste, it kills
several Animals; as, Moles, Mice, Weaslles, Birds, and the like. The Powder of
it blown up into the Nostrils, occasions Sneezing; wherefore it is called in
English Sneez-wort. Parkinson says, the Spaniards make a Poison of the Juice of
the Root, being fermented in an Earthen Pot; wherewith they anoint their
Arrows, that the Wounds inflicted by them may be rendered incurable. It Is very
strange that this Poison taken into the Body should not be deadly, and yet that
the Wound touched with it should be so. But the same may be said of the Poison
of Vipers; which being taken inwardly, occasions no deadly Symptoms; but being
mixed with the Blood* through the Orifice of a Wound, or Puncture, soon kills,
unless the Party is immediately relieved by proper Remedies. To conclude, both
Hellebores were formerly used for Melancholy and Mad People, and now they are
only used in great Diseases; as, for the Falling Sickness, Giddiness, Madness,
Dropsy, Hip Gout, Convulsions, and the like. The Extract of Hellebore of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of the Roots of White
Hellebore cut one Pound, of Fountain Water six Quarts; infuse them three Days,
then boil it half away, and press it out strongly; to the strained Liquor add
three Pounds of Honey, and boil it to the Consistence of Honey, and keep it in a
Glass for use. It grows in hilly and rough Grounds, not only in Greece, and
Italy, and other hot Countries, but also in Germany.

True Black Ellebore, or Hellebore, in Latin Helleborus niger.
It purges strongly melancholy Humors, and therefore consequently is a good
Medicine for all those Diseases which take their Rise from thence; as, Madness,
Hypochondriacal Passion, and Elephantiasis, Herpes, Cancers, Giddiness,
Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, and the Itch. But it is to be noted, that it ought
to be given only to strong People. There is less danger in the Decoction of it.
It Is corrected with Mastich, Cinnamon, Annise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, and the
like. Some say, that Black Hellebore, rightly prepared, is a very innocent
Medicine; and that it may be given to Women and Children, and to weakly People.
The Dose of it, in substance, is, from fifteen Grains to half a Dram, or two
Scruples: Those that are very strong may take a Dram. It Is given in Infusion,
or Decoction, from a Dram to two Drams. When it is taken in substance, the form
of it is a Powder; as, Take of Black Hellebore two Scruples; of Ginger,
Mastich, Red Roses, Cinnamon, and Annise-seeds, each four Grains; mingle them
in Broth: Children may take a Scruple. It Is also made up into Pills, with some
convenient Syrup. The Virtue of the Root is wholly in the Fibers, and the Bark.
It Is best corrected with Cloves. Hartman commends, for an immoderate Flux of
the Courses, a Girdle made with the fresh Leaves of Black Hellebore, and worn
about the Loins. Take of Black Hellebore two Scruples, infuse them in a
sufficient quantity of Rose-Vinegar, or in Whey, for twenty four Hours, then
dry it, and reduce it to a Powder, and add to it of Annise-seeds and Cinnamon,
each half a Scruple; mingle them, and make a Powder. This is commended by
Margravius, as a fit Purge for melancholy People.

Euphorbium.
It Is a concreted Juice, that is very acrid. You must choose that which is pure,
yellow, and acrid; which being just touched by the Tongue, heats the Mouth a
long while after; but it grows milder by Time; and therefore, when it is fresh,
it ought to be used with great Caution. It wonderfully purges Watery Humors
from the whole Body: But it is a churlish Medicine; for, besides the malignant
Propriety of its Substance, it has an inflaming Faculty. Take of Euphorbium
dissolved in Vinegar, and thickened again, eight Grains; of the Seeds of
Purslain fifteen Grains: Make Pills with Rose-Vinegar. Or, Take of Euphorbium
infused in Oil of Almonds for the space of a Night, and afterward roasted
under Ashes, in a Citron, ten Grains; of the Seeds of Lettice one Scruple: Make
Pills with the Juice of Citron. Or, Take of Euphorbium prepared four Grains, of
Cassia fresh drawn half an Ounce; with Sugar make a Bolus. These Preparations
of Euphorbium, Maggravius reckons up amongst his Flegmagoges. But Hoffmannus is
of the Opinion, that Euphorbium ought not to be taken inwardly. It Is much used
for the Caries of the Bones, and for Wounds: See our Wiseman, and Fabricius
Hildanus. But Care must be taken that it be not sprinkled upon Ulcers of the
Jaws, Nostrils, Palate and Tongue; or upon those Places where Tendons or Nerves
are exposed naked; lest by velicating and biting them, it should occasion
dangerous Symptoms.

F.
FIstich, or Pistachionuts, in Latin Nux Pistachia.
They are very grateful to the Stomach, whether they are eaten, or drunk in
Wine. They do good for the Biting of Creeping Beasts. They are bitterish. They
open Obstructions, especially of the Liver; and also of the Breast and Lungs.
They are reckoned very Nutritive, and Provocatives to Venery; for which Reason
they are frequently used, with other Restauratives, by the Spanish, Italian and
French Physicians: And they so much depend upon them, that they scarce make any
strengthening Medicine without them. Oil of Pistachio-nuts eases inward Pains
that proceed from Viscid Phlegm and Wind. It Is also useful in Convulsions, and
for the Palsy.

Fraxinella.
The Root, which, in a manner, is only used, is Cardiack, and Alexipharmick.
It Is a good Preservative against the Plague, taken any way; and is reckoned
good against Poison, and the Biting of Venomous Creatures. It kills Worms, a
Dram of it being taken at a time. It Is used in cold Diseases of the Womb, and
to force the Courses and Urine. It hastens Delivery, expels the Secundine, and
a dead Child, two Drams of it being taken in Wine. It Is also good for the
Gripes, and Gravel. It Is also mixed with Vulnerary Potions; and is used in the
Falling Sickness, and for Diseases of the Head. The Roman Women make a
Cosmetick of the distilled Water; and they also use it for Inflammations of the
Eyes. The Cods and Flowers being touched, occasion Itching; and in hot
Countries, burn the Skin. Take of the Roots of Fraxinella, Bistort, Tormentil,
Master-wort, Gentian, Carline-Thistle, of both the Birth-worts, of
Pentaphyllum, Zedoary, of the Greater Valerian, Contrayerva, Angelica,
Elecampane, Virginian Snake-weed, of the Leaves of Carduus Benedictus,
Scabious, Meadowsweet, Rue, Savin, Pennyroyal, Scordium, St. John's wort, of
the Bark of Citron, Oranges, Cinnamon, of the Berries of Laurel, Juniper, of
the Flesh of Toads, each two Ounces; of Viper's Flesh four Ounces, of the best
Saffron half an Ounce; make of all a Powder; to which add, of the Extract of
Juniper Berries made in White Wind, and evaporated to the Consistence of Honey,
a sufficient quantity to make a Confection; to which add Oil of Rue, Amber,
Cloves, Juniper, mixed with Sugar, each two Scruples; mingle them all according
to Art, and then add to each Pound of this Confection two Ounces of
Venice-Treacle and Mithridate. This is the Orvictan, so much cried up by some.

G.
GAlangal, in Latin Galanga major.
The Root of it is good in all Cases wherein Ginger is used; and it is wont to
be candied like Ginger. It provokes Appetite, as Capers and Olives do. The
fresh Root of either of them, cut into Slices, is boiled with Flesh and Fish
for the same purpose. It Is also eaten raw, with Oil, Salt and Vinegar, with
Fish and Flesh, to help Concoction. It Is used in the cold Diseases of Men and
Beasts. It Is Cephalic, Cardiack, and Stomachick. It strengthens the Stomach,
and takes off Sour Belching. Being chewed in the Mouth, it discusses Wind, and
cures a Stinking Breath. It does good in the Cholick, heats the Reins, and
provokes Venery. Candied with Sugar, it is good for cold Diseases of the Head
and Nerves. It cures the Headache, and eases the Pain of the Limbs. It Is good
for the Palpitation of the Heart, used with the Juice of Plantane. The Powder
of it taken in good Wine, or Balm-water, or in the Juice of Borrage, cures
Fainting, proceeding from a cold Cause. The Germans use to give it to those
that are about to be Let Blood, to chew it in their Mouths, to prevent
Fainting. It grows spontaneously in Malabar and Java.

Galbanum.
It Is a fat Juice, but cannot be dissolved with Oil; in Water it may. It Is of a
middle Nature, betwixt a Gum and a Resin; for it will burn like Resin, and
dissolve in Water like a Gum. It Is of a yellow Color, and of a soft Substance,
like Wax. It tastes bitterish and acrid, and smells very strong. The chief use
of it is, to mollify and digest. It Is used inwardly to provoke the Courses, to
hasten Delivery, to expel the Secundine, and a dead Child. It Is also outwardly
used in Childbearing, for the Courses, for Mother-fits, and for Giddiness. The
Fume of it is good in the Falling Sickness, for Mother-fits, and for Fainting,
and the like. It Is said by some of the Ancients, that he that washes his Hands
with a Solution of it, may safely handle Serpents: But the Truth of it may be
well doubted. Take of Galbanum, and choice Myrrh, each one Dram and an half; of
Castor sixteen Grains; with a sufficient quantity of the Balsam of Peru: Make
twelve Pills of each Dram: Give three at Bedtime, drinking upon them three or
four Spoonfuls of Compound-Briony-water: Continue the use of these Pills thirty
Days. These Pills are very proper in Hysteric Diseases. Take of Galbanum
dissolved in Tincture of Castor, and strained, three Drams; Tacamahaca two
Drams; mingle them; make a Plaster to be applied to the Navel. This Plaster is
very proper in Hysteric Diseases. It Is an Ingredient of several Plasters of
the London-Dispensatory; as, of the Plaster of Ammoniacum, Barbarum Magnum; of
the Plaster of Cinnabar, and of the Compound Diachylon; of the Plaster of
Mucilages, of the Divine Plaster, and some others. The way to purify it is, to
dissolve it in Vinegar; then passing it through a Cloth, all the Moisture is to
be evaporated away over the Fire. By this means it is cleans'd, indeed, from
Straws, and some other Impurities that are contained in it: But then, part of
its Volatile Spirits is evaporated at the same time, and in them consists its
greatest Virtue; while some others are fixed by the Acid, which always hinders
the Motion of Volatiles. Wherefore I would never advise this Purification: I
had rather, after choosing it as clean as may be, only powder it in a Mortar, to
mix it with what may be thought fit; for, though there should be some little
Straws in it, they would never be able to alter the nature of the Remedy, or
diminish its Virtue so much, as does the Destruction of its Volatile Salts by
the Vinegar. But because it is too moist to be powdered, you must first cut it
into little Slices, and dry it in the Sun. It Is a Tear of the Herb called
Faerula.

Common Great Gentian, in Latin Gentiana major.
The Root of it, which is chiefly used, is Alexipharmick. It Is used in the
Plague, and other Contagious Diseases; for Obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, and the like. It Is good for a Dropsy, Mother-fits, Weakness of the
Stomach, the Worms, Agues, and for the Biting of a Mad Dog. It Is frequently
used outwardly to dilate Ulcers, and to make Issues run. The Compound-water of
Gentian of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of the
Roots of Gentian cut one Pound and an half, of the Leaves and Flowers of the
Lesser Centory, each four Ounces; infuse them for the space of eight Days, in
six Quarts of White Wind, and then distill them in B. M. This Water is a good
Preservative against Ill Air, and and Contagious Diseases. It opens
Obstructions of the Liver, strengthens the Stomach, creates an Appetite, and
helps Digestion. It Is good for the Jaundice, and opens Women's Obstructions.
The Extract of Gentian is also much in use. The Root powdered, and made into an
Electuary, with Conserve of Orange-peels, and Conserve of Hips, strengthens the
Stomach, creates an Appetite, and expels Wind, and helps Concoction.

Ginger, in Latin Zinziber.
It grows in all the Provinces of India. It Is candied green in India, and is
good for Old People, and such as are cold and phlegmatic, and for such whose
Stomachs do not concoct well; especially, when it is fresh candied. It Is also
good for Viscid Phlegm of the Lungs. The Indians use the Leaves of Ginger in
Broths, and for the Kitchen. They also use the Roots of it green, with Oil and
Salt, mixed with other Herbs. Fresh Ginger is reckoned by them an excellent
Remedy for Cholical Pains, and for the Caeliack and Lientaerick Passions. It Is
also good for long Diarrhaea's, proceeding from Cold; and also for Wind, and
the Gripes, and the like. But it is to be noted, that they who are of a hot
Constitution ought not to use it, whether they are sick or well; for it
inflames the Blood, and opens the Orifices of the Veins. But Ginger and Pepper
are more used in the Kitchen, than in Physic. It Is mixed with purging
Medicines that are strong, to correct them. It cleanses the Lungs and Stomach,
strengthens the Brain, and clears the Sight when it is dulled by moisture. It
strengthens the Stomach, and is mixed with Antidotes. It Is an Ingredient in the
Cardiack Syrup, of the Cardiack Julep of the London-Dispensatory.

Goards, in Latin Curcurbitae.
It quenches Thirst, provokes Urine, lessens Seed, and extinguishes Venery.
It Is used in Meats, prepared in the following manner: They boil the inner and
white Substance, with the unripe and soft Seeds; afterward they cut them
small, with Onions, and boil them with Salt and Butter; and then they are much
like Headed Cabbage cut and boiled: They are very good for lean People. The
Italians cut it into pieces, and boil it in Broth. It tastes well, and yields a
laudable Juice, and we suppose it is a convenient Diet for Feverish People; for
it cools and mollifies. It Is much of the same Virtue with Cucumber. The fresh
Leaves applied to the Breasts of Women in Childbed, lessens the Milk. The
Seeds are reckoned among the four Greater Cold Seeds. For Redness of the Face,
Take of the Kernels of Peaches four Ounces, of the Seeds of Goards two Ounces;
make an Oil of them by Expression, wherewith anoint the Face. Menstruous Women,
by only looking on young Goards, kill them: But this seems fabulous.

Canary- Grass, in Latin Phalaris.
It grows as well in Spain and France, as in the Canaries. The Seed, and the
Juice of the Herb, and the Leaves, taken inwardly, are commended for Pains in
the Bladder.

Common Dog- Grass, or Couch-Grass, in Latin Gramen caninum.
It Is a tall Grass, sometimes four or five Foot high. It expels Gravel. Silvius
says, that Sheep and Oxen that are troubled with the Stone in the Wintertime,
are freed from it in the Spring by eating Grass.

Cotton- Grass, in Latin Gramen Tomentosum.
It grows in marshy and watery places, and is easily known by the Cotton on it.
It Is very astringent; and is used for making Candles, and the like.

Oat- Grass, in Latin Gramen Avenaceum.
It Is found in May, in the Hedges, and narrow Ways. Tragus says, a Decoction of
it in White Wind, used for some Days, is an excellent Remedy for the Worms in
Children.

Guaiacum, in Latin Lignum sanctum.
In curing the French Pox there is no Medicine better or surer than the
Decoction of Guaiacum; for, if the Cure be managed as it ought, and the
Decoction be taken in due time, it is a certain Cure for this Disease. It Is also
good in a Dropsy, for an Asthma, the Falling Sickness, for Diseases of the
Bladder and Reins, and for Pains in the Joints, and for all Diseases proceeding
from cold Tumors and Wind. The Spaniards learnt the use of it from the Indians:
For, a certain Spaniard having taken the Disease from an Indian Woman, was much
afflicted with Venereal Pains; and having an Indian Servant who practiced
Physic in that Province, he gave his Master the Decoction of it, whereby his
Pains were eased, and his Health restored: And by his Example, many other
Sapniards were cured. So that, in a short time, this way of Cure was known all
over Spain; and soon after, every where else. The Pox, that is the Disease of
the West-Indians, ininfected the Europeans in the following manner: In the Year
1493. in that War of the Spaniards at Naples, with the French, Columbus
returned from his first Voyage which he had undertaken for the Discovery of the
New World; and having found some Islands, he brought thence Men and Women to
Naples, where His Catholic Majesty was. Having then made Peace with the French
King, both the Armies having free Intercourse, and Ingress, and Egress, at
pleasure, the Spaniards had first Conversation with the Indian Women, and the
Indian Men with the Spanish Women: And then it crept afterward into Italy and
Germany, and lastly into France, and so over all the World. At first it had
many Names: The Spaniards thinking they were infected by the French, called it
the French Pox: The French supposing they got it at Naples, called it the
Neopolitan Disease: And the Germans thinking they received it from the
Spaniards, called it the Spanish Disease: But others more properly termed it
the Indian Malady; for from thence it first came. The Way of preparing this
Decoction, together with the Method of taking it, is as follows: Take of the
Wood cut small twelve Ounces, of the Bark of it beaten two Ounces; infuse it in
six Sextaries of Water, in a large Earthen Pot, twenty four Hours; the Pot must
be close stopped; boil it with a gentle Fire, to the Consumption of four
Sextaries of the Water; when it is cold strain it, then put upon the same Wood
eight Sextaries of Water, and boil it to the Consumption of two: Keep it
apart. The Way of giving it is as follows: The Sick being purged according as
his Physician shall think fit, he must be put into a warm Chamber, and let him
go to bed in the Morning, and take ten Ounces of the first Water hot; and being
well covered, he must sweat two Hours; then, being well rubbed, let him change
his Linen, and put on his Clothes well warmed; four Hours after give him
Raisins and Almonds, with Bread twice baked, whereof let him eat moderately,
and drink as much as is sufficient of the Second Water: Eight Hours after he
has eaten, let him take again ten Ounces of the first Water hot, and let him
sweat two Hours, and be cleansed from his Sweat as before; an Hour after the
Sweat, give him the Almonds and Raisins, and the Bread twice baked for his
Supper, and let him drink of the Second Water. Let him observe this Method for
the first fifteen Days, unless his Strength be much impaired; for if so, he
must be allowed a roasted Chicken, besides the things abovementioned: Those
that are weakly, and cannot bear so strict a Diet, must be allowed also a
roasted Chicken after nine Days: But if the Sick be so very weakly that he
cannot bear at all the forementioned Diet, he must eat Chicken sparingly at
the Beginning, increasing his Meals by degrees. After fifteen or sixteen Days,
purge with ten Drams of the Pulp of Cassia, or some such Medicine, and on the
same Day let him drink of the Second Decoction: On the Seventeenth Day let him
return to the Method above described; let him take, Morning and Evening, the
Water of the First Decoction, sweat, and be dieted as before; only, instead of
a Chicken, let him eat half a Pullet; and toward the End, somewhat more: Let
him continue the same Diet to the Twentieth Day, at which time, being well
clothed, let him walk about his Chamber; afterward purge him again, and let
him continue the use of the Decoction forty Days more, and let him observe an
orderly Diet, and abstain from Women and Wine: But if he nauseate the
Decoction, let him drink Water wherein Annise and Fennel have been boiled; let
him eat a small Supper, and, to be sure, let him forbear Flesh then. This
Method, some think, will eradicate the worst sort of Pox: But others hold,
there is no other Way of curing it, when it is deeply rooted, than by the use
of Mercury. The incomparable Chyrurgeon, Mr. Wiseman, mentions it frequently in
his excellent Treatise of the French Pox. Take of Guaiacum four Ounces, of the
Bark of the same two Ounces, of Sarsaparilla eight Ounces, of the Wood of
Saxifrage one Ounce and an half, of the Shavings of Hart's-horn and Ivory, each
six Drams; infuse them all Night in ten Quarts of Fountain Water, then boil
them in a Vessel close stopped, to the Consumption of a third part; add at the
End, of the Leaves and Roots of Soap-wort two Handfuls, of the Leaves of
Agrimony, and both the Speed-wells, each one Handful; of Raisins stoned six
Ounces; of the Seeds of Sweet Fennel and Coriander, each six Drams; of Spanish
Liquorish two Ounces; strain the Liquor, and aromatize it with a little
Cinnamon, and keep it for use: The Patient commonly takes a Quart, or more, of
this Drink in a Day. Take of the Leaves of Sena four Ounces, of Gummy Turbith
and Hermodactyls, each two Ounces; of Black Hellebore, and the Pulp of
Colloquintida, each six Drams; of Guaicum and Saxifrage rasp'd, each one Ounce;
of the Bark of Guaiacum, and the fresh Berries of Juniper, and the outward Bark
of Citrons, each half an Ounce; of Cinnamon and Cloves, each two Drams; infuse
them in equal Parts of the Waters of Balm, Meadow-sweet, and Carduus
Benedictus, for the space of forty eight Hours; then boil them gently, and
strain out the Liquor; dissolve in it, of Aloes-Rosat two Ounces, Diagridium
one Ounce; bring it to the Consistence of an Extract, and keep it for use: The
Dose is, from half a Dram to one Dram. This is a proper Purge in the French
Disease. Or, Take of the Extract above described two Drams, of the Gum of
Guaiacum half a Scruple, of Mercurius dulcis one Scruple; make Pills with the
Syrup of Buck-thorn: These Pills are also used for the same Disease.
Distillation of Guaiacum is performed in the following manner: Take the
Shavings of Guaiacum, fill a large Retort with them, three quarters full; place
it in a Rever-beratory Furnace, and join to it a great capacious Receiver;
begin the Distillation with a Fire of the First Degree, to warm the Retort
gently, and to distill the Water which is called Phlegm; continue it in this
condition until there come no more Drops, which is a Sign that all the Phlegm is
come; throw away that which you find in the Receiver, and fitting it again to
the Neck of the Retort, lute well the Junctures; you must afterward increase
the Fire by degrees, and the Spirits and Oil will come forth in white Clouds;
continue the Fire until there comes no more; let the Vessels cool, and unlute
them; pour that which is in the Receiver into a Tunnel lined with Brown Paper,
and, set upon a Bottle, or some other Vessel; the Spirit will pass through, and
leave the black, thick, and very fettid Oil in the Tunnel; pour it into a Viol,
and keep it for use. It Is an excellent Remedy for Rottenness of the Bones, for
the Toothache, and to cleanse old Ulcers. It may be rectified, and may be used
inwardly for the Falling Sickness and Palsy, and to drive forth the
Afterbirth: The Dose is, from two Drops to six, in some convenient Liquor. The
Spirit of Guaicum may be rectified in a Limbeck, to separate the Impurity that
passes with it: It works by Perspiration, and by Urine: The Dose is, from half
a Dram to a Dram and an half. It Is likewise used, mixed with Water of Honey, to
cleanse Inveterate Ulcers. You will find in the Retort the Coals of Guaiacum,
which you may turn into Ashes by putting Fire to them: Calcine these Ashes some
Hours in a Potter's Furnace, then make a Lee of them with Water, filtrate it,
and evaporate it in a Glass, or Earthen Vessel, in Sand, there will remain the
Salt of Guaiacum; which you may make white by calcining it in a Crucible, in a
strong Fire. This Salt is Aperitive, and Sudorifick; it may serve, as all other
Alkalies, to draw the Tinctures of Vegetables: The Dose is, from ten Grains to
half a Dram, in some convenient Liquor. During the Distillation you must not
make the Fire too strong; for the Spirits coming forth with a great deal of
Violence, will be apt to break either the Retort or the Receiver. Though Guaiacum
be a very dry Body, yet abundance of Liquor is drawn from it; for, if you put
into the Retort four Pounds of this Wood, sixteen Ounces to the Pound, you will
draw thirty nine Ounces of Spirit and Phlegm, and five Ounces and an half of
Oil; there will remain in the Retort nineteen Ounces of Coals, from which you
may draw half an Ounce, or six Drams of an Alkali-Salt. The Oil of Guaiacum is
Acrimonious, by reason of the Salts it has carried along with it; and it is the
Gravity of the Salts that does precipitate it to the bottom of the Water. This
Oil does good for the Toothache, because it stops the Nerves with its Ramous
Parts; hindering thereby the Air from entering. Moreover, by means of the
Acrimonious Salts which they contain, they do dissipate a Phlegm, which uses to
get within the Gum, and causes Pain. Take of Guaiacum, cut into small pieces,
eight Ounces; of Sarsaparilla six Ounces, of the Bark of Walnut-tree, of the
Roots of Fig-wort, and of Saxifrage, each two Ounces; Herb Robert three
Handfuls, of Raisins of the Sun stoned, and of Live Millepedes, each one Pound;
make a Bag for four Gallons of New Beer. This is a Diet-drink for the King's
Evil. Guaiacum grows in Hispaniola, Jamaica, and some other Places.

Gum-Ammoniacum.
Choose that which is without Sand, that is pure, yellow without, and clear
within; which burns clear when it is fired, and softens, and sticks to the
Hands when handled, and flies into many shining pieces when it is knocked with
an Hammer: It will dissolve in Water; it smells stronger than Galbanum, and
has a bitterish Taste. It attenuates, and resolves, and draws violently, and
moves the Belly. It Is chiefly used for Pains of the Gout, to resolve the viscid
and thick Mucilage of the Lungs, and Mesentery; and for obstinate Obstructions
of the Liver, Spleen, and Womb; and for the Stone. It Is used outwardly for a
Scirrhus, for the King's Evil, and to dissolve other hard Swellings.
Gum-Ammoniack is distilled in the following manner: Put a Pound of
Gum-Ammoniack into an Earthen Retort, or a Glass one, luted, big enough for two
thirds to remain empty; place this Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace, and
fitting to it a Receiver, begin the Distillation with a very little Fire, to
warm gently the Retort, and drive forth, Drop by Drop, a little Phlegmatic
Water; when the Vapors begin to appear, throw out that which is in the
Receiver; and re-fitting it, and luting close the Joints, increase the Fire by
degrees, and continue it until all is come forth; then let the Vessels cool,
and unlute them; pour out that which is in the Receiver, into a Tunnel lined
with Brown Paper; the Spirit will pass through, and leave the thick, black Oil
in the Filter: Keep it in a Viol. It Is good for the Palsy, and Hysterical
Diseases; the diseased Parts are rubbed with it: And it is given Women to smell
to. Put the Spirit into a Glass-Limbeck, and rectify it by distilling it in
Sand: It Is a good Remedy against the Plague, and all sorts of Malignant
Diseases. It Is used in the Scurvy, and all manner of Obstructions. The Dose is,
from eight to sixteen Drops. The Spirit of all other Gums may be drawn after
the same manner. The Plaster of Ammoniacum of the London-Dispensatory is made
in the following manner: Take of Ammoniacum, of Bran well sifted, each one
Ounce; Ointment of Marshmallows, Compound Mellilot-Plaster, Roots of Briony
and Orris powdered, of each half an Ounce; Geese, Ducks and Hens Fat, of each
three Drams; of Bdellium, and Galbanum, each one Dram and an half; Resin of the
Pine, and yellow Wax, of each five Ounces; Oil of Orris and Turpentine, of each
an Ounce and an half; boil the Fats and Oil, with Mucilage of Linseed and
Fenugreek, each three Ounces, to the Consumption of the Mucilage; strain it,
and add the Wax, Resin and Turpentine, the Ointment of Marshmallows, with the
Plaster of Melilot; when it begins to be cold, put in the Ammoniacum dissolved
in Vinegar, then the Bdellium powdered, with the rest of the Powders, and so
make a Plaster according to Art. It asswages and mollifies hard Swellings, and
discusses the Peccant Humor: It softens the Spleen when hard, and eases the
Pain of it. The Plaster of Hemlock, with Ammoniacum, of the London-Dispensatory
is made in the following manner: Take of the Juice of the Leaves of Hemlock
four Ounces, of Vinegar of Squils, and of Gum-Ammoniacum, each eight Ounces;
after due Infusion, strain it, and reduce it to the Consistence of a Plaster,
according to Art: It eases Pain, and allays Inflammations. Ammoniacum is also
used in some other Plasters of the London-Dispensatory: Take of Gum-Ammoniacum
dissolved in Vinegar one Ounce; of Ladanum and Mastich, each two Drams; of Oil
of Wormwood, and of Wax, each a sufficient quantity: This is used for an
Inflammation and Abscess of the Liver. Syrup of Ammoniacum of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of Maudlin and
Cetrach, each four Handfuls; of Common Wormwood one Ounce; of the Roots of
Succory and Asparagus, and of the Bark of the Roots of Capers, each two Ounces;
make an Infusion of them for twenty four Hours: After due Preparation, in three
Ounces of White Wind, and of Simple Radish-water, and Fumatory-water, each two
Pints; boil them to a Pint and an half, let the strained Liquor stand till it
is clear; dissolve apart, in four Ounces of the strained Liquor, when it is
warm, two Ounces of Gum-Ammoniacum, dissolved first in the sharpest
White-wine-Vinegar; boil the rest to a Syrup, with a Pound and an half of Fine
Sugar, adding the Dissolution of the Gum toward the End. This Syrup opens
Obstructions, and is good for Diseases of the Skin: An Ounce of it, or somewhat
more, may be taken at a time.

Gum-Arabick, in Latin Gummi Arabicum.
It Is the Gum or Juice of an Egyptian Thorn: The most transparent, and whitest,
is the best. It will easily dissolve in Water; it mitigates Acrimony, and is
good for Fluxes, Coughs, and Catarrhs. Take of the Roots of the Greater Comfrey
two Ounces, of the Leaves of Plantane and Mouse-ear, each one Handful; of the
Tops of Mallows and Maidenhair, each half an Handful; of Liquorish rasp'd half
an Ounce; of Fine Flower and Gum-Arabick, of Tragacanth and Bole-Armoniack,
each one Dram; of the Seeds of Lettice and Purslain, each one Dram; of the
Seeds of Red Roses one Pugil; make a Decoction in Rainwater to one Pint and an
half; strain it, and sweeten it with Sugar; make a Julep: Take eight Ounces
every Morning, for ten or twelve Days. This is good for an Ulcer of the Reins
or Bladder. Take of the Roots of Marshmallows and the Greater Comfrey dried,
each two Drams; of Gum-Arabick, and of the Gum of Cherry and Prune-tree, each
one Dram; of Olibanum and Myrrh, each four Scruples; of the Seeds of White
Poppy and Winter-Cherries, each one Dram and an half; of Camphyr two Scruples;
powder them all very fine; and having added of Ceruss of Antimony a third part
of the weight of all the rest, make a Mass for Pills with a sufficient quantity
of Venice-Turpentine: The Dose is, one Dram, Morning and Evening. These are
excellent Pills for the same purpose. But if the Turpentine should occasion
Pain, Juice of Liquorish, dissolved in Pellitory-water, may be used instead of
it.

Gum-Caranna.
The Indians use it for Tumors, and all sorts of Pain. It Is commended for those
Diseases which Tacamahaca is wont to cure; but it is more effectual than that.
It Is brought from Carthage. Take of Gum-Elemi and Turpentine, each half an
Ounce; of Olibanum, Mastich and Gum-Tragacanth, each three Drams; of Bole*
Armoniack one Ounce and an half; of the Seeds of Nigella, Myrtle and
Balaustians, each one Dram; of Euphorbium one Scruple, of Amber two Drams, of
Burgundy-Pitch eight Ounces, of Gum-Caranna ten Drams, of Oil of Cloves, and
Peruvian Balsam, each six Grains; mingle them, and make a Plaster according to
Art, to be applied to the Neck.

Gum-Copal.
It Is very clear, and transparent. The Indians use it in their Sacrifices, for
Perfumes: And their Priests use it so frequently in their Temples, that when
the Spaniards came into those Parts first, they smelt it. It Is good for cold
Diseases of the Head; and may serve instead of Frankincense, and Gum-Anime.
It Is alalso very good for fresh Wounds. It comes from the West Indies.

Gum-Elemi.
It Is of the Color and Consistence of Wax; it tastes somewhat bitterish, and
smells like Fennel. It discusses Tumors, cleanses Sordid Ulcers, and Cicatrises
them. It Is of excellent Virtue in Wounds of the Head, and therefore
Practitioners always use it in Plasters and Ointments for Fractures of the
Scull, and Wounds of the Head. The Plaster of Gum-Elemi of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of Gum-Elemi four
Ounces, of Resin of the Pine, and pure Wax, and Ammoniacum, each two Ounces; of
Turpentine three Ounces and an half, of Malaga-Sack a sufficient quantity; boil
them to the Consumption of the Wine, then add the Ammoniacum dissolved in
Vinegar, and make a Plaster. Ointment or Liniment of Gum-Elemi of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of Gum-Elemi, of
Turpentine of the Firr-tree, each one Ounce and an half; of Old Sheep's-Suet
cleans'd two Ounces, of Old Hog's-Grease, one Ounce; make an Ointment. It Is
used chiefly for Wounds and Ulcers of the Head; but it is also good for Ulcers
in any Part of the Body. It cleanses, and incarns, and is very agreeable to the
Body.

Gum-Gotta.
It Is a concreted Juice, of a yellow Color; and if it be moistened with
Spittle, it becomes more yellow. What Plant it comes from is uncertain; but it
is a great Commodity in the East Indies. Take of Gum-Gotta eight Grains, of
Conserve of Roses three Drams, of Oil of Mace one Drop: Or, Take of Gum-Gotta
six Grains, dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of fresh Broth. It purges
Watery Humors.

Gum-Lac.
It Is a Juice of an Indian Tree, called Malus Indica Lusitanis. It Is not
certainly known how it is made; for, what Garcias says, of its being made by
winged Ants, as Bees make Honey, does not seem probable; but it rather sweats
out of the very Tree, or from the Branches of it, at set Times, and grows to
the Form we see it with the Heat of the Sun. The best comes from Pegu and
Martaban. It Is Twofold; namely, Seed-lac, or Shel-lac: It Is also Factitious. It
attenuates, and opens, and purifies the Blood, and provokes Sweat, and is
Diuretic. It Is chiefly used in Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and
Gallbladder. It Is good in a Dropsy, for the Jaundice, an Asthma, and
Impost-humes of the Lungs; to expel Malignity, and to force the Courses. The
Species called Dialacca is much commended by most Physicians, and is made in
the following manner: Take of Gum-Lac prepared, and of the Roots of
Rhaponticum, each three Drams; of Schaen^nth, Indian Spikenard, Mastich, of the
Juice of Wormwood and Agrimony thickened, of the Seed of Smallage,
Bishop's-weed, Fennel, Annise, Savine, Bitter Almonds, Cleands, Myrrh, Zedoary,
the Roots of Madder, Asarabacca, of Birth-wort Long and Round, and of Gentian,
of Saffron, Cinnamon, dried Hysop, Woody-Cassia, and Bdellium, of each one Dram
and an half; of Black Pepper and Ginger, each one Dram; make a Powder according
to Art. Sealing-wax is made of Gum-Lac: The fine, hard Sealing-wax is made of
fine Gum-Lac, melted in an Earthen Vessel, into which a sufficient quantity of
the color is put, and mixed well together; then take it off the Fire, and make
it up into Rolls, or Sticks. Red Wax is colored with choice Vermillion; Blue
Wax with Blue Bice, Smalt, or Ultramarine; Green Wax with Green Bice,
Verdigrease, or the like; Black Wax with Ivory, or Cherry-stone-Black; Purple
Wax, with Red Lake, and the like, Coarse* hard Sealing-wax is made in the
following manner: Take of Shel-lac twelve Ounces; of Resin and choice
Vermillion, each six Ounces; melt them, and mix them together; and when they
are of a due Heat make them into Sticks. You may set a Gloss upon them, by
gently heating them in a naked Charcoal-fire, and rubbing them with a Cloth
till they are cold.

Gum-Olibanum, or Frankincense, in Latin Olibanum.
It heats, dries, and is somewhat astringent. It Is chiefly used inwardly, for
Diseases of the Head and Breast, and for Fluxes of the Belly and Womb, and for
a Cough, and Spitting of Blood. But the Internal Use of it is much disliked by
some; for they say it occasions Madness. It Is used outwardly for ^umes to
strengthen the Head, and to stop Catarrhs. It incarns Ulcers, and cures Wounds.
Mixed with Lard, it cures Chilblains. It eases the Pain of Ulcers of the
fundament, powdered, and mixed with Milk. It Is mingled with Plasters, Ointments
and Balsams, to cleanse and incarn Ulcers and Wounds. But the chief use of it
is in Fractures of the Scull; being powdered, and mixed with the White of an
Egg, and applied to the Temples, it does good for an Hemicrania, and the
Headache. Infused in sweet Wine, and dropped hot into the Ears, it eases the
Pain of them, and cures Ulcers in them. The Bark of Frankincense is more
effectual than the Frankincense it self, and is more astringent. The Smoke of
Frankincense was formerly used to take off Inflammations of the Eyes, and to
stop Fluxes: But it is not used nowadays. But the most ancient and remarkable
use of it was in holy Things; for they sacrificed and perfumed their Temples
with it: And the same use is made of it nowadays in Christian Churches. It
has been also used, which is very strange, in all Ages, and in all Nations, and
by People of all sorts of Religions, to purify the Bodies of the Dead. It was
called Olibanum by the Greeks, from an Assyrian Youth of that Name; who, as it
is fabulously reported, being maliciously slain for his pious Behavior toward
the Gods, was turned into this Shrub, called Arbor Thurifera. Upon which
Account they affirm, that nothing is more pleasing to the Gods than the Smell
of Frankincense.

Gum-Opoponax:
See Panax Herculis.

Gum-Sagapenum.
The Plant, whose Juice it is, is unknown. It opens discusses, attenuates and
cleanses. It Is used for Pains of the Side and Breast, and for Ruptures. It
cleanses the Lungs of thick Matter that sticks to them. It Is used in the
Falling Sickness, and for Diseases of the Spleen, and the Palsy. It provokes
the Courses; and, taken in Wine, it cures those that are bit by Venomous
Creatures. It takes off Mother-fits, being held to the Nostrils with Vinegar.
It Is reckoned amongst the strongest Purgers; but Mesue says, it hurts the
Stomach and Liver. It may be corrected with such Things as are astringent, and
preserve the Tone; as, with Mastick, Spike, and the like. Schroder reckons the
Virtues, in short, thus: It Is very drawing: It purges clammy, gross and watery
Humors from the Stomach, Guts, Womb, Reins, Brain, Nerves, Joints, and Breast;
wherefore it is good for Dropsies, Old Coughs, an Asthma, the Headache,
Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Obstructions and Tumors of the Spleen,
for the Cholick, to provoke the Courses and the Urine: But it is not to be used
to Women with Child, for it kills the Child. It Is good outwardly for a
Pleurisy, and other Tumors; for it resolves and eases Pain. The Fume of it
takes off a Fit of the Falling Sickness; and cures the little Excrescencies on
the Eyelids, called Hordeola. Take of Gum-Sagapenum and Ammoniacum, each half
a Dram; of Diagridium six Grains, of the Troches of Alhandal four Grains; make
Pills with Syrup of Betony.

Gum-Sarcocolla.
It Is so called because it agglutinates Flesh. It Is best when it is fresh, and
of a palish Color; for, when it is old it grows reddish. It has a bitter
Taste, and is of a porous Substance, and easily dissolves in Water. It heats
and dries, and is astringent. It consolidates, glutinates, ripens and concocts.
It Is chiefly used for Cicatrizing and healing Wounds. It Is excellent for
Fluxeons, for the Albugo and Nubeculae of the Eyes, being infused in Woman's or
Asses Milk, and mixed with Rose Water.

Gum-Tamahaca.
It Is much used by the Indians, in Tumors of all kinds, in any part of the
Body. It wonderfully resolves, ripens, and discusses. It takes away all Pains
proceeding from Cold and Phlegmatic Humors. The Fume of of it takes off
Mother-fits. It Is commonly applied, in the form of a Plaster, to the Navel in
Hysteric Diseases. It stops all Defluxions from the Head, being wrapped in a
Cloth, and applied behind the Ears. Being applied in the form of a Plaster to
the Temples, it diverts Defluxions on the Eyes, and other parts of the Face. It
cures the Toothache, the Hollow Tooth being stopped with it. An excellent
Stomach-Plaster is made of it, and a third part of Storax, and a little
Amber-grease; for it strengthens the Stomach, provokes Appetite, and helps
Concoction, and expels Wind. It Is of excellent Virtue in Pains of the Hips, and
for Diseases of the Joints, proceeding from cold Humors. Monardes adds a third
part of Wax, to make it stick the better. This Plaster is very good for
Swellings and Hardness of the Spleen.

Gum-Tragacanth.
It flows from the Root, being cut. That which is brought to us is glutinous,
white, or yellow, and of a sweetish Taste. The Water wherein it is infused
becomes clammy and mucilaginous. It opens Obstructions, and attemperates
Acrimony. It is used in Medicines for the Eyes, and for Coughs and Hoarsness,
and Distillations in a Linctus with Honey. A Dram of it being dissolved, and
taken in a proper Liquor, mixed with Burnt Hart's-horn and a little Alum,
eases the Pain of the Kidneys, and Erosions of the Bladder. It Is good for the
Bloody Flux* in Clysters. And dissolved in Milk or Rose Water, it takes off
Redness of the Eyes, and stops sharp Distillations on them. A Mucilage is made
of it in Water, to form other Medicines; for instance, Troches. It Is an
Ingredient of the Syrup of Hysop of the London-Dispensatory, which is made in
the following manner: Take of the Roots of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Liquorish
cut, each ten Drams; of Jujebs and Sebestians, each fifteen pair; of Raisins
cleans'd one Ounce and an half; Figs, and fat Dates, of each number Ten; of the
Seeds of Mallows, Quinces, and of Gum-Tragacanth, tied up in a Rag, each three
Drams; of Hysop moderately dried ten Drams, of Maidenhair six Drams; all being
prepared, infuse them twenty four Hours in eight Pints of Barly-water, then
boil them in B. M. and strain them out hard; to the clear Liquor add six Pounds
and an half of Fine Sugar, make a Syrup in B. M. It corroborates the Breast and
Lungs, and is excellent for Coughs.

H.
HEdge-Hysop, or rather Water-Hysop, in Latin, Gratiola.
It Is an excellent Remedy to purge Watery and Cholorick Humors, which it draws
from the most remote Parts, and evacuates them by Vomit and Stool; and by
consequence must be of good use in a Dropsy, for the Yellow Jaundice, and for
Pains of the Hips. It may be taken in Powder, or green, in a Decoction* But
because it works so violently, it ought to be corrected with Ginger, Sal Gemma*
Cinnamon, or the like. It Is very bitter, and kills Worms, and carries off the
Matter occasioning them. Being bruised, and applied, it cures Wounds quickly.
It grows in Germany, and Italy, and some Parts of France.

Heliotrope, in Latin Heliotropium majus.
The Herb cures Warts, being rubbed upon them. It Is very effectual in a
Carcionoma, and for Gangrenous Ulcers, and King's-Evil-Swellings. The Leaves
sprinkled with Rose Water, and applied to the Head, ease the Pain of it. A
Decoction made of the Leaves and Cummin, expels Gravel, and kills Worms.

Hermodactyls, in Latin Hermodactylus.
Botanists do not agree about Hermodactiles of the Shops. Some say they are the
Roots of Colchicum: Others deny it: And the more Learned and Skilful make them
to be different things. Take of Hermodactiles powdered half a Dram, of
Aloes-Succotrine one Scruple, of Powder of Cummin six Grains; make Pills
according to Art. Or, Take of White Wind three Ounces, of Hermodactiles
powdered two Drams, of Powder of Ginger one Scruple; mingle them, and let them
stand in Infusion all Night; strain it, and add an Ounce and an half of Syrup
of Betony, and make a Draught. Maggravius mentions these Pills, and this Potion
amongst his Phlegmagoges. Plaster of Hermodactiles of the London-Dispensatory
is made in the following manner: Take of the Plaster called Diachalcitis eight
Ounces, of Burgundy-Pitch melted and strained four Ounces; of White
Venice-Soap, and New Yellow Wax, each three Ounces; of Butter of Oranges one
Ounce; of the Seeds of Cummin and Hermodactiles, each one Ounce and an half; of
the Leaves of dried Wormwood, of the Flowers of Camomile, and of
Florentine-Orris, each half an Ounce; powder fine those Things which are to be
powdered, and make a Plaster according to Art.

Hypocistis, or Rape of Cistus, in Latin Orobranche.
It grows from the Roots of all the Sorts of Cistus. It Is very effectual for
all Fluxes; as, of Blood, the Fluxes of Women, and for Celiack and Dysenterick
Diseases. It Is also good to strengthen any Part. It Is nowadays prepared in
the following manner: They beat the fresh Flowers, and press out the Juice, and
thicken it in the Sun, and keep it for use. Take of Conserve of Roses, and of
the Roots of the Greater Comfrey, each two Ounces; of Sealed Earth,
Bole-Armoniack, Dragon's-Blood, Red Coral, of the Lapis Hematites, and Troches
de Carrabe, of each one Dram; of Hypocistis, the Grains of Kermes, and the
Seeds of Plantane, each one Scruple; with equal parts of Syrup of Poppies and
Myrtles make an Opiate; of which, take the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning and
Evening, drinking upon it a little Plantane-water. This is used for Voiding of
Blood by Urine.

J.
JAlap, in Latin Jalapium.
The Root of it is like Mechoacan, but it is covered with a black Bark, and is
brownish within. It comes to us sliced from India. It tastes gummy, but not
unpleasant. It Is stronger than the common White Mechoacan, for it purges Watery
Humors better. A Dram of the Powder of it may be given at a time. The
Purgative Quality resides in the Resin. Resin, or Magistery of Jalap is made in
the following manner: Put a Pound of Jalap, grossly powdered, into a large
Mattress; pour upon it Spirit of Wine Alcoholiz'd, until it be four Fingers
above the Matter; stop the Matras with another, whose Neck enters into it; and
luting the Junctures with a wet Bladder, digest it three Days in a Sand-heat;
the Spirit of Wine will receive a red Tincture, decant it, and then pour more
upon the Jalap, proceed as before; and mixing your Dissolutions, filtrate them
through Brown Paper; put that which you have filtrated into a Glass-Cucurbite,
and distill in a Vaporous Bath two thirds of the Spirit of Wine, which may serve
you another time for the same Operation; pour that which remains at the Bottom
of the Cucurbite, into a large Earthen Pan, filled with Water, and it will turn
into a Milk, which you must leave a Day to settle, and then separate the Water
by Inclination; you will find the Resin at bottom, like unto Turpentine; wash
it several times with Water, and dry it in the Sun, it will grow hard, like
common Resin; powder it fine, and it will become white; keep it in a Viol. It
purges Serosities: It Is given in Dropsies, and for all Obstructions. The Dose
is, from four to twelve Grains, mixed in an Electuary, or else in Pills. The
Resins of Turbith, Scammony and Benjamin may be drawn after the same manner. If
you use sixteen Ounces of Jalap, you will draw an Ounce and six Drams of Resin.
You must observe to give the Resin of Jalap always mixed with something else,
that may separate its Parts; for if it be taken alone, it will be apt to adhere
to the Membrane of the Intestines* and so cause Ulcers by its Acrimonious
Quality. Moreover, Apothecaries should observe to mix it in a little Yolk of an
Egg, when they would dissolve it in a Potion; for it sticks to the Mortar, like
Turpentine, when it is moistened with any Aqueous Liquor. It may be likewise
incorporated with some Electuary, and then it easily dissolves. Twelve Grains
of this Resin work as much as a Dram of Jalap in substance: But I have always
observed in my Practice, that the Powder of Jalap works better and surer than
the Resin. Take of Lenetive Electuary two Drams, of the Cream of Tartar half a
Dram, of Powder of Jalap two Scruples; make a Bolus with a sufficient quantity
of Syrup of Buck-thorn; add three Drops of Oil of Juniper. This purges strongly
Watery Humors. For weakly People use the following Medicine: Take of Lenitive
Electuary one Dram, of Cream of Tartar half a Dram, of Powder of Jalap one
Scruple, of Rubarb powdered ten Grains; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Roses Solutive, and three Drops of Oil of Juniper' make a Bolus.

Ierusalem-Artichoak, in Latin Battata Canadensis.
It frequently grows in Gardens here in England. The Root of it tastes well,
and is eaten with Butter and Ginger, and sometimes baked in a Pie: But however
it be dressed, it is windy, and offensive to the Stomach.

The Iesuit's-Bark, in Latin China-China, Arbor Febrifuga Peruviana, Pulvis
Patrum, or Pulvis Cardinalis.
A noted Merchant, and an honest Man, who lived many Years in Peru, and
published an Account of this Tree, written in Italian, says, it grows in Regno
Quitensi, in a peculiar Place; which the Indians call Loca, or Loia. The Powder
of the Bark, given in a due quantity, is the most certain and safe Remedy for
the Cure of an Ague. The incomparable Physician, Dr. Thomas Sydenham called it
the only Specific for Agues: Says he, (treating of the Cure of Agues) When I
had found the Inconveniences that proceed from Evacuations, and well weighing
the Matter, I supposed that Jesuit's-Powder would be the most certain Cure.
And, indeed, I can truly affirm, notwithstanding the Prejudice of the Common
People, and of some few of the Learned, that I never found any Injury by the
use of it, nor can imagine any; only they that have used it a long time, are
seized sometimes with a Scorbutic Rheumatism, but this happens rarely; and
when it does, it is easily cured by the following Medicines: Take of Conserve of
fresh Garden-Scurvy-grass two Ounces, of Wood Sorrel one Ounce, of the
Compound-water of Wake-Robin six Drams; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Oranges, make an Electuary: Take two Drams of it three times a Day, for the
space of a Month; drinking upon it six Spoonfuls of the following Water: Take
of Garden-Scurvy-grass eight Handfuls; of Watercresses, Brook-lime, Sage and
Mint, each four Handfuls; the Bark of six Oranges, of bruised Nutmeg half an
Ounce; infuse them in six Quarts of Brunswick-Mum, distill them in a common
Still, and draw off three Quarts of Water. Being called to a Patient that has a
Quartan-Ague, suppose, for Instance, on a Monday; and if the Fit be to come
that Day, I do then nothing; only, to encourage the Patient, I tell him he will
have no more Fits than that. To which End, I give the Bark in the following
manner, on Tuesday and Wednesday: Take of Jesuit's-powder one Ounce, make an
Electuary with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of July-flowers, or of dried
Roses, to be divided into twelve Parts; whereof, let him take one every fourth
Hour, beginning presently after the Fit is off, drinking upon it a Draught of
any Wine. But if the Patient can take Pills best, Take of the Jesuit's-powder
one Ounce, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of July-flowers, make Pills of a
moderate bigness; whereof, let him take six every fourth Hour. But it is less
troublesome, and full as good, that an Ounce of this Powder be mingled with a
Quart of Claret, and that eight or nine Spoonfuls of it be taken at the same
times abovementioned. On Thursday, which is the Fit-day, I order nothing;
because, most commonly, no Fit comes then; the Relics of the Feverish Matter
being put off by the usual Sweats which come toward the End of the preceding
Fit, carry it off; and the Provision for a new Fit being intercepted by the
repeated Juice of the Powder, on the Days betwixt the Fits. But* lest the Ague
should return again, eight Days exactly from the time wherein the Sick took the
last Dose, I give the same quantity of the Powder; namely, an Ounce, divided
into twelve Parts, according to the Method above-describ'd. But though the
Repetition of it once does very often cure the Disease, yet the Sick is not
wholly out of Danger, unless his Physician repeat it the third or the fourth
time, at the same distances abovementioned; especially if the Blood has been
weakened by foregoing Evacuations, or if the Patient has unwarily exposed
himself to the cold Air. But, though this Remedy has no Purgative Quality in it,
yet, by reason of the peculiar Temper of some Bodies, it often happens, that
the Sick is as violently purged by the use of it, as if he had taken some
strong Purge: In this Case it is necessary to give Laudanum with it; and
therefore I order ten Drops of Laudanum to be put into Wine, and to be taken
after every other Dose of the Powder, if the Looseness continues. The
abovementioned Method cures also Quotidian and Tertian-Agues. But though Tertian
and Quotidian-Agues seem wholly to intermit after a Fit or two, yet many times
they appear like Continual Fevers; and there is only Remission of the Fever on
the Days the Fit should intermit; especially when the Sick has been kept abed
altogether, or has been punished with an hot Method and Medicines, that are
designed to drive out the Fever by Sweat. In this Case we must lay hold of the
least Remission, and give the Powder every fourth Hour; left, whilst we attend
on the Fit, there should not be time enough for the Powder to work upon the
Blood. But seeing there are some that cannot take the Bark, neither in the form
of a Powder, nor of an Electuary, or Pills, I give to these an Infusion of it
made in the Cold: I infuse for some time two Ounces of the Bark, grossly
powdered, in a Quart of Rhenish-wine; and four Ounces of the said Infusion
seems to contain the Virtue of one Dram of the Powder; and because it is not
unpleasant, nor does oppress the Stomach, it may be taken as often again as any
other Form of this Medicine; namely, till it has cured the Ague. Sometimes it
happens, that before this Disease forms it self into Regular Fits, the Sick, by
reason of continual Vomiting, cannot contain the Bark in the Stomach, in what
Form soever it is taken. In this Case, the Vomiting must be first stopped,
before the Bark is given: To which End I order, that six or eight times, in the
space of two Hours, the Sick take one Scruple of Salt of Wormwood, in one
Spoonful of the Juice of Limons fresh pressed out; afterward sixteen Drops of
Liquid Laudanum, in a Spoonful of strong Cinnamon Water; and soon after, if the
Vomiting be stopped, let him take the Jesuit's-powder. For Infants, whose tender
Age can scarce bear this Remedy in any other Form, at least, so much of it as
may be sufficient to cure the Disease, I prescribe the following Julap: Take of
Black-Cherry-water and Rhenish-wine, each two Ounces; of the Jesuit's-powder
three Drams, of Syrup of July-flowers one Ounce; mingle them, and make a Julap;
give a Spoonful or two, according to the Age of the Child, every fourth Hour,
till the Disease is cured; dropping into every other Dose, if there be a
Looseness, a Drop or two of Liquid Laudanum. As to Diet, let the Sick eat and
drink what his Stomach craves, Summer-Fruits and cold Liquors only excepted;
and let him drink Wine moderately, for his ordinary Drink; by which alone I
have recovered some, whose Bodies, by reason of the frequent Returns of the
Ague, have always eluded the Salutiferous Virtue of the Bark. The Disease being
taken off, all manner of Evacuations are carefully to be avoided; for the
gentlest Purge, nay, a Clyster only of Milk and Sugar, will be apt to occasion
a Relapse. But this excellent Bark does not only cure Agues, it is also
frequently used, by the best Physicians, for Continual Fevers, in the Gout, and
for Hysteric Diseases, and the Fever that accompanies Consumptions, commonly
called the Hectic Fever, the Bark being given in Infusion, and sweetened with
Syrup of Rasberries. But if, with an Hectic Fever, the Consumptive Patient be
also afflicted with a Looseness, which commonly ends the Tragedy, the following
Pills are of excellent use: Take of the Lemnian Earth half a Scruple, of
Bole-Armoniack twelve Grains, of the Pill de Stirace one Dram and an half, of
the Jesuit's-powder half an Ounce, of Syrup of July-flowers a sufficient
quantity; make fourscore Pills; let him take five every six Hours, during the
Looseness; dringing upon them seven Spoonfuls of the following Julap: Take of
the Aqua-lactis Alexiteria twelve Ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated three
Ounces, of Dr. Stephens's Water, and Epidemick-water, each two Ounces; of
Diacodium three Ounces. The following Medicine is commended for a Consumption:
Take of the Peruvian Bark one Ounce, of the Balsam of Tolu three Drams, of
Cochinel one Scruple; boil them in a Pint of Carduus Benedictus-water; strain
it, and add of Syrup of Rasberries and Epidemick-water, each two Ounces: Take
four Spoonfuls twice a Day. Some adp to the Infusion of this Bark, the Lesser
Centory, Wormwood, Charvil, Juniper Berries, the Bark of the Alder-tree,
Saxifrage, Salt of Tartar, and diverse other Ingredients; but the Basis of all
is the Peruvian Bark, the rest of the Ingredients do no great Good. Tincture of
the Peruvian Bark is made in the following manner: Put into a Bolt-head four
Ounces of good Bark, grossly powdered; pour upon it Spirit of Wine, four Fingers
high above the Matter; fit to it another Mattress, in order to make a double
Vessel; lute well the Junctures, and place your Vessel to digest in Horse-dung,
or in a Vaporous Bath, four Days; stir it from time to time, the Spirit of Wine
will load it self with a Red Color; unlute the Vessels, filtrate the Tincture
through Brown Paper, and keep it in a Viol well stopped. It Is a Febrifuge to be
given in Agues, three or four times a Day, after the Fit; and to be continued
for a Fortnight: The Dose is, from ten Drops to a Dram, in some proper Liquor;
as, in Centory-water, Juniper, Wormwood-Water or Wine. If you put new Spirit of
Wine to the Matter which remains in the Mattress, and set it in Digestion, as
before, you will draw more Tincture, but it will not be so strong as the other;
wherefore you must give it in a larger Dose. Extract of Peruvian Bark is made
in the following manner: Put to infuse warm twenty four Hours eight Ounces of
Peruvian Bark, in a sufficient quantity of distilled Water of Nuts; afterward
boil the Infusion gently, and strain it, make a strong Expression of the
Residence, put it to infuse in new Water of Nuts, boil it and strain it as
before; mix together what you have strained, let them settle, and decant the
clear Liquor, and evaporate it in a Glass, or Earthen Vessel, set in a
Sandheat, unto the Consistence of thick Honey: It has the same Virtues as the
former. The Dose is, from twelve Grains to half a Dram, in Pills, or dissolved
in Wine. Sir Robert Tabar was the first that found out the true Dose or
Quantity of it for curing Agues; for he did not stand upon Scruples, but gave
Drams and Ounces of it; and so it answered his End, and rendered him and the
Bark famous. Being once required by some Physicians to desine what an Ague was,
he answered, That an Ague was a Disease that he could cure, and they could not.
It Is to be noted, that the Bark, when it is old, is as effectual to cure Agues,
as when it is fresh; and, in one respect, much better; for the Purgative
Quality, which is observed to be in the fresh Bark, goes off in time. Spon. in
his Book of Observations, Sur les Fievres, and les Febrifuges, says, That by
diligent Search he had found, that the Peruvian Bark did not come from the
Trunk or Branches, but from the Root; for he had tried some of the Bark of the
Trunk and Branches, that was sent to him, and it was not at all bitter. Which
Observation may be of some use to those in our World, who endeavor to find a
Succedaneum for it. I, says he, have made some Trials in this Matter: The Bark
of the Root of the Peach-tree is very rough, and a little bitter; upon which
Account it is, undoubtedly, very proper for a Looseness, The Bark of the Roots
of the Ash is also rough, and pungently acrid, by reason of abundance of Salt
contained in it, which gives it its Febrifuge Virtue. Lastly, The Bark of the
Roots of the Black-Cherry-tree is rough, and bitter; and therefore the Powder
of it given in a Quartan-Ague, lessens the Fits, but does not quite take them
off: Yet, says he, I do not question but that it will cure Fevers, being given
orderly, and in a due quantity.

Florentine- Iris, in Latin Iris Florentina.
The Root of it hanged in Wine or Beer, keeps the Beer sweet, and imparts a
pleasant Smell to the Wine, and makes it taste as if Rasberries were mixed with
it. It Is also much used by Bakers, to make Leaven for Wheaten Bread. Many
Virtues are attributed, by Ancient and Modern Authors, to this Plant. It Is
chiefly used for Obstructions of the Lungs, for a Cough, Asthma, Obstructions
of the Courses, and for Children's Gripes. Outwardly used, with Hellebore and
Honey, it cleanses the Skin from Spots. It Is frequently used in Sweet Powders,
for the Hair. It Is also good for the Dropsy, and the Jaundice; it purges Water
powerfully. The Juice of the Root is given for this purpose, from half an Ounce
to an Ounce and an half. A Gentlewoman cured several People of Dropsies only by
giving the Juice of this Root: She ordered them to take four Spoonfuls every
Morning in six Spoonfuls of White Wind. An Ounce of the fresh Juice has been
used with good Success in a desperate Obstruction of the Belly. It purges
Phlegm, Water and Choler: But it is nowadays only used for Dropsies. Take of
the Roots of Florentine-Iris and Hermodactiles powdered, each six Drams; of the
Plaster Oxycroceum, and of the Mucilages, each two Ounces; of the Resin of
Pine one Ounce; mix them, and moisten them with Oil of Worms, and make a
Plaster: This is used for the Gout. Take of the Roots of Florentine-Iris twelve
Ounces, of the Wood of Rhodim two Ounces, of the Leaves of Marjoram three
Drams, of Cloves one Ounce, of Limon-peel five Drams, of Cyperus-root one
Ounce, of Sweet Smelling Flag six Drams, of Damask-Roses four Ounces, of Red
Roses two Ounces; of Benzoyn, Styrax and Calamit, each one Ounce; of Labdanum
half an Ounce; make a gross Powder. This is a sweet Powder, and is very proper
to sprinkle amongst Clothes* to preserve them from the Moth. If all the
aforesaid Ingredients are distilled with Strong Beer, in a common Still, six
Grains of Musk being tied up in a Rag, and hanged in the Receiver, you will
have a Perfumed Water, that is very fit for Funerals.

Jujubs, in Latin Jujubae.
They are moderately hot and moist: They attemperate the Sharpness of the
Blood, and are good for Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, for Coughs,
Difficulty of Breathing, for Diseases of the Reins and Bladder, and for Heat of
Urine. The Syrup of Jujubs of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following
manner: Take of Jujubs number Sixty, of the Flowers of Violets five Drams, of
Liquorish rasp'd and bruised, of the Leaves of Maidenhair, and of
French-Barly, each one Ounce; of the Seeds of Mallows five Drams; of the Seeds
of White Poppies, Melons, Lettice, and of Quinces and Gum-Tragacanth tied up in
a Rag by themselves, each three Drams; boil them in three Quarts of
Fountain Water, till half is consumed; strain it, and clarify the Liquor, and
with two Pounds of White Sugar make a Syrup. It Is a good, cooling Syrup, and
proper for Coughs, Pleurisies, and for Ulcers of the Lungs and Bladder. It Is an
Ingredient in the Lohoch Sanans of the London-Dispensatory, and of the Pectoral
Decoction.

K.
KErmes, or the Scarlet Oak, in Latin Ilex Coccigera.
This little Tree grows on stony Hills about Monopeliar, and in other Parts of
France, and in Italy: But Clusius says, it does not every where bear the Grains
of Kermes; for he says, they are only to be found in those Regions which are
near the Mediterranean Sea, where the Sun shines very hot; and not always there
neither; for, when the Shrub grows so big as to bear Acorns, the Kermes will
not grow on it; and therefore the Inhabitants burn them up when they are about
four Years old, that young ones may come in their Room, which afterward yearly
have the Grain of Kermes sticking to them, on the Branch, like small Peace, of
an Ash Color. These Grains are counted by Philosophers and Botanists, the
Spurious or Excrementitious Fruit of the Scarlet-Oak only: But the learned and
ingenious Dr. Martin Lister found such kind of Grains growing in England, upon
the tender Branches of Cherry-trees; and supposes that they are not
Excrescencies, but the Work of some Insect, for receiving as in a Nest, its
young ones. The Grains serve for two Uses, for Medicine, and for Dying of a
Scarlet Color. They are astringent, and are used successfully for Wounds, and
wounded Nerves. They are also of good use to prevent Miscarriage; and used by
the Physicians of Montpeliar for sudden Accidents, and Acute Diseases; as, for
an Apoplexy, Palsy, and the like. They are also used for the Palpitation of
the Heart, for Fainting, and for Melancholy. The Confection of Kermes of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of the Juice of
fragrant Apples, and of the sweetest Water of Roses, each one Pint and an half;
of the Syrup of the Grains of Kermes one Quart; of Sugar one Pound; boil them
almost to the Consistence of Honey, then take it from the Fire, and while it is
hot add two Drams of Amber-Grease, cut small, and dissolved with some Drops of
Oil of Cinnamon; which being well mixed, add the following things powdered; of
choice Cinnamon, and the best Wood of Aloes, each six Drams; of prepared Pearl
two Drams, of Leaf-Gold one Dram; mix them according to Art. The Syrup of
Kermes, mentioned in making Confection of Kermes, is made in the following
manner: They beat the Grains in a Marble Mortar, and pulp them through a Sieve,
and mix them with an equal quantity of Sugar; this they call Conserve: And by
adding more Sugar, Raw Silk, the Juice of Apples, and Rose Water, they make a
Syrup.

L.
LArk-Spur, in Latin Consolida Regalis.
The Juice of the Flowers, and the distilled Water clear the Sight, and
strengthen it: And some say, that looking always upon it does the same;
wherefore they take care to hang it always in sight. It Is successfully used in
Vulnerary Potions; a Decoction of the Flowers in Wine, with a Dram of Saffron,
opens Obstructions.

Lead-wort, in Latin Plumbago Plinii.
It cures Horses when they are galled, and prevents Worms breeding in the
Sores, being bruised and applied.

Lignum-Aloes.
It heats and dries, and comforts all the Bowels, especially the Heart and
Womb. It recreates the Vital and Animal Spirits, and therefore is good for
Fainting. It kills Worms. It Is used frequently in Cordial Epithems. Being
chewed in the Mouth, and the Mouth washed with a Decoction of it, it cures a
Stinking Breath. It Is used for Perfumes; and being dried and powdered, and
sprinkled upon the Body, it smells well. A Dram of the Root taken inwardly,
removes superfluous Humors from the Stomach, strengthens it, and mitigates the
Heat of it. It eases the Pain of the Sides and Liver, and does good in the
Bloody Flux, and for the Gripes. A piece of this Wood, with the Gum sticking on
it, was presented to the Royal Society, by the Honorable Mr. Boil: It tasted
just like the Wood, and the Color of it was like pure Succotrine-Aloes. It Is
said that a Milk flows from this Tree, which is so virulent, that if it chance
to drop into the Eyes, it occasions Blindness; and if it fall upon any other
part of the Body, it causes Blisters, and an Inflammation. The true
Lignum-Aloes grows in Malacca, and in the Island Sumatra. Take of Labdanum and
Mastich, each two Drams; of Lignum-Aloes, Storax-Calamit, Cinnamon, and
Turpentine, each one Dram; of Myrtles, and the Roots of Cyperus, each half a
Dram; of the Juice of Mint, and Horse-tail, extracted with Red Wine, a
sufficient quantity: Make a Plaster to be applied to the Region of the Pubis
and Perinaeum, for an Incontinence of Urine.

Lignum-Colubrinum.
It Is commended for expelling Poison; the Wood, Bark and Root mixed together,
is given for this purpose; but the Root is best. It grows in Malabar.

Lignum-Molucense.
It Is found in the Molucca's, and is kept in Gardens; and is so much esteem^d
by the Inhabitants, that they will not let a Stranger see it. The Seed of it is
used to catch Birds; they mix it with boiled Rice, and lay it out for the Birds
to eat it; and as soon as they have tasted it, they fall asleep, and are
stupid; and if they eat greedily of it, it kills them: To rouse them that are
asleep, they dip their Heads in cold Water, and so they recover. The Wood
reduced to Powder with a File, and taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, expels
Poisons. It cures the Biting of Vipers and Serpents, ten Grains of it being
taken in Rose Water. It also cures Wounds made by poisonous Arrows. The
strongest Man must take but half a Scruple of it. When it is used for Purging,
the Party that takes it must make but a small Supper the Night before. It
purges all Humors, but especially gross, clammy and melancholy Humors. It Is
good for long Quartan-Agues, and for Continual Fevers; for the Iliack Passion,
the Cholick, Wind, a Dropsy, and for Gravel, and for Difficulty of Urine; for
Pains of the Joints, a Scirrhus, and the King's Evil. It kills all sorts of
Worms, and restores lost Appetite. Ac^sta observed the great use of it in
inveterate Pains of the Head, an Hemicrania, Apoplexy, Noise of the Ears, the
Gout, and for Diseases of the Stomach and Womb, and for an Asthma. If it work
too much, let the Party drink a Draught of a Decoction of Rice.

Lignum-Nepbriticum.
It comes from Countries that are moderately hot, as is Mexicana. It Is used for
Diseases of the Reins, and for Difficulty of Urine: And the Water of it is good
for Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. The Water of it is made in the
following manner: They cut the Wood small, and infuse it in clear
Fountain Water, and keep it in the Vessel till all the Water is drunk; then
they put on fresh Water, and so they repeat it as long as the Wood will
tincture the Water: In the space of about half an Hour the Wood imparts a light
Sky-colour to the Water, which grows deeper in time. It Is also good in Fevers,
and for the Cholick. Take of Sarsaparilla six Ounces, of China three Ounces, of
Saxifrage one Ounce, of Nephritick Wood two Ounces, of Hart's-horn and Ivory
rasp'd half an Ounce, of White Sanders half an Ounce, of the Roots of Parsely,
Grass, Knee-holm, and Eringo, each one Ounce; of Liquorish two Ounces, of Dates
stoned number Six, of Caraway and Coriander-seeds, each three Drams; infuse
them in seven Quarts of Fountain Water, boil it according to Art, and Aromatize
it with the Wood of Cassia.

Limon, in Latin Malus Limonia
Limons are more acid than Oranges or Citrons, and therefore it is probable the
Juice is colder. It Is proper for all those Uses that Citron is, but it is not
so effectual against Poisons; yet is it more powerful; in hot Diseases, it
quenches Thirst, and lessens Feverish Heats. The Juice of it is very proper to
lessen the Stone, and to cleanse the Urinary Passages. The Syrup of the Juice
of Limons is good for the Stone, and Obstructions of the Kidneys. It quenches
Thirst, is used in Burning Fevers, and it strengthens the Heart and Stomach: It
restrains the Effervescence of Choler, and is used with good Success to stop
Vomiting, the Hickups, and to take off a Burning Fever. The Peel of Limons, as
well as of Oranges, is candied with Sugar, for Sweetmeats; and the small ones
are also candied whole, for various Uses. The distilled Water of Limons, as
well as of Citrons, is reckoned an excellent Cosmetick. Secret Letters are writ
with the Juice of Limons, which may be read when they are held to the Fire. The
Juice imparts a curious Purple Color to Conserve of Roses, or Violets. It Is
also much used to change Colors, or to fix them. For Nephritick Diseases, Take
of the Wood of Oak rasp'd one Ounce, of Fountain Water three Quarts, of the
Juice of Limons four Ounces; infuse them twenty four Hours upon hot Ashes, and
afterward boil it to the Consumption of a third part; strain it: The Dose is
six Ounces. It Is excellent for an hot Intemperies of the Liver, for Ulcers of
the Reins, and for Heat of the Urine; but especially, it evacuates salt, viscid
Phlegm from the Reins and Bladder, the Cause of Heat of Urine and Strangury.
Limons are brought to us from Spain and Italy.

Liquid-Amber.
It Is the Resin that flows from a vast Tree, that has Leaves like Ivy-leaves:
The Indians call it Ocosolt. When the Spaniards first entered into those Parts,
where these Trees grow, they called them Spice-bearing Trees. It Is much used in
Physic: It heats, strengthens, resolves, and is Anodine. It comforts the
Brain, the Head being anointed with it; and cures all sorts of Pains proceeding
from a cold Cause. It strengthens the Stomach, procures Appetite, and helps
Concoction. Much of it is used to perfume Gloves. It Is good in all cold
Diseases, to resolve Tumors, to open Obstructions of the Womb, to assuage the
Tumors of it, and to provoke the Courses. Some cut the Wood in small pieces,
and boil it, and take off the Fat which swims at top, and sell it for true Oil:
And this is sold by some Apothecaries for Liquid-Storax.

M.
MAce, in Latin Macis.
It Is the Covering or the Nutmeg, and is very Aromatic, and full of much
Spirituous Heat, and is therefore good for cold Diseases. It Is much of the same
Virtue with the Nutmeg; but because its Parts are finer, it works more
powerfully, and is more penetrative.

Mandrake, in Latin Mandragora.
It Is Male and Female. It grows spontaneously in hot Countries, as Spain and
Italy, and the like, in Woods, and shady Places. Mandrakes are reckoned amongst
Narcotick Medicines. Some have questioned whether the Apple of it were
wholesome, or no. But Faber Lynceus, Botanick Professor at Rome. a very learned
Man, and of good Reputation, says, that both the Pulp and the Seed may be
safely eaten. Now, seeing the Apples of the Mandrake are fit to be eaten, and
smell well, why should we seek for any other Interpretation for the Hebrew Word
Dudaim, which Reuben brought to his Mother Leah? And seeing it was the Opinion
of the Ancients, that the Seeds of the Mandrakes purged the Womb, it is very
probable that Rachel, knowing this Virtue of them, desired the Mandrakes; that
her Womb being purged, she might be rendered capable to conceive, and to bear
Children, as well as her Sister Leah, and her Maid Zilpha. The Bark of the
Root, which is brought to us from abroad, especially from Italy, is Narcotick;
but it is seldom used inwardly. It Is outwardly used for Redness and Pains of
the Eyes, for an Erisipelas, hard Tumors, and the King's Evil.

Manna.
The best comes from Calabria. It sweats out of the Branches and Leaves of the
Ash-trees in Calabria, and grows hard by the Heat of the Sun: For Manna is not
Heavenly Dew, or Airy Honey, as has been proved by undoubted Experiments. What
can be more evident Demonstration, that Manna is the Humor or Juice,
distilling from the Trunk or Branches of the Ash-tree cut; or, What Experiment
can be more certain to prove it, than what Pena and Lobelius deliver? Namely,
That having cut down great Branches of the Larix and Ash-tree, and placed them
in a Wine-Cellar, at that time of the Summer that Manna used to be gathered in,
and the next Day they perceived Manna upon them. This was confirmed to me, says
Mr. Ray, when I traveled into Italy, by many of the Inhabitants of Calabria;
but especially by the learned and diligent Searcher into the Works of Nature,
Doctor Thomas Cornelius, a Physician; who having carefully covered the
Branches, with Clothes wrapped round them often, gathered Manna from them.
Which is a Proof beyond Exception. Manna is used to loosen the Belly, two or
three Ounces of it being dissolved in Broth or Whey. It Is a very gentle
Medicine, and may be safely given to Old Men, Children, and Women with Child.
Take of Manna one Ounce and an half, dissolve it in two Ounces and an half of
Black-Cherry-water, add to it one Ounce of the Purging Syrup of Apple, Spirit
of Sulphur three Drops: Half of it may be taken at a time. This is a proper
Purge for Children. A Person that had the Cholick, and had taken thirty
Clysters to no purpose, was releiv'd by taking an Ounce and an half of Manna,
mixed with two Ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds, in fat Chicken-Broth. Take of
Manna half an Ounce, of fresh Oil of Sweet Almonds a sufficient quantity to
dissolve it, add ten Drops of Rose Water; mingle it: Let Children lick of this
often, to loosen their Bellies when there is occasion.

Black Master-wort, in Latin Astrantia nigra.
It purges Melancholy, like White Hellebore.

Mastick-tree, in Latin Lentiscus.
All the Parts of it are binding; the Buds, the Leaves, the Branches, the
Fruit, and the Bark of the Root. A Juice is pressed from the Bark, the Root,
and the Leaves, boiled in Water, or from the green Leaves bruised; which taken
inwardly, is good for a Looseness, and the Bloody Flux, Fluxes of the Womb, and
for the Falling of the Womb and Fundament. In short, it may be used instead of
Acacia and Hypocistis. The Oil of the Mastick-tree, made of the ripe Fruit, and
thickened, cures the Mange in Cattle and Dogs. It Is also successfully mixed in
Medicines for curing the Leprosy. The Oil of it is much commended for the
Falling of the Hair, and for Inflammations of the Gums, the Oil being held in
the Mouth moderately hot. Mastick grows only in the Island of Chios, where the
Inhabitants take as much care of the Mastick-tree, as other People do of their
Vine-yards; for they chiefly live by the Product of the Mastick-tree: And so
great Abundance of it have they, that they pay yearly, as a Tribute to the
Grand Seignior, 4 or 5000 Ducats. Mastick taken inwardly, stops the Voiding of
Blood, and cures an old Cough, and is good for the Stomach. Two Drams of
Mastick, mixed with Crumbs of toasted Bread, and apapplied hot to the Stomach,
takes off Vomiting, and the Pain of the Stomach. Take of Myrrh and Mastick
equal Parts, boil them in Oil of Camomile: This is excellent for inveterate
Pains of the Hips. Half an Ounce of Mastick, boiled in three or four Quarts of
Water, is used for the ordinary Drink of those that have a Looseness. The People
of China, Men, Women and Children, do most commonly hold Mastick in their
Mouths, to strengthen their Teeth and Gums, and to perfume their Breath; they
also bake it with their Bread, to give it a good Taste. In short, Mastick is
preferred before all other Medicines, in those Diseases where-there is need of
Binding. The best Mastick is of a light Color, clear and transparent,
sweet-scented and friable. It Is sometimes adulterated with Resin of the
Pine Tree, and with Frankincense; but the Cheat may easily be discovered by the
Smell.

Mechoacana.
It takes its Name from an Island in New-Spain, called Mechoacan. It purges
Phlegmatic and Watery Humors from all Parts of the Body, especially from the
Head, Nerves and Breast. It Is good for old Coughs, the Cholick, and the
French Pox. It Is taken most commonly in substance, being powdered, and taken in
a proper Liquor, especially in Wine. It is not given in a Decoction, because it
has been found by Experience, that boiling destroys the Virtue of it. The Dose
is, from half a Dram to two Drams. It Is corrected by adding a third part of
Cinnamon, Annise, or Mastick. It Is best when it is fresh, whitish within, and
of an Ash Color without.

Mezereon.
It Is very hot and acrid; being chewed in the Mouth, it burns the Jaws and
Throat: But it purges Choler strongly, being corrected by infusing it twenty
four Hours in Vinegar. Some correct it by infusing it in Wine, and drying it
again. But the Leaves, Bark, or Berries, howsoever they are prepared and
corrected, are seldom used, by reason of their Malignity: Nor, indeed, ought
they to be used, but in desperate Cases, or for want of safer Medicines.

Myrobalanes, in Latin Myrobalani.
There are five Sorts of them, which are comprehended in the following Distick.

Myrobalanorum species sunt quinque bonorum;
Citrinus, Chebulus, Belericus, Emblicus, Indus.
All of them cool, dry, and are astringent; as is manifest from their Taste,
which is sharp, with a little Acrimony. The Chebulae, Belericae and Emblicae
purge Phlegm, the Citrinae purge Yellow Choler, and the Indae Black Choler.
Being toasted, they purge a little, and bind much, like Rubarb. Because they
purge little, Physicians give other Things with them. The Dose is two or three
Drams.

Myrrh, in Latin Myrrha.
The best Myrrh is the cleanest, which is rough, light, and breaks easily;
smells sweet, tastes bitter and hot. It heats, disposes to Rest, and is good in
cold Diseases of the Head. It conglutinates, and dries. It provokes the
Courses, and hastens Delivery. It Is good for an old Cough, and Difficulty of
Breathing, and for Pains of the Breast and Sides, and for a Looseness, and for
the Bloody Flux. It cures an Hoarseness, being held in the Mouth, and what
dissolves of it being swallowed down. It heals Wounds of the Head, and is
frequently applied to Bones when they lie naked. It was much used formerly to
preserve dead Bodies. Some say, it is good in a Dropsy. It Is excellent in a
Gangrene, for Swellings and Wounds, especially in the Head. The Troches of
Myrrh of the London-Dispensatory are made in the following manner: Take of
Myrrh three Drams, of the Flower of Lupines five Drams, of the Roots of Madder,
the Leaves of Rue, Wild Mint, Dittany of Crete, Cummin-seeds, Assafoetida,
Sagapenum, and Opoponax, each two Drams; dissolve the Gums in Wine wherein
Mug-wort has been boiled, or Juniper Berries; add the rest, and make Troches
with the Juice of Mug-wort. They move the Courses with ease, in such as use to
have them with pain, a Dram of them being taken in some proper Liquor. It Is an
Ingredient in the Elixir proprietatis, which is made in the following manner:
Take of Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron, each half an Ounce; of Spirit of Wine
rectified ten Ounces, of Spirit of Sulphur by the Bell half an Ounce; first
draw a Tincture from the Saffron, in the Spirit of Wine, by digesting of it six
or eight Days; then add the Myrrh and Aloes grossly beaten, and the Spirit of
Sulphur; digest them in a long Viol, well stopped, for the space of a Mouth;
stop the Viol close, and shake it often; pour off the black Tincture from the
Faeces, let it stand quiet a Night, then pour it out, and decant it so often as
you find any Faeces at the bottom. It Is hot and dry, Stomachick and Anodine,
Uterine and Alexipharmick. Two Drams of it will purge. It cures Tertian Agues,
and is an Universal Medicine, fit for all Ages, for Men, Women and Children. It
alters, evacuates, and strengthens, when you do not design Purging. The Dose
is, six or twelve Drops, in Wine or Beer. Tincture of Myrrh is made in the
following manner: Put what quantity you please of good Myrrh powdered into a
Bolt-head, and pour upon it Spirit of Wine four Fingers high; stir the Matter,
and set it in Digestion in warm Sand two or three Days, or until the Spirit of
Wine is loaded with the Tincture of Myrrh; then separate the Liquor by
Inclination, and keep it in a Viol well stopped. It may be used to hasten
Delivery, and to bring down the Courses; also for a Palsy, Apoplexy, Lethargy,
and for all Diseases that proceed from Corruption of Humors. It Is Sudorifick,
and Aperitive. The Dose is, from six Drops to fifteen, in some proper Liquor.
It Is commonly used in outward Applications, or mixed with Tincture of Aloes, to
dissolve cold Tumors, for Injections, and a Gangreen. Though Tinctures of Myrrh
are daily drawn in Wine, yet the best that can be prepared is with Spirit of
Wine, because this Menstruum receives the more Oily or Balsamic Part of the
Myrrh. Some use to evaporate this Tincture to the Consistence of an Extract,
but then they lose the more Volatile Part of the Myrrh; wherefore it is better
to use the Tincture, as above described. Oil of Myrrh, per deliquium, is made
in the following manner: Boil Eggs until they be hard, then cutting them in
two, separate the Yolks, and fill the White with Myrrh powdered; set them on
little Sticks placed conveniently on purpose, in a Plate, or Earthen Pan, in a
Cellar, or some such moist place, and there will distill a Liquor to the bottom
of the Vessel; put it out, and keep it for use: This is called Oil of Myrrh.
It Is good to take away Spots and Blemishes in the Face, applied outwardly.
Myrrh is a Gummy Juice, that distills from a Thorny Tree, of a middle height,
by Incisions that are made into it. This Tree grows commonly in Ethiopia and
Arabia. The Ancients were wont to collect from the same Tree a Liquor that fell
from it without Incision, which is called Stacten: It Is a liquid Gum, and, it
is probable, has more Virtue than common Myrrh, because it is the more
spirituous part which filtrates through the Pores of the Bark.

N.
CEltick Nard, in Latin Nardus Celtica.
It heats and dries, provokes Urine, strengthens the Stomach, and discusses
Wind. It Is frequently used in Lotions for the Head. It grows frequently upon
the Alps.

Spike- Nard, in Latin Nardus Indica, sive Spica Nardi.
It Is much of the same Virtue with the former. It Is Hepatick, is good for the
Jaundice, and the Stone in the Kidneys. Nard-Oyl is made in the following
manner: Take of Spike-Nard three Ounces, of Marjoram two Ounces; Wood of Aloes,
Sweet Smelling Flag, Elecampane, Cyperus, Bay Leaves, Indian Leaves or Mace,
Squinanth, Cardamoms, of each one Ounce and an half; bruise them all grossly,
and steep them in Water and Wine, of each fourteen Ounces; Oil of Olives four
Pounds and an half; perfect the Oil by boiling it gently, in a double Vessel.
It heats, attenuates, digests, and binds moderately; and is good for cold and
windy Diseases of the Brain, Stomach, Reins, Liver, Spleen, Bladder and Womb.

True English Stinking Dead- Nettle, in Latin Galeopsis.
The Juice of it given with Vinegar, is good for Hemorrhoids, and takes off
Warts, and discusses hard Tumors. A Decoction of it, or the Powder of the Herb,
is commended for Diseases of the Spleen.

Nigella.
The Seed is chiefly in use. It expectorates, increases Milk, and provokes
Urine and the Courses. It Is good for the Biting of Venomous Creatures, and is
reckoned Specific for Quotidian and Quartan-Agues. It Is used outwardly in
Epithems, and the like, for the Headache, and to dry Catarrhs. An Oil is
pressed out of it, which many ignorant Apothecaries use instead of Nard-Oyl.
For Catarrhs and a Coriza use the following Nodulus: Take of the Seeds of
Nigella toasted, of Tobacco, Storax, and Calamint, each one Scruple; of
Amber-grease two Grains; mingle them and tie them up in a Rag; let it be often
held to the Nostrils. For the Recovery of Smelling, Take of Roman Nigella a
sufficient quantity, powder it, and mix it with old Oil in a Mortar; leaning
the Head back, and the Mouth filled with Water, let the Party snuff some of it
up into his Nostrils. Take of the Roots of Sow-bread, and of Esula, each one
Dram; of the Seeds of Roman Nigella half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of
Honey make a Pessary for the Falling of the Womb. It Is an Ingredient of the
Syrup of Mugwort of the London-Dispensatory.

Nutmeg, in Latin Nux Moschata.
The Tree grows commonly in the Island Banda, situated near the Equator. It Is
somewhat Astringent, is Stomachick, Cephalic and Uterine; it discusses Wind,
helps Concoction, mends a Stinking Breath, prevents Fainting, does good in the
Palpitation of the Heart, lessens the Spleen, stops a Looseness and Vomiting,
provokes Urine, and quickens the Sight. Nutmeg is of great use in the
Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes; for it has all the Virtues necessary for a
Medicine fit for these Diseases. The Oily Substance of it defends the Guts from
sharp Humors, and eases the Pain; the Aromatic Quality consisting in the Airy
Spirit, penetrates the Noble Parts, and comforts them; the Earthy Part binds,
dries up Ulcers, and Cicatrises them. Candied Nutmegs are used in all cold
Diseases of the Head, for a Palsy, and other Diseases of the Nerves and Womb;
besides, they are counted Cordial. They have been used to be brought many Years
candied from the Indies, and are used for Sweetmeats and Banquets. Delicate
People eat the outward Bark when it is green, and they prefer it before the
Nut, for it has a curious Smell, and is very agreeable to the Stomach; but it
has been found by Experience, that the frequent and excessive use, both of the
Nuts and Bark, occasions Sleepy Diseases, for they are very Narcotick: Upon
which Account, what Tavernier relates is not improbable; namely, That when
these Nuts are ripe* the Birds of Paradise flock together to the
Molucca-Islands, to eat them; just as Thrushes flock to France, at the time of
the Vintage; but they pay dearly for their dainty Food; for when they have
eaten greedily of them, they are seized with a Giddiness, and fall to the
Ground as if they were drunk; and when they lie on the Ground the Ants eat off
their Legs. And Lobelius mentions an Observation of an English Lady with Child
that longed for Nutmegs, and eat twelve of them; upon which show grew delirous,
or was rather intoxicated; but having slept a good while, and Repelling
Medicines being applied to her Head, she recovered. The Wounds of a Soldier
were soon cured by eating Nutmegs. Wedelius also commends them for curing of
Wounds. John Bauhinus having drunk cold Water too freely on the Apennine
Mountains, was seized with violent Pains in his Bladder, and his Scrotum was
swelled with the Wind, though he never was bursten'd before or after; and when he
thought he should have died by reason of the Violence of the Pain, his
Fellow-Traveller gave him Nutmegs, and he eat four of them presently, and, by
the Blessing of God, was freed of his Pains. Nutmegs chewed and swallowed, do
much good for a Palsy of the Parts that serve for Swallowing. An Oil expressed
from the fresh Nuts beat, and made hot in a Drying Pan, is good for the Gripes,
and Nephritick Pains, being taken inwardly in some hot Liquor. Children's
Navels being anointed with it when they are gripped, are eased thereby. It Is
also good for Pains of the Nerves and Joints proceeding from Cold. The Temples
being anointed with it, it disposes to Rest. The best Nutmeg is that which is
weighty. Oil of Nutmegs is made in the following manner: Take sixteen Ounces of
good Nutmegs, beat them in a Mortar until they are almost in a Paste, and put
them upon a Boulter, cover them with a piece of strong Cloth, and an Earthen
Pan over that; put your Cloth over a Kettle half filled with Water, and set the
Kettle upon the Fire, that the Vapor of the Water may gently warm the Nutmegs;
when you find, upon touching the Pan, it is so hot that you cannot endure your
Hand upon it, you must take off the Boulter; and putting the Matter into a
Linen Cloth, take its four Corners, and tie them quickly together, put them
into a Press, between a couple of warm Plates, set the Pan underneath, and
there will come forth an Oil, which congeals as it grows cold; press the Matter
as strongly as you are able, to draw out all the Oil; then keep it in a Pot
well stopped. This Oil is very Stomachick, being applied outwardly, or else
given inwardly. The Dose is, from four Grains to ten, in Broth, or some other
convenient Liquor. This is called Oil of Nutmegs by Expression, which is an
Ingredient in the following Apoplectick Balsam: Take of Oil of Nutmegs by
Expression two Ounces, Oil of Rosemary, Marjoram, Sage, Thyme, Hysop and
Angelica, each one Dram; Oil of Cinnamon half a Dram, of Oil of Amber half a
Scruple, of Oil of Rhodium one Dram, of the Oil of Rue, Limons, Oranges and
Cloves, each one Scruple; of Peruvian Balsam half an Ounce, of Tincture of
Benzoin, of Civet, Chemical Oil of Nutmegs, of Tincture of Cloves, each half a
Dram; of Amber-grease two Drams, of Musk one Dram; put all the Oils together,
in a Glass, for use; the longer they have been mixed, the better they are: Then
take ten or twenty Drops, and grind them with the Oil of Nutmegs half an Hour,
then drop the same number of Drops as before; get up the Mixture together with
a piece of Horn, or with a Knife, then let it stand two Hours to ferment, then
put thirty Drops of the Oils more to it, and grind it with the Mixture half an
Hour; cover it with a Paper, and let it stand all Night; in the Morning grind
it with the Balsam of Peru for half an Hour, then warm a Brass Mortar and
Pestle, and cut or scrape into it your Amber-grease; add to it thirty Drops of
your Mixture of Oils grind them together for a quarter of an Hour, then add
thirty Drops more of the Oils, afterward put it out on one side of the Stone,
and on the other side put the Musk, mix it by degrees, with the Oils and
Amber-grease, till it be all dissolved; then put to it the Civet, and grind it
with the Musk and Amber-grease for a quarter of an Hour; mix all by degrees
with the former Composition, and ferment them two Hours, then put it up, and
keep it for use. Take of Alabastrian Ointment, and of Ointment of Roses, each
two Ounces; of Opium one Dram, of Saffron one Dram, of Oil of Nutmegs one Dram;
mingle them, and make an Ointment; anoint the Temples and Forehead with it:
It Is good for the Headache. Take of Saffron powdered two Scruples, of the
Ointment of the Flowers of Oranges, and of Oil of Sweet Almonds, each one
Ounce; of Oil of Nutmegs by Expression half a Dram; mingle them, and make an
Ointment: Anoint Children's Breasts, in Colds, and other Diseases of the Lungs,
with this Ointment.

Nux Vomica.
It Is Narcotick and Virulent, and worse than Opium. Being powdered, and mixed
with Meat, it kills Cats and Dogs.

O.
OAK of Jerusalem, in Latin Botrys.
The Herb powdered, and mixed with Honey, is good for an Ulcer of the Lungs: It
provokes the Courses, and expels a dead Child. Take of this Herb, of
Hedge-Mustard, and of Nettles, each two Handfuls; of Colt's-foot one Handful
and an half; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water, in B. M. to
a Quart of the clear Liquor strained; add the Juice of Turnips pared, and
boiled in Fountain Water; change the Water twice, and when they are soft press
out the Juice gently; add of this Juice, having cleared it self by standing,
one Pint, fine Sugar three Pounds; boil it to a Syrup in B. M. when there is
occasion to use it.

Olive Tree.
It Is a Tree of a moderate Bigness; it grows slowly, and lasts long, some say
two hundred Years. It grows in Italy and France, and other Places. Though Olives,
when they are ripe, are black, and taste acrid, bitter and nauseous; yet the
Oil that is pressed from them is most commonly Pellucid, and a little
yellowish. It tastes sweet and pleasant; but that which is freest from Color
and Taste, is reckoned the best. The Leaves of Olives cool, dry, and are
astringent. They are chiefly used outwardly, for Fluxes of the Belly of the
Courses, for an Herpes, and the like; and with Medicines for the Eyes. So great
is the use of the Oil, both for Meat and Medicine, that it would take up too
much time to mention all. Galen, Dioscorides, Pliny, and others, both Ancient
and Modern, have treated largely of it. One was asked when he was above an
Hundred Years old, by what Means he kept up the Vigor of his Mind and Body: He
answered, By taking Wine inwardly, and by using of Oil outwardly. Cardan
mentions three Things which prolong Life; Milk, Honey and Oil: But he does not
mean that the Oil should be used outwardly, but be taken inwardly with Meat.
Aristotle said, that Oil and Salt should be always had in Readiness, for that
they much conduced to a long Life. The best Oil for the Recovery of Health is
that which is made of Olives before they are ripe, and then it is called
Omphacinum: Of this they make Ointments, and many other Compositions. Oil of
Ripe Olives is hot, and moistens moderately: The Old is hotter than the New. It
mollifies, digests, is vulnerary, and loosens the Belly, an Ounce of it being
taken in hot Beer. It takes off the Dryness of the Breast, cures the Gripes,
opens the Urinary Passages, cleanses and heals them when they are sore. It Is
outwardly used for Clysters, and hot Tumors, and the like. Mixed with warm
Water, and taken inwardly, it vomits; and therefore is used against Poisons.
Schroder says, that in Westphalia they usually give Oil daily, with hot Beer,
to those that are wounded; and they take so much of it, that their very Sweat
smells of it. A Toast dipped in Oil, and well moistened with it, and taken daily
in the Morning, keeps the Body open. All sorts of Insects being besmeared with
Oil, die presently: The Reason is plain, for it stops the Pores whereby they
breath. Oil cleanses the Hands from Pitch, and Clothes when they are pitched.

Opium-seed, White of Poppies, in the First Part this Herbal.
Opium is a Tear which distills of it self, or by Incision of the Heads of the
Poppies. It Is found frequently in Greece, in the Kingdom of Cambaia, and the
Territories of Grand-Cairo in Egypt. There are three Sorts of it, the Black,
the White, and the Yellow. The Inhabitants of those Countries keep this Opium
for their own use, and send us only the Meconium, which is nothing else but the
Juice of the Poppy-heads, drawn by Expression; which is not near so good as the
true Opium. The best Opium comes from Thebes, or else from Grand-Cairo. Choose
it black, inflamable, bitter, and a little Acrimonious. Its Smell is
disagreeable and stupefactive. Extract of Opium is made in the following
manner: Cut into Slices four Ounces of good Opium, and put it into a
Boult-head; pour upon it a Quart of Rainwater well filtered, stop the
Boult-head, and setting it in the Sand, give your Fire by degrees; then
increase it to make the Liquor boil for two Hours; strain it warm, and pour it
into a Bottle; take the Opium which remains undissolv'd in the Rainwater, dry
it in an Earthen Pan, over a small Fire; and putting it into a Mattress, pour
upon it Spirit of Wine, to the height of four Fingers; stop the Mattress, and
digest the Matter twelve Hours in hot Ashes; afterward strain the Liquor, and
there will remain a Glutinous Earth, which is to be flung away; evaporate both
these Dissolutions of Opium separately, in Earthen or Glass-Vessels, in a
Sand-heat, to the Consistence of Honey, then mix them, and finish the drying
this Mixture with a very gentle Heat, to give it the Consistence of Pills, or
of a solid Extract: It Is the most certain Soporifick that we have in Physic:
It allays all Pains which proceed from too great an Activity of the Humors.
It Is good for the Toothache, applied to the Tooth, or else to the Temple-Artery
in a Plaster. It Is used to stop Spitting of Blood, the Bloody Flux, the Flux of
the Courses, and Hemorrhoids; for the Cholick, for hot Defluctions of the Eyes,
and to quiet all sorts of Griping Pains. The Dose of it is, from half a Grain
to three Grains, in some convenient Conserve, or else dissolved in a Julap.
Those that accustom themselves to the use of Opium must increase the Dose of
it, or else it will have no Effect on them. Helmont's Liquid Laudinum is made
in the following manner: Take of Opium four Ounces, cut it into Slices, dry it
in a gentle Heat; then take a Quart of the Juice of Quinces, mix one quarter of
the Juice with Opium, rub it very well in a Glass-Mortar, let it dissolve as
much of the Opium as it will bear; decant it off, and pour on as much more
fresh Juice, rub it as before; continue so doing till the Opium is dissolved,
but keep out a little of the Juice to mix with four Spoonfuls of Yeast; then
put it to the rest of the Liquor, and place it in a wide-mouthed Glass, covered
with Paper, in the first Degree of Heat, on a degestive Furnace, to ferment;
let it continue four Days, or so long as it ferments; when it has done
fermenting take it off the Furnace, and decant it from the Faeces; that which
will not decant filter through Paper; then add to this Tincture an Ounce of
Saffron, two Ounces of Cinnamon, half an Ounce of Nutmegs, and half an Ounce of
Cloves; the Cinnamon and Nutmegs must be powdered grossly; set it on the
Degestive Furnace again, in the same Degree of Heat, and let it stand three or
four Days; then filter your Tincture through Paper, and put it into a
Cucurbite, put on an Head and Receiver; draw off half that which remains in the
Cucurbite; you must filter it again, lest any Dregs should remain at the
bottom: Put it up in a Glass for use.

Oranges, in Latin Malus Aurantia.
The Nobility and Gentry in England value the Trees much, and keep them in
their Gardens for a fine Show, and some of them bring Fruit to Maturity; but by
reason of the Coldness of our Climate, the Product is no way suitable to the
Charge. They are kept in Houses in the Wintertime, to defend them from the
Injuries of the Weather: But they grow in great abundance in Sicily, Italy and
Spain, and in other Places. The Flowers are much esteemed for their good Smell,
which they retain a long while. The distilled Water of them is also very
fragrant, and is not only pleasant, but useful too against the Plague and
Contagious Diseases. The Spaniards give it to Women in hard Labor, with a
little Penny-royal-water. The Bark is more bitter, and therefore hotter than
the Bark of Citron. Being candied, it kills the Worms in Children. It also
strengthens the Heart and Stomach, and is good for those Diseases Citrons are
prescribed for. The Juice is not so sharp as that of Limons or Citrons, yet it
is cooling, and tastes pleasantly. It creates an Appetite, and extinguishes
Thirst; and therefore is of good use in Fevers. Oranges are excellent for
curing the Scurvy. The Oil pressed out of the Bark is of a fiery quality, as
will appear to any one that shall press the fresh Juice near a Candle; for the
Drops, like Dew, that fly out will flame and crackle, just as if the Powder of
Sulphur were flung upon the Flame. Some think that the Bark so pressed into
the Eyes clears the Sight. Neck-laces and Bracelets, to number the Prayers, are
made of small Oranges that fall off; and they smell very pleasantly. The Seeds
kill the Worms in Children. The Seeds being set in the Earth, little Trees
spring for a Year, which are eaten in the manner of Sallets; they taste very
pleasantly, and strengthen the Stomach, and create an Appetite. For the Worms,
Take an Orange, bore an Hole in it, and press out the Juice; then fill it with
equal parts of Oil of Flax, the Juice of Wormwood, and Rue, adding a little
Treacle, and Flower of Lupins, and let them boil a while: Anoint the Pulse, the
Temples, the Nostrils, and the Navel with this Linament, and you will find
wonderful Success. Conserve of Oranges is made in the following manner: Take
what quantity you please of the yellow Peel of Oranges, beat them well in a
Stone-Mortar, and add thrice the weight of Fine Sugar; beat it up to a
Conserve: This is good for a cold Scurvy, and for Pains and Wind in the
Stomach. Syrup of Oranges is made in the following manner: Take of the Juice
strained, and clarified by standing, one Pint; of White Sugar clarified, and
boiled up to the Consistence of Tablets, two Pounds; let it just boil up, and
so make a Syrup. Orange-water is made in the following manner: Take of the
yellow Peel of half an Hundred of the best fresh and well-colour'd Oranges,
infuse them four or five Days in three Quarts of Sack and two Quarts of
Nants-Brandy; put a Pound of Loaf-Sugar into it to sweeten it.

Orchis.
It heats and moistens, and tastes sweet. It Is chiefly used for a Provocative
to Venery; it comforts the Womb, and helps Conception. Take of the Salt of
Satyrion half a Scruple in Malaga-Wine often, after the Flux of the Courses:
This has made many Women fruitful. Diasatyrion of the London-Dispensatory is
made in the following manner: Take of the Roots of Orchis three Ounces; Dattes,
bitter Almonds, Indian-Nuts, Pine-Nuts, Fistich-Nuts, Ginger candied,
Eryngo-Roots candied, each one Ounce; of Cloves, Galangal, Long and Black
Pepper, each three Drams; of Amber-grease one Scruple, of Musk two Scruples, of
Penids four Ounces, of Cinnamon and Saffron, each half an Ounce; of Malaga-Wine
three Ounces, of Nutmegs, Mace, Grains of Paradise, each two Drams; of
Ash-tree-Keys, the Belly and Loins of Scinks, of Facticious Borax and Benzoin,
each three Drams; of the Wood of Aloes and Cardamoms, each two Drams; of the
Seeds of Nettles, Onions, and of the Roots of Avens, each one Dram and an half;
mingle them, and make an Electuary according to Art, with two Pints and an half
of the Syrup of Ginger preserved. This Electuary is frequently used for a
Provocative to Venery.

Oyster-green, or Sea-Wrake, in Latin Fucus Marinus.
All kinds of Wrake cool and dry, and are good for Inflammations being used
fresh.

P.
PAnax-Herculis.
This Herb being cut, especially in the Root, the Juice flows out in the
Summertime, which is called Opopanax. It Is good for Wounds: It mollifies,
digests, discusses Wind, purges thick and clammy Phlegm from the remote Parts,
from the Head, Nerves and Joints. The best is yellow without, and white or
yellowish within; it tastes very bitter, and smells strong; it is of a fat
Consistence, dissolves easily in Water, and is light and friable. The Roots of
Panax-Herculis are good for all cold Diseases of the Breast, for Pains of the
Stomach, and Obstructions of the Bowels; for Diseases of the Reins, Bladder,
Womb and Breast. They are good for Pains of the Head, Giddiness, the
Falling Sickness, Convulsions, the Palsy, an Asthma, for Coughs, the Jaundice.
and a Dropsy* They expel Wind, provoke Urine and the Courses, hasten Delivery,
and expel Gravel. A Decoction of them is good for the Hip-Gout. Take of
Opopanax one Dram, of Spike-Nard powdered half a Scruple, of Diagridium four
Grains; with Syrup of Staecha's make Pills: These Pills purge Phlegm.

Pellitory of Spain, in Latin Pygrethrum.
It Is reckoned an excellent Remedy for the Palsy of the Tongue, and Loss of
Speech. The Root is very biting, and hot. Being chewed in the Mouth, it cures
the Pain in the Teeth.

Round Black Pepper, in Latin Piper Rotundum Nigrum.
It grows in most of the Provinces of India, especially Malaca, Java and
Sumetra. There is so much of it in those Places, that it serves the whole
World. The Plant is so weak, that it cannot stand by it self; and if it has no
Tree to climb upon, it falls to the Ground like Hops.

White Round Pepper, in Latin Piper Rotundum Album.
There is no difference betwixt the Plants, as there is none betwixt the Vines
that bring White and Red Grapes. All sorts of Pepper heat, provoke Urine,
concoct and discuss, being taken inwardly; and used outwardly, they take off
the Shaking Cold Fit of Agues, and are good for the Biting of Venomous
Creatures. Pepper hastens Delivery, and is supposed to hinder Conception, being
applied after Copulation. It Is good for Coughs, and all Diseases of the Breast.
Mixed with Honey, it is best for a Quinsie. It takes off the Gripes, being taken
with the tender Leaves of Laurel. It draws Phlegm from the Head, being chewed
with Raisins; and it excites Appetite, and helps Concoction. Mixed with Pitch,
it discusses King's Evil Swellings, and is good for Cold and Crude Stomachs.
There is a great difference betwixt Taking of it whole, and in Powder; for the
Powder causes the Hickups, and inflames all the Bowels: They therefore that
take it to help their Stomachs, should swallow it whole. And it is best to
season Baked Meats with Whole Pepper; for when it is powdered it sticks to the
Coats of the Stomach, and occasions in some Constitutions the Heart-burning,
and the Hickups. It Is used outwardly in Gargarisms, and Sneezing-Powders. It
takes off the Pain of the Teeth, and asswages the Swelling of the Uvula, and is
good for cold Diseases of the Nerves. Pepper, and the Oil of it, is mightily
commended for Quartan-Agues, by several good Authors. Oil of Pepper outwardly
used, is an excellent Rememedy for a Palsy. Not only the Berries, which are
properly called Pepper, are so biting, but also the whole Plant. The Indians
use Long Pepper in Ointments, for Pains of the Members proceeding from Cold,
and against Poisons, and for Giddiness of the Head, Catarrhs, and Dimness of
Sight, with good Success. The Common Sort of People in India use, when their
Stomachs have been a long while weak, to drink Water wherein a good quantity of
Pepper has been infused: And they draw a very fiery Spirit from fresh Pepper,
which they use for the same purpose. Pepper with a clustered Tail, and Long
Oriental Pepper, have much the same Virtues with these described. Take of
Malaga-Sack three Pints, of Rue, Ginger and Long-Pepper cut, each two Drams; of
Nutmegs one Dram; boil them to the Consumption of a third part; strain it, and
add two Drams of Venice-Treacle, and one Dram of Mithridate, and four Ounces of
strong Angelica-water; mingle them: The Dose is, one Spoonful at a time for
Preservation against the Plague, and three at a time to cure it.

Pitch, in Latin Pix.
It Is the Resin of the Pine, of the Firr-tree, and some other Trees: which is
distilled by Fire, and boiled to a Consistence. Pitch used in the manner of a
Plaster, pulls up Hairs by the Roots. It mollifies, suppurates, discusses
Swellings, and incarns Ulcers. Tar cures the Mange in Cattle, and their Wounds
and Ulcers, and keeps the Fly from them. In Norway they use Tar that is made of
the Firr, with good success in Malignant Fevers; they mix it with Beer, and
drink it: And they count dry Pitch a present Remedy for the Gout: But the chief
use of Pitch is for Shipping. Lamb-Black is nothing but the Smoke of Pitch;
they that make it have Rooms that keep in all the Smoke, and so they collect
it. Take of Liquid Pitch, and of the Balsam of Tolu, each twenty six Grains; of
Chios-Turpentine one Scruple; with Powder of Crab's-eyes make a Mass, whereof
make Midling-Pills; take three in the Morning, and at Bedtime, drinking upon
them six Spoonfuls of the following Julap: Take of Hysop-water one Pint, of
Ground-Ivy-water six Ounces, of the Tincture of the Balsam of Tolu one Dram and
an half, of White Sugar Candy a sufficient quantity. These Pills are good in a
Consumption.

The Plane-tree, in Latin Platanus Orientalis Vera.
The tender Leaves boiled in Wine, and used in the manner of an Ointment, stops
Fluxions on the Eyes. The Bark boiled in Vinegar is used for Pains of the
Teeth; but nowadays it is not used in Physic. The Lord Bacon, that excellent
Man, whom all the World admires, planted several of these Trees near Verulam.

Poley-Mountain, in Latin Polium Montanum.
It provokes Urine, and the Courses; is good for Dropsies, and the Jaundice,
and the Biting of Venomous Creatures. It Is an Ingredient in Treacle and
Mithridate. Sylvius commends it much for the Falling Sickness, because it
abounds with a Volatile Salt.

Pomegranate, in Latin Malus Punica, sive Granata.
It grows in France, Italy and Spain. The Apples are reckoned to contain a good
Juice, that is agreeable to the Stomach; but it yields little Nourishment.
Pomegranates, with respect to their Taste, are distinguished into Sweet, Acid
and Vinous. The Sweet, and the Syrup of them, is used for Cronical Coughs; and
a Pleurifie; but it is not good in Fevers, because it occasions Wind, and
increases the Heat. The Acid are cold, and Astringent, and Stomachick;
wherefore they, and the Syrup of them, are used to quench Thirst, for Fevers,
the Running of the Reins, for Ulcers of the Mouth, and the like. The Vinous are
of a middle Nature, betwixt Acid and Sweet; they are Cordial and Cephalic, and
chiefly used for Fainting, and Giddiness, and the like. The Juice is pressed
out of these Apples for the aforesaid Uses; and being fermented and cleared, is
called Wine. The Flowers are very astringent, wherefore they are frequently
used for Fluxes of all kinds. The Powder of them being sprinkled upon Ulcers,
soon Cicatrises them, and cures Ulcers of the Mouth. The Bark is of the same
Nature with the Flowers, and is used to tan Leather, and to make Ink, instead
of Galls. A Decoction of it in Wine, taken inwardly, kills Worms, especially
those which are called Ascarides. The Kernels cool and bind, especially those
of the Acid Apple. In short, the Flowers, the Bark, the Kernels, and the Leaves
are proper where there is need of Binding. Syrup of Pomegranates of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of White Sugar a
Pound and an half, of the Juice of Pomegranates clarified a Pint; make a Syrup
in B. M. Caesalpinus says, that the Juice pressed from the Pomegranate, and the
Peel of it, purges yellow Choler: But this must be understood of the Sweet
Apples. Take of Pomegranate-peel half an Ounce, of Red Roses two Pugils; boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Cow's Milk; in half a Pint of the strained
Liquor dissolve half an Ounce of Diascordium: Make a Clyster. This Dr. Sydenham
commends much in a Looseness, to stop it.

Potatoes, in Latin Battata.
They are boiled, or roasted under Ashes, and eat better than our Turnips. They
grow in the New World, and the neighboring Islands; from whence they were
brought to Spain, and from thence to other Parts of Europe.

Mock- Privet in Latin Phillyrea.
The Leaves of it are astringent; and a Decoction of them cures Ulcers of the
Mouth: And being taken inwardly, it provokes Urine, and the Courses.
Mock-Privet is much used to make Hedges in Gardens, and is planted in Walks.

Psylium, in English Flea-wort.
It grows commonly about Montpeliar, and in Italy. It evacuates yellow Choler,
and by its Mucilage blunts the Acrimony of the Humors; and is therefore
commended in a Dysentery, and the like. But it is supposed to be offensive to
the Stomach, and occasions Faintness if it be taken often. For Pains proceeding
from Inflammations of the Eyes, Take of the Mucilage of the Seed of Flea-wort,
and Quinces, made in Plantane and Rose Water, each one Ounce; and mixed with
five Grains of Camphire, in the White of an Egg; drop it into the Eyes. When
the Palate, Uvula or Tongue are excoriated, Purslain or Flea-wort-water does
good. Violent Pains of the Head, proceeding from an hot Cause, which other
Remedies could not mitigate, have been happily eased with an Epithem made of
the Mucilage of the Seeds of Flea-wort, extracted in Rose Water, and mixed with
a little Vinegar. Take of the Mucilage of the Seeds of Flea-wort, or of
Quinces, extracted with the Water of Lettice or Roses, half an Ounce; of Syrup
of Violets, Limons, or Pomegranates one Ounce and an half; mingle them: Let the
Sick take a little by Intervals, and hold it in his Mouth. This is good for an
Heat, Drought, or Foulness of the Tongue or Jaws.

Pulsatilla.
It Is a Vulnerary Herb. The distilled Water of it is excellent for cleansing
and curing Wounds. The Root of it is much commended by some for a Preservative
from the Contagion of the Plague, and against Poisons, and for the Biting of
Venomous Creatures, two Drams of it being taken in Wine, It Is also mixed with
Antidotes. But Tragus says, that the Root dried, provokes Sneezing; and that,
being chewed in the Mouth raw, it evacuates Phlegm. Which argues, that it is not
gentle nor sweetish, as Matthiolus says.

R.
COmmon Reed, in Latin Arundo Vallatoria.
The Root of it boiled in Water or Wine, and taken inwardly, provokes the
Courses and Urine. The Decoction of it in Wine takes off the Scurf from the
Head, the Head being washed therewith. The green Leaves bruised, and applied,
cures St. Anthony's Fire, and other Inflammations. Reeds are strowed in the
Chambers of those that have Fevers, to keep them cool. The Juice of the Root,
mixed with an equal quantity of Honey and Goat's Suet, takes off the Spots
occasioned by the Smallpox. The Pith applied to the Fore Part of the Head, and
the Feet, provokes Sweat powerfully if the Party that uses it keeps his Bed,
and is well covered. The Root beat, and applied, draws out Thorns from the
Flesh.

Rubarb, in Latin Rhabarbarum.
It grows in China. It purges gently yellow Choler, and clammy Phlegm. It Is a
Specific for the Liver. It cures the Jaundice, a Looseness, and the
Bloody Flux. It Is reckoned to purge first, and bind afterward. It Is commonly
ordered to be torrefied, but it certainly lessens the Virtue of it. For Fevers
proceeding from Obstructions, Take two Drams of Rubarb, or one for Infants,
slice it, and tie it up in a Rag, and infuse it in a Pint of Succory-water: The
Dose is, four Ounces. You must pre^s the Rag wherein the Rubarb is every
Morning. Montanus says, he cured all sorts of Fevers with this Remedy. For the
Hectic Fever in Children, and to purge them upon other Accounts, Take of
choice Rubarb sliced two Drams, put it into a Glass-Bottle containing a Quart
of Small Beer, or any other Liquor the Child usually drinks of; stop the Bottle
close: This Medicate Beer must be used in the Day and Night, and at Meals. When
it is drunk up, a Quart more must be put upon the same Rubarb: Which also being
drunk off, a Quart more must be put upon it as before. After which, the Rubarb
commonly loses its Virtue. But, lest the Beer first put on should be too much
impregnated with the Cathartick Quality of the Rubarb, and so purge too much,
it is best to add another Pint presently after the first is drunk; but
afterward fresh Beer must not be added, till the whole Bottle is taken. Syrup
of Rubarb of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of
the best Rubarb, and of the Leaves of Sena, each two Ounces and an half; of
Violets one Handful, of Cinnamon one Dram and an half, of Ginger half a Dram,
of the Waters of Bettony, Succory and Bugloss, each a Pint and an half; mix
them, and let them stand warm all Night; strain the Liquor, and boil it to a
Syrup, with two Pounds of Fine Sugar; adding to it, at last, four Ounces of
Syrup of Roses Solutive: An Ounce or more of it may be taken at a time. The
Troches of Rubarb are made in the following manner, Take of choice Rubarb ten
Drams, of the Juice of Maudline thickened, and of Bitter Almonds, each half an
Ounce; of Red Roses three Drams, of the Roots of Asarabacca, Madder, Indian
Spike, of the Leaves of Wormwood, Annise and Smallage, each one Dram; make
Troches according to Art, with Wine wherein Wormwood has been boiled, or with
the Juice of Maudline clarified: A Dram of them may be taken at a time. Extract
of Rubarb is made in the following manner: Bruise six or eight Ounces of good
Rubarb, and infuse it twelve Hours warm in a sufficient quantity of
Succory-water, so as the Water may be four Fingers above the Rubarb; let it
just boil, and pass the Liquor through a Cloth; infuse the Remainder in so much
more Succory-water as before, then strain the Infusion, and express it
strongly; mix your Impregnations, or Tinctures, and let them settle; filtrate
them, and evaporate the Liquor in a Glass-Vessel, over a very gentle Fire,
until there remains a Matter that has the Consistence of thick Honey; this is
called Extract of Rubarb: The Dose is, from ten Grains to two Scruples, in
Pills, or dissolved in Succory-water. The best sort of Rubarb is that which
being broke, appears of a Nutmeg-colour within. Its Virtues are so many, and so
great, that if they were sufficiently known, and Men could generally use it
without that Nauseousness which too commonly attends it, Mankind would have
infinitely less need than they have of the Art of Physic in most Cases; and
Men might, perhaps, preserve themselves from most Diseases, without any other
Help.

Ryce, in Latin Oryza.
It grows in East India, and is their chief Corn. It delights much in moist and
wet Ground, and therefore they perpetually water it; so that those that reap it
are forced to go up to the Knees in Water. It Is very much eaten with Meat; so
that all the Oriental Nations live upon it almost. It Is easy to concoct, and
tastes very pleasantly being boiled in Milk, or in fat Broth. It Is good Food
for those that are troubled with the Bloody Flux, a Looseness, and the like.
Some think, that the feeding upon it often makes them fat; and therefore Lean
Women eat it often, boiled in Milk.

S.
SAge of Jerusalem, in Latin Pulmonaria Maculosa.
It Is commonly used with Pot Herbs. It Is cordial, and good for the Lungs. It Is
much of the healing Nature of Comfrey. It Is chiefly used for Ulcers of the
Lungs, and for other Diseases of them; as, a Consumption, Spitting of Blood,
and the like. It Is used outwardly for Wounds. It Is an Ingredient in the
Magisterial-Water of Snails of the London-Dispensatory.

Sanders, in Latin Santalum.
There are three sorts of it, White, Yellow and Red. These Woods are Epatick
and Cordial. They are chiefly used for Fainting, Palpitation of the Heart, and
Obstructions of the Liver. They are used outwardly in Epithems, for Catarrhs,
Headache, Vomiting, and for an hot Intemperies of the Liver. The Arabians, and
most of the Modern Physicians, hold, that Sanders are cold: But John Bauhinus,
and others, judge they are hot, by their Effects and Taste. Great quantities of
the White and Yellow Sanders are used in India; for almost all the Inhabitants
wash their Bodies with Water wherein they have been infused, having been first
pounded in a Stone-Mortar, and then they suffer it to dry on: And this they do
to cool their Bodies, and to perfume them, for the Indians are much delighted
with sweet Smells. Red Sanders cools and binds. White Sanders powdered, and
taken in an Egg, or infused all Night upon hot Ashes, in Red Wine, and taken
inwardly, stops the Flux. The Species of the three Sanders of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of all the Sorts of
the Sanders, and Red Roses, each three Drams; Rubarb, Ivory, Juice of
Liquorish, and Pur^lain-seeds, of each two Drams and fifteen Grains; of
Gum-Arabick, Tragacanth, of the Seeds of Melons, Cucumbers, Citruls, Goards,
and Endive, of each one Dram and an half; of Camphyr one Scruple; make a Powder
according to Art. It Is used for Obstructions of the Liver, for the Jaundice,
and for Weakness of the Stomach and Bowels.

Sarsaparilla.
It consists of fine Parts, and is Sudorifick. It Is a Specific for the
French Pox, for Pains in the Limbs, and for curing Ulcers and Cronical Diseases
that proceed from gross and clammy Humors, and for such as depend on the
Nerves. It Is also used for the King's Evil, and the like. Take of Sarsaparilla
ten Ounces, of the Roots of China four Ounces, of fresh Roots of Female Fern
three Ounces, of White Sanders two Ounces, of Hartshorn and Ivory rasp'd, each
one Ounce and an half; infuse them twelve Hours in ten Quarts of Barly-water,
then boil it to the Consumption of a third part; adding toward the latter end,
Raisins of the Sun stoned half a Pound; then strain it, and add an Ounce of
Fine Sugar to every Pint of the Decoction, and a Dram of Coriander-seeds: Keep
it in Stone-Bottles, well stopped, in a Cellar. Take of Sarsaparilla powdered
two Ounces, of the Inner Resinous Wood of Guaiacum half an Ounce, of
Hart's-horn burnt, and the Troches of Vipers, each one Ounce; of Yellow
Sanders, Tormentile and Amber, each half an Ounce; of Diaphoretick Antimony the
weight of all the rest; make an Electuary with equal Parts of Syrup of
Rasberries, and the Altering Syrup of Apples: The Dose is one Dram, drinking
upon it a Draught of the Decoction of Sarsa to provoke Sweat. The two Medicines
abovementioned are used for the Cure of the French Pox.

Sassafras.
It grows in Florida, and in other Regions of America. The Decoction of the
Wood of the Root and of the Bark is much used. It Is good for the Hip-Gout, and
for Obstructions; and is counted excellent for pale Virgins. It Is much used for
the French Pox. It expels Wind from the Womb, takes off Crudities, provokes the
Courses wonderfully, and cures barrenness, and makes lean People fat. Many use
the Water, or Decoction of it, to prevent the Plague, and other Contagious
Diseases. It Is good for Wind, and cold Diseases of the Stomach. It helps
Concoction, stops Vomiting, and is very good for cold Diseases of the Breast.
It cures the Headache, expels Gravel, takes off the Heat of Urine, cures a
Stinking Breath, and stops Catarrhs. Take of Sassafras six Drams, of
Sarsaparilla four Ounces, of the inner Resinous Wood of Guaiacum three Ounces,
of the Bark of the same one Ounce; of the Roots of Bur-dock, Scorzonera,
Contrayerva, Tormentil, and Butter-bur, of each one Ounce and an half; infuse
them in two Quarts of Small White Wind, upon hot Ashes, for twenty four Hours;
then add six Quarts of Fountain Water, and boil it half away; put in also of
Annise-seeds, Sweet-Fennel-seeds, and Coriander-seeds, each three Drams; of
Liquorish two Ounces; strain it for use. Electuary of Sassafras of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of the most fragrant
Wood of Sassafras two Ounces, boil it in three Pints of common Water till half
is consumed; toward the End add half an Ounce of Cinnamon grossly powdered;
strain it, and with two Pounds of Fine Sugar boil it to a thick Syrup; then add
of Cinnamon powdered one Dram, of Nutmegs powdered half a Scruple, of
Amber-grease thirty two Grains, of Musk three Grains, ten Leaves of Gold, and
four Drops of Spirit of Vitriol: Make an Electuary according to Art. It opens
Obstructions, stops Defluxions, helps Concoction, expels Wind and Gravel, and
is generally good for Diseases that proceed from cold, crude and thin Humors.
A Dram of it may be taken at a time.

Saw-wort, in Latin Seratula.
It Is called so because the Leaves are indented like a Saw. Taken in Wine it is
good for Ruptures and Bruises; and a Dram of the Powder of the Root taken in
hot Wine, does the same. A Decoction of it in Wine cleanses Ulcers wonderfully,
and incarns and cicatrises them. It eases the Pain of the Piles, they being
fomented with it. The Leaves and the Root beat together, and applied, cures
Wounds and Bursten Bellies.

Scammony, in Latin Scammonium.
The best comes from Antioch; it is clear, splendid, melts easily, and breaks
easily, is not very weighty; being touched with the Tongue it grows milky, when
it is broken it is yellowish; but that which we have commonly is of an
Ash Color, and looks ill, because it is not the Liquor or Tear flowing from
the Plant, but the Juice pressed out. It purges strongly Choleric, Watery and
Sharp Humors from the remote Parts, and therefore is frequently used for such
Purposes: The Dose is, from six Grains to a Scruple. But it is most commonly
used mixed with some other thing. The Preparation of Scammony is in the
following manner: Put the Powder of Scammony into a Quince made hollow, covered
with Paste, and baked in an Oven, or roasted under Ashes; take out the
Scammony, and being so prepared, it is called Diagridium. There is another
Preparation of it with Sulphur: Take of Scammony powdered as much as you
please, put it upon a Paper, hold the Paper over Live Coals whereupon Brimstone
is cast, till the Scammony melts, or grows white; and this is called
Sulphurated Scammony. Diagridium is an Ingredient in the Golden Pill, and of
the Pill Cochia Major. Scammony is an Ingredient in the Pill Cochia Minor, of
the Pill De Lapide Lazuli, of the Pill of Opopanax, of the Pill Rudii, and of
the Pill Sine-quibus. Take of Calcined Hart's-horn three Grains, of Mercurius
Dul^is fifteen Grains, one Drop of Oil of Sulphur being dropped upon it,
Diagridium nine Grains, Cinnamon two Grains, Spirit of Hart's-horn three Drops;
mingle them, make a Powder to be taken in the Pap of a Roasted Apple once a
Week. This is a proper Purge for Children that are troubled with Worms.
Scammony is also an Ingredient of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses of the
London-Dispensatory.

Scottish Scurvy Grass, Sea-Coal-wort, or Sea-bind-Weed, in Latin Soldanalla
Marina.
The Herb is Acrid, and injurious to the Stomach; it purges violently; but
because of its Acrimony, it is boiled in fat Broth. It Is peculiarly proper to
evacuate Water in a Dropsy: It Is also good in the Scurvy. It Is corrected with
Cinnamon, Mace, Ginger and Annise-seeds, and the like. It Is given sometimes in
Substance, and then the Dose is, from half a Dram to a Dram. Take of the Leaves
of Scottish Scurvy Grass half an Ounce, of Annise-seeds one Scruple; boil them
in Flesh-Broth for one Dose. Take of the Powder of Scottish Scurvy Grass one
Dram; of Spike and Mace, each half a Scruple; mingle them. Either of these
Medicines is used to purge Water.

Sebestens, or Assyrian Plums, in Latin Myxa, sive Sebesten.
They grow in Egypt and Asia. They are much used in Diseases of the Lungs, for
Coughs joined with Heat and Drought, for Difficulty of Breathing, a Pleuresie,
a Peripneumonia, an Hoarsness, and for a Catarrh. They are an Ingredient in the
Pectoral Decoction of the London-Dispensatory, and in the Syrup of Hysop.

Sena.
It grows in Syria, Persia and Arabia; and from thence is carried into Egypt,
to Alexandria; from whence it is brought to us. It purges Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy; but it is flatulent; and is apt to disturb the Stomach and Bowels.
It Is corrected with Cinnamon, Galangal and Ginger. It Is given in Substance,
from half a Dram to one Dram and an half; and in Infusion, from two Drams to
five. Great Virtues are attributed to it by the Ancient and Modern Physicians.
It cures the Headache, is good for Madness, the Falling Sickness, a Palsy, and
the Itch, and the like. It chears the Heart, quickens the Sight, helps Hearing,
and opens Obstructions of the Bowels. Take of the Leaves of Sena cleans'd a
sufficient quantity, put them into a Glass-Bottle, and pour upon them so much
Aqua-vitae as will rise four or five Fingers above the Matter; stop the Bottle
close, and let it stand for two Days: The Dose is two Spoonfuls in Broth. Sena
is an Ingredient of Elixir Salutis, which is, indeed, an excellent Medicine.
It Is made in the following manner: Take of the Leaves of Sena four Ounces, of
Guaiacum, and of the Roots of Elecampane dried, of the Seeds of Annise,
Carraways and Coriander, and of Liquorish, each two Ounces; of Raisins of the
Sun stoned half a Pound; steep them in the Cold, in three Quarts of Aqua-vitae,
for the space of four Days; strain it: The Dose is two, three or four
Spoonfuls, more or less, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient. It Is
excellent for the Cholick, and for Gravel, and many other Diseases. It Is sold,
I believe, in most Market Towns in England, and is made by many: And there has
been very hot Disputes amongst the Publishers, about the Primogeniture of it.
The Greater Compound-Powder of Sena of the London-Dispensatory is made in the
following manner: Take of the Seeds of Annise, Caraway, Fennel, Cummin,
Spike-Nard, Cinnamon and Galangal, each half an Ounce; of Liquorish and Gromel,
each one Ounce; of Sena the weight of all: Make a Powder. The Lesser
Compound-Powder of Sena of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following
manner: Take of the best Sena two Ounces, of the Cream of Tartar half an Ounce,
of Mace two Scruples and an half, of Ginger and Cinnamon, of each one Dram and
an half; Sal Gemmae one Dram; make a Powder according to Art. The Powder called
Dia-Sena of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of
the Leaves of Sena, and of Cream of Tartar, each two Ounces; of Cloves,
Cinnamon, Galangal and Bishop's-weed, each two Drams; of Diagridium half an
Ounce: Make a Powder according to Art. The Decoction called Decoctum Senae
Gerconis of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of
the Leaves of Sena two Ounces, of the Roots of Polypody of the Oak half an
Ounce, of Ginger one Dram, of Raisins of the Sun stoned two Ounces, of
Sebestens and Damask-Prunes, each in number Twelve, of the Flowers of Borrage,
Violets, Red Roses, and Rosemary-flowers, each two Drams; boil them in two
Quarts of Fountain Water, to the Consumption of half: But some Purging Syrup is
usually added to this, to make it work.

Skirret, in Latin Sisarum.
It Is sown in Gardens; but the usual Way of propagating it is, to set the
lesser Roots in February or March, before they spring; the greater being to be
eaten at that time, boiled, and dish'd with Butter, Pepper and Salt, the middle
hard Nerve being first taken out. Cordus says, that it is the most wholesome
Root that is eaten. It Is hot and moist, and concocts easily* and nourishes
pretty well; but it is windy, and therefore a Provocative to Venery.

Smilax Aspera.
It grows in Sicily, Italy and France every where in the Hedges. It Is a
Succedanum for Sarsaparilla. It cures the French Pox, and Pains of the Joints
and Nerves. It evacuates hurtful Humors by Sweat and Transpiration, and cures
the Vices of the Skin. It Is given in Powder, or in a Decoction. Fallopius cured
several of the French Pox with it.

Virginian Snake-weed, in Latin Polyrhizos Virginiana.
It Is a most certain and present Remedy against the Venom of the Rattle-Snake.
It Is also good for the Biting of a Mad Dog, and to cure a Quartan-Ague, half a
Dram or a Dram of it being taken just before the Fit comes. It Is also used in
Pestilential Fevers, and also for the Worms in Children. Take of Virginian
Snake-weed powdered one Dram, of Coral calcined till it is white half a Dram;
mingle them: Make a Powder. The Dose is half a Scruple, or a Scruple, twice a
Day, for three Days following: The Child must drink a Decoction of Grass-Roots
upon it.

Sponge, in Latin Spongia.
It Is much of the nature of a Mushroom. It grows upon Rocks, Shells, and the
Sands. It has several Uses: It Is used in Fomentations, for it retains the Heat
much longer than Clothes. Anatomists and Surgeons use it to suck up Blood,
and to dilate Ulcers, and to keep them open as long as it is convenient, and to
dry them. The Ancient Physicians used the Ashes of it in Medicines for the
Eyes. Many Modern Physicians prescribed the Ashes to be taken in Wine, for the
space of a Month, for the Cure of a Bronchocele.

Squills, or Sea-Onion, in Latin Scilla.
It grows in Spain, and elsewhere. It incides, opens and discusses. It Is used
in Obstructions of the Liver, of the Spleen, and for Obstructions of the
Courses and Urine; for Coughs, and the Mucilage of the Lungs. There are two
Oxymels of Squills used in the Shops, Simple and Compound. They are chiefly
used for Diseases of the Breast proceeding from gross Phlegm. Honey of Squils of
the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take a large
Sea-Onion, full of Juice, cut it into small pieces, and put it into a
Glass-Vessel close stopped, and covered over with a Bladder; let it stand in
the Sun forty Days, twenty Days before the Rising of the Dog Star, and twenty
Days after; then open the Glass, and take the Juice which lies at the bottom,
and preserve it with the best Honey. Vinegar of Squills of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take that part of the
Squills which is between the outward Bark and the bottom, cut it into thin
Slices, place them thirty or forty Days in the Sun, or in some gentle Heat;
then cut a Pound of them small, with an Ivory-Knife, or a Knife made of some
white Wood; put it into a Vessel with six Pints of Vinegar, set the Vessel,
close stopped, in the Sun thirty or forty Days; afterward strain it, and keep
it for use. Simple Oxymel of Squills of the London-Dispensatory is made in the
following manner Take of Clarified Honey three Pounds, of Vinegar of Squills two
Pints; boil them according to Art. Compound Oxymel of Squills of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of Origanum, Hysop,
Thyme, Lovage, of the Lesser Cardamoms, and of Staechas, each five Drams; boil
them in three Pints of Water, to one; strain it, and mix with it two Pounds of
Honey, of Raisins half a Pound, Juice of Briony five Ounces, Vinegar of Squills
a Pint and an half; boil it according to Art, and take off the Scum. This and
the Simple Oxymel are good for Obstructions of the Lungs, and to cleanse the
Stomach. Wine of Squills of the London-Dispensatory is made in the following
manner: Take of the Roots of White Mountain-Squils, gathered about the Rising
of the Dog Star, cut them into Slices, and let them lie a-drying a Month; put a
Pound of them into a Glass, and pour upon them four Quarts of Old French
White Wind; infuse them forty Days, and then take out the Squills. Take of
Oxymel of Squills one Ounce and an half, of Vinegar of Squills two Ounces;
mingle them: Make a Vomit. This is a gentle Vomit. Take of the Infusion of
Crocus Metallorum six Drams, of Wine of Squills one Ounce and an half, of
Simply Syrup of Sorrel half an Ounce. This is a stronger Vomit. Oxymel of
Squills, mixed with Pectoral Syrups, is excellent to help Expectoration.

Staechas.
It grows plentifully about Montpeliar. It heals and dries, is Diuretic and
Vulnerary. It Is chiefly used for Obstructions of the Urine, Liver, Spleen and
Courses. It resolves Coagulated Blood, it dries Catarrhs, and kills Worms being
taken in Wine. It Is also commended for drying up sharp Defluxions of the Lungs.
It Is used outwardly to mollify hard Swellings of the Womb, in Fomentations. It
dries and discusses Defluxions of the Head, the Herb being burnt and smelt to.
Matthiolus says, that the whole Herb cures all Diseases of the Brain proceeding
from a cold Cause; namely, Phlegmatic Fluxions, Pains of the Head, the
Falling Sickness, the Palsy, and the like. Syrup of Staechas of the
London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of the Flowers of
Staechas four Ounces, of Rosemary half an Ounce, of the Herb Thyme, Calamint
and Origanum, each an Ounce and an half; of Sage and Betony, each half an
Ounce; of the Seeds of Rue, Peony and Fennel, each three Drams, digest them a
Day or two in B. M. in a sufficient quantity of warm Fountain Water; strain it
out, and to five Pints of the strained Liquor add five Pounds and an half of
Fine Sugar: Make a Syrup according to Art in B. M. add some Drops of Oil of
Cinnamon. This Syrup is frequently made use of in Diseases of the Head.

Staves-acre, or Louse-wort, in Latin Staphis Agria.
It grows in Dalmatia, Apulia and Calabria. It Is violently hot, Acrid and
Caustic; therefore it is used for a Masticatory. It also purges; but being not
a gentle Medicine, it is seldom used. Twelve Grains or a Scruple of the Seed
purges upward and downward, and raises Salivation; wherefore it is very good in
the French Pox, says Sylvius: but it inflames the Jaws, and occasions a violent
Heat in them, and brings the Patient in danger of Suffocation, and therefore
surely ought not to be used inwardly. Take of Mastick three Drams, of Pellitory
of Spain and Staves-Acre, each two Drams; of the Roots of Angelica half a Dram,
of Cubebs and Nutmegs, each one Dram; of Euphorbium one Scruple, of Wax a
sufficient quantity to make a Mass for Masticatories.

Storax-tree, in Latin Styrax Arbor.
It grows in Italy. The Resin of Storax, which is sold in the Shops is
twofold, dry and liquid. The dry is called Storax-Calamite; so called because
it is put up in Reeds. And when there is only mention made of Storax in
prescribing, you must understand it to be the Calamite-Storax. It heats, dries,
mollifies and concocts* is good for Distillations and Hoarsness. It Is good also
for an Hardness and Obstruction of the Womb. It Is much used for Perfumes. That
is best which is fat, and has whitish Fragments. The Red Storax of the Shops,
which the Jews frequently use for Perfumes, comes from India. Liquid Storax is
a fat Liquor, like a Balsam; it has a strong Smell, and is of the Consistence
of Honey. A Storax, with the Leaves of Maple, grows in the Lord Bishop of
London's curious Garden: It was brought from Virginia. The Pill of Storax of
the London-Dispensatory is made in the following manner: Take of
Storax-Calamite, of Olibanum, Myrrh, and of the Juice of Liquorish thickened,
each half an Ounce; of Saffron one Dram; with Syrup of White Poppies make a
Mass. This is much used for Tickling Coughs proceeding from Rheums, and
Defluxions on the Lungs: The Dose is fifteen Grains, or one Scruple, to be
taken at Bedtime.

Straw-berry-tree, in Latin Arbutus.
It grows in Sicily, Italy and France, and in the West Part of Ireland. The
Fruit tastes pleasantly, but not so well as Straw-berries. It Is offensive to
the Stomach, and causes the Headache. A Water drawn from the Leaves and Flowers
in Glass is counted an excellent Anti-dote against the Plague, and for Poisons.

Sugar-Cane in Latin Arundo Saccharina.
It grows spontaneously in both the Indies. It Is also planted in many other
Places; as, in the Canary-Islands, Spain, Sicily, Crete and Cyprus. It loves a
fat and moist Ground, and is fit to make Sugar in the space of a Year. The
Juice is pressed out in a Mill, which is very sweet, but will not keep above
twenty four Hours, afterward it turns to Vinegar: They boil it up in great
Furnaces; but it is worth noting, that if any Oil be mixed with it, it will
never come to Sugar. Sugar is much used, both in Food and Physic. It has been
supposed, that the immoderate use of Sugar here in England has been the Reason
of the Increase of the Scurvy and of Consumptions amongst us: It Is certain that
it increases the Scurvy, for by the frequent use of it the Teeth grow black and
rotten, which are certain Signs of the Scurvy. Moreover, it contains in it a
very Corrosive Salt, which appears by Distillation: And it is well known, that
the Scurvy is occasioned by a Fixed Salt, and cured by a Volatile Salt. But it
is to be noted, that Sugar is better to be mixed with Medicines peculiar to
Women's Diseases than Honey, for Honey is injurious to the Womb. Sugar is
dissolved in Water, then filtrated, and so it is purified; afterward the
Liquor is evaporated, and it is made up into Loaves, or put up in Casks: It Is
either Red, brown, or white, according to the Degrees of Purification. When the
Sugar has been refined no more than abovesaid, it is a little fat: Now to
refine it farther, it is dissolved in Limewater, and boiled, and the Scum is
taken off; when it is sufficiently boiled they cast it into Molds of a
Pyramidal Form, which have Holes at the bottom to let the more glutinous part
run through, and separate. It Is farther refined by boiling it with the Whites
of Eggs in Water; for the glutinous quality of the Whites of Eggs does help to
receive and take away the Impurities that remain in the Sugar, and the boiling
drives them all to the Sides of the Vessel, in a Scum: The Liquor is passed
through a Cloth, and then evaporated to a due Consistence. Sugar Candy is only
Sugar Crystalliz'd: The Way to make it is, to boil Refined Sugar in Water, to
the Consistence of a thick Syrup; it is then poured into Pots, wherein little
Sticks have been laid in order, it is left in a still place some Days, without
stirring, and you have the Sugar Candy sticking to the Sticks. Brown
Sugar Candy is made after the same manner. Its Sweetness proceeds from an
Essential Acid Salt, mixed with some Oily Parts, whereof it consists; for, if
you separate these two Substances, one from another, neither of the two will
prove at all sweet: The Oil alone is insipid upon the Tongue, because it makes
little or no Impression upon the Nerve that serves for Tasting; but when the
Acid is entirely mixed with it, the Edges of this Acid do serve for a Vehicle
to the Oil, to make it penetrate and tickle superficially the Nerve, whereby
the Sense of Tasting is produced: The Acid therefore being alone, does become
incisive, and pricks the Tongue by its Edges; but when they are dulled and
blunted by the Ramous Parts of the Oil, then they have another sort of
Determination, and can no longer pierce the Nerve of Tasting, but with a great
deal of Tenderness and Gentleness. Cask-Sugar is sweeter than finer Sugar,
because it contains more viscous or fat Parts, which remain the longer upon the
Nerve of the Tongue: And this makes us sometimes prefer the first, as to Use,
before the other. Sugar Candy is better for Coughs than common Sugar, because,
being harder, it requires a longer time to melt in the Mouth; and besides, it
keeps the Breast moister than the common Sugar. Spirit of Sugar is made in the
following manner: Powder and mix eight Ounces of White Sugar Candy with four
Ounces of Sal-Armoniack, put this Mixture into a Glass, or Earthen Body, whose
third part only is thereby filled; fit an Head to the Body, and place it in a
Sand-Furnace; join a Receiver to it, and lute well the Junctures with a wet
Bladder; give it a small Fire for an Hour only, to heat the Vessel, then
increase it to the second Degree; there will distill a Liquor, Drop by Drop, and
toward the End there will rise white Vapors into the Head; increase your Fire
still more, until nothing more comes forth; let the Vessels cool, and unlute
them, you will find in the Receiver seven Ounces of a brown Liquor that smells
ill, and also a little black Oil that sticks to the Sides; pour it all together
into a Glass-Body, and having fitted to it an Head and Receiver, and luted the
Joints, distill in Sand six Ounces of a very Acid Spirit, that is clear, and
agreeable to the Taste, and without any Smell. It Is good against Gravel, and
the Dropsy, and for a Looseness, and the Bloody Flux. The Dose is, eight or ten
Drops in Tincture of Roses, or the like. That which remains in the Body, after
Rectification, is a Fetid Oil, which may be outwardly used to cleanse old
Ulcers. Melassoes, or the Honey of Sugar, are used to make Aqua-vitae; and they
yield a strong Spirit. It has been reported, that some Brewers make Ale, in a
great measure, with Melassoes; but if they do, it is an abominable Cheat; for
they are not near so wholesome as Malt. Take of Brown or Red Sugar four
Spoonfuls, of common Salt as much as will lie on a Threepence, of Cow's-Milk
one Pint; let the Milk just boil up, dissolve the Sugar and the Salt in it;
strain it. This is a Clyster, and, generally speaking, serves as well as the
best, to empty the Bowels.

Swallow-wort, in Latin Asclepias.
It grows in Germany, Italy and France. The Root of it is very Alexipharmick,
and Sudorinick. It Is chiefly used for the Plague, and other Contagious
Diseases; for Obstructions of the Courses, for the Palpitation of the Heart, a
Fainting, and a Dropsy. It Is also commended for the Stone. It Is used
outwardly. The Flowers, the Roots, and the Seeds cleanse Sordid Ulcers. It Is
good for the Biting of Venomous Creatures, for Ulcers of the Paps, of the
Breasts, and the like.

T.
TAmarinds, in Latin Tamarindi.
They grow in Arabia Foelix, and in the East and West Indies. They correct the
Acrimony of the Humors, purge Choler, and restrain the Heat of they Blood;
they cure Fevers, and the Jaundice, and take off the Heat of the Stomach and
Liver, and stop Vomiting. The Turks and Arabians, when they go long Journies in
the Summertime, carry Tamarinds with them, to quench their Thirst. In
Pestilential and Putrid Fevers, Water wherein Tamarinds have been infused,
sweetened with Sugar, is a proper Liquor to drink; for it extinguishes Thirst,
and cools much. Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, of Sena two Drams, of Rubarb
one Dram and an half; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water; to
three Ounces of the strained Liquor, add of Manna and Syrup of Roses Solutive,
each one Ounce: Make a Purging Potion. This is a good Cooling Purge, and works
well. Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, of Sena two Drams, of Rubarb one Dram
and an half; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water; to three Ounces of
the strained Liquor add of Manna, and Syrup of Roses Solutive, each one Ounce;
of Syrup of Buck-thorn half an Ounce, of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses
two Drams; mingle them, make a Potion: But this must be given only to strong
People. I have found by Experience, that this purges, when nothing else will.
It Is good for a Dropsy, and the Running of the Reins.

Tea, or Thee.
This Shrub grows in Japan and China. The Price varies according to the
Largeness of the Leaves; and so great a difference is there in the Price, that
one Pound of the best Tea is sold for more than an hundred Pounds of another
Sort. The Goodness of it is known by the fragrant Smell of the Leaves: It
smells somewhat like Hay, mixed with a little Aromatic Smell. It Is of a green
Color, and tastes sweet, with a little bitter. It purifies the Blood, prevents
troublesome Dreams, expels Malignant Vapors from the Brain, takes off
Giddiness, and the Headache, especially when it proceeds from Over-eating. It Is
good in a Dropsy, for it provokes Urine very much. It dries up Rhumes of the
Head, corrects the Acrimony of the Humors, opens Obstructions of the Bowels,
and strengthens the Sight; for the People of Japan use it as the only Remedy
for Weakness of the Sight, and Diseases of the Eyes, whereunto they are much
subject. It corrects Adust Humors, cools an hot Liver, and softens an hard
Spleen. It keeps People wakeful, especially those that are not used to drink
it. It renders the Body brisk, chears the Heart, drives away Fear, and takes
off the Gripes, and suppresses Wind. It strengthens the Bowels, quickens the
Memory, and sharpens the Wit. It prevents the Stone: And a Person that
traveled in Japan, and made it his Business to enquire about the Stone there,
could not find one Person that had the least Symptom of it, either in the
Bladder or Kidneys. And it is, moreover, a Provocative to Venery; it
strengthens the Stomach, and is very good for Gouty People.

Christ-thorn, in Latin Palivrus.
The Root and Leaves are Astringent, they stop the Flux of the Belly, and
digest and cure a Phyma. The Fruit is so inciding, that it is said to lessen
the Stone of the Bladder, and to remove Excretions of the Breast and Lungs. The
Seeds bruised, are commended for a Cough: and the Mont peliar-Physicians use
them for Gravel; and the Stone. Some report, that these were the Thorns our
Blessed Savior was crowned with, in Contempt, by the Unbelieving Jews, just
before his Crucifiction.

Mastick- Thyme, in Latin Marum.
It grows in many Places in Spain. By reason of its curious Smell, it is kept
in Gardens in England, France and Germany. One Dram of the Bark of it is a
present Remedy for desperate Obstructions of the Courses, being taken in Rough
Wine every Morning.

Turbith.
It purges Phlegm, and clammy Humors, that fall on the Joints. It Is good in
the Dropsy, for it purges Watery Humors. It Is brought to us from Guzaratta.

Turmerick, in Latin Curcuma.
The Dutch boil it with Fish, for it gives it a good Taste, and colors it
yellow. It Is besides, an excellent Remedy for Obstructions of the Bowels, viz.
of the Lungs, Liver and Spleen; and also of the Mesaraick Veins, and for
Nephritick Pains. It Is also very good for the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder.
It also opens Women's Obstructions, and hastens Delivery: But it is peculiarly
good for curing of the Jaundice. In short, This Root is reckoned the best of
all Medicines for opening Obstructions. The People of China use it in
Sneezing-powders, like the Roots of White Hellebore. And they make an Ointment
with this Root, and the Powder of Sanders, and some sweet Flowers, wherewith
the Men and Women anoint their Bodies all over: And though this may seem very odd
to those that are unaccustomed to it, by reason of the yellow Color, yet it
secures them very well from the Heat of the Sun, and Feverish Heats, and from
the vexatious Biting of Flies and Gnats. Take of the Roots of Turmerick and
Madder, each one Ounce; of the Greater Celandine-Root and Herb, of the Tops of
the Lesser Centory, each one Handful; boil them in equal Parts of Rhenish-wine
and Fountain Water, to a Quart; in the strained Liquor dissolve two Ounces of
the Syrup of the five Opening Roots; give half a Pint, Morning and Evening,
hot, till the Patient recovers of the Jaundice; but Vomiting or Purging must be
first used.

V.
VIne, in Latin Vitis.
It does not deserve the Name of a Tree, because it cannot stand by it self.
There is as great Variety of them, as of Pears and Apples. Currents that are
called Corinthian, do not grow now about Corinth; for the Inhabitants are not
encouraged to plant, or to take care of them, there being now no Sale for them;
the Turks having shut up the Passage, and not suffering any great Ships to go
thither, they come now from Zant, and many other Places. The Raisins of the Sun
are very large Grapes, and in form like a Spanish Olive. They dry them after
this manner: They cut cross-ways, to the Middle, the Branches they design for
this use, and so they intercept a good part of the Nutritious Juice that should
come to the Grapes; they let the Branches hang half cut upon the Vine, till
they are dried by degrees, partly by the Heat of the Sun, and partly for want
of Nourishment. Vines grow best in an hot Country; and the hotter the Country
is, if it be not too hot, the sooner the Grapes are ripe. There are great
quantities of excellent Wine in Spain, Italy, Sicily, and some Parts of France.
They usually climb up on Trees; as, upon the Elm, and the Poplar. In Lombardy
they plant them in the Cornfieldsd, so near Trees, that they may climb up on
them; and so they have Corn, Wine and Wood in the same Fields. The Leaves and
Tendrels of the Vine bruised, and applied, ease the Pain of the Head, and take
off Inflammations, and Heat off the Stomach. The Tear of the Vine, which is
like a Gum, (but it does not grow on our Vines) taken in Wine, is good for the
Stone. The Ashes of the Tendrels mixed with Vinegar, cure a Condyloma, and is
good for the Biting of Vipers, and Inflammations of the Spleen. It Is to little
purpose to mention the Virtues of Wine, for there is scarce any one that is
ignorant of them. The Wine called Setinum was most esteemed by the Ancients.
The Wines that are most esteemed amongst us are, the Claret Wine,
Burgundy-Wine, common White Wind, Frontiniack, Hermitage, and Champaign: These
come from France. The following from Spain: Canary-Sack, Malaga-Sack,
Sherry-Sack, Alicant-Wine, and Port-o-Port. From the Island of Crete is brought
Red Muscadine. From Germany, Rhenish Wine. Wine is wholsomer than Beer, Mead,
or Cider; and, indeed, than any other Liquor. Nowadays Rough Wines, though they
are not so pleasing to the Palate, are counted better for the Stomach, and to
help Concoction; as, Claret, and Florentine-Wine. Baccius wrote an excellent
Book in the Year 1596. of the several sorts of Wines; it was printed at Rome,
and is, indeed, worth perusing, wherein is contained all that has been wrote of
the Grape by Ancient and Modern Writers, together with Observations of his own,
about Greek, Italian, Spanish, French and Rhenish-Wines, with the Ways of
making them; their Diseases and Remedies. Omphaciun is the unripe Juice of the
Grape strained, and kept in a Vessel close stopped: It cools and dries. It is
not only used in Physic, but also with Food, in Sauces. It takes off
Nauseousness, excites Appetite, stops the Flux of the Belly, and mitigates the
Heat of the Stomach and Bowels, being taken inwardly. And outwardly applied, it
clears the Sight, as also does Wild Apples, and cleanses them from Filth. It Is
better for all hot Diseases than Vinegar. Sapa is New Wine, boiled to the
Consumption of a third part. Defrutum is New Wine, boiled to the Consumption of
half. Distillation of Wine into Brandy is made in the following manner: Fill
with Wine half a large Copper Body, cover it with its Moor's-head bordered with
its Refrigeratory, and fit to it a Receiver; lute well the Junctures with a wet
Bladder, and distill with a gentle Fire about a quarter of the Liquor, or else
until the Liquor which distills does not burn when the Fire is put to it; that
which is in the Receiver is called Brandy. Brandy may be drawn from all sorts
of Wines; but more of it may be drawn in some Countries, than in others. For
Example, The Wines that are made about Orleans and Paris do yield more Brandy
than many others which seem to be stronger; and the Reason is, because those
Wines that appear stronger are loaded with a great deal of Tartar, which fixes
their Spirits; whereas the other, containing but a convenient Portion of this
Tartar, do leave their Spirits at greater liberty. When Wine has been drunk,
there is made a Separation of Spirits in the Body, much resembling that which
is made by Distillation; for the Heat of the Bowels warming it, causes the
Spirituous Parts to spread on all Sides, through the Pores, and some part of
them to mix with the Blood, and rarefie it; from whence it comes to rejoice the
Heart, and increase the Vigor of the whole Body; but because these Spirits do
always tend upwards, the greatest part flies into the Brain, where it quickens
its Motion, and produces a certain Gaiety of Mind: But now, though Wine,
moderately taken, is so profitable for the Functions of the Body, yet it causes
many Mischiefs when it is used to Excess; for the Spirits rising in great
Abundance, do circulate in the Brain with so much Celerity* that they soon
confound the whole Economy: And, indeed, every one knows, that a Continuations
of Debauches does at last render a Man dull and stupid; that Apoplexies,
Palsies, Gout, Dropsy, and a long Train of many other Diseases, are the usual
Consequences of Intemperance. Spirit of Wine is made in the following manner:
Fill a large Bolt-head, with a long Neck, half full with Brandy, and fitting an
Head and Receiver, lute close the Junctures; set your Bold-head upon a Pot,
filled half with Water, to distill in a Vaporous Bath, the Spirit, which
separates from the Phlegm, and rises pure; continue this Degree af Fire, until
nothing more distills: Thus you will have a Deflegmated Spirit of Wine at the
first Distillation. It serves for a Menstruum to a great many Things in
Chemistry. Half a Spoonful of it is given to Apoplectical and Lethargical
Persons, to make them come to themselves: Likewise their Wrists* Breast and
Face are rubbed with it. It Is a good Remedy for Burns, if applied so soon as
they happen. And it is good for Cold Pains, for the Palsy, Contusions, and
other Maladies, wherein it is requisite to discuss and open the Pores. Spirit
of Wine Tartariz'd in made in the following manner: Put a Pound of Salt of
Tartar into a long Glass-Body, pour upon it four Pints of Spirit of Wine
prepared as above; place your Vessel in Sand, and cover it with an Head, to
which fit a Receiver; lute well the Junctures with a ^et Bladder, and give it a
gradual Fire, which continue until three parts of the Spirit of Wine are risen;
then remove the Fire, and keep this Spirit in a Viol well stopped: It has the
same Virtues as the other, but is more subtle. The Liquor that remains in the
Body may be evaporated, and a Salt of Tartar got, as good as before. The Queen
of Hungary's Water is made in the following manner: Fill a Glass or Earthen
Cucurbite half full with Rosemary-flowers, gathered when they are at best, pour
upon them a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine to infuse them; set the
Cucurbite in a Bath, and joining its Head and Receiver, lute close the
Junctures, and give it a digesting Fire for three Days; after which, unlute
them, and pour into the Cucurbite that which may have been distilled; re-fit
your Limbeck, and increase the Fire so as to make the Liquor to distill Drop by
Drop; when you have drawn about two Thirds of it, put out the Fire, let the
Vessels cool, and unlute them, and put the Water so distilled into a Vial well
stopped. It Is good in a Palsy, Lethargy, Apoplexy, and for Hysterical Diseases.
The Dose is, from one Dram to two. It Is likewise used outwardly, for Burns,
Tumors, Cold Pains, Contusions, Palsy, and in all other Cases wherein it is
requisite to revive the Spirits. Ladies use to mix half an Ounce of it with six
Ounces of Lilly-water, or Bean-flower-water, and wash their Faces with it.
Wine, like all other Liquors that use to ferment, grows sour by the Dissolution
of its Tartar in a second Fermentation. This Dissolution is commonly made when,
upon the Wine's going to decay, some of the more subtle Spirits are lost; for
the Tartar taking their Place, fixes the rest of the Spirits which remain in
the Wine, so that they can act no long. Vinegar is made by setting Wine in
some hot place, or by keeping it too long, or by exposing it to the Sun.
Vinegar is frequently used in Physic, and Food. Pickle and Sauces are made of
it. It excites Appetite, and promotes Concoction. It Is used in Physic to allay
Feverish Heats, and to prevent Putrefaction; to cut Phlegm, and Glutinous
Humors, that they may be rendered thereby fitter to be expectorated. Outwardly
used, it cures the Itch, an Herpes, and the like; but it is injurious to the
Nerves, and Nervous Parts: It also makes the Body lean. There is a memorable
Story of a General in the Belgic Wars, who, about the Middle of his Age, grew
so very fat, that he was forced to have Bandage for his Belly; and finding
himself grow more and more unwieldy every Day, and unfit for his Business, he
left off drinking Wine, and drank Vinegar the rest of his Days; by which Means
his Belly assuaged, and he was lessened in weight Eighty seven Pounds.
Christopher A Vega says, he saw three People that were hanged, or suffocated so
much, that Froth came out of their Mouths, restored to Life by Vinegar, and the
Powder of Pepper, and Pennyroyal. For Crusty, Stinking Ulcers of the Head,
which Children are commonly troubled withal, and sometimes grown People, Take
of Ginger three Ounces, boil it in sharp Vinegar and Butter, of each half a
Pound, till the Vinegar is consumed; then beat it into an Ointment, with
Butter, and anoint the Sores with it Morning and Evening, and it will cure them
in four or five Days. In the London-Dispensatory are the following Sorts of
Vinegar: Rosemary-Vinegar, Clove-Vinegar, Rose-Vinegar, Elder-flower-Vinegar,
Vinegar of Squils, and Treacle-Vinegar. The Vapor of Vinegar is very proper in
the Plague. Vinegar is distilled in the following manner: Put six Quarts of
strong Vinegar into an Earthen Pan, evaporate in a Bath about a Quart, and pour
that which remains into a Glass or Earthen Cucurbite, and distill it in a strong
Sand-heat, until there remain at bottom nothing but a Substance like Honey; keep
this Vinegar well stopped: Many call it Spirit of Vinegar. Its principal Use is,
to dissolve or precipitate Bodies. It Is sometimes mixed in Cordial-Potions, to
resist Putrefaction: The Dose is half a Spoonful; it is mixed with Water. And
this Oxyorate is used to stop Hemorrhagies, taken inwardly; and to assuage
Inflammations, applied outwardly. Tartar is that which is found sticking to
Casks of Wine, like a very hard Stone, sometimes white, sometimes red,
according to the Color of the Wine it comes from. White Tartar is to be
preferred before Red, because it is purer, and contains less Earth. Both one
and the other are had in great Abundance in Languedoc and Provence; but the
best White Tartar of all is brought out of Germany. Crystals of Tartar are made
in the following manner: Boil in a great deal of Water what quantity of White
Tartar you please, until it be all dissolved; pass the Liquor hot through
Hippocrates's Sleeve, into an Earthen Vessel, and evaporate about half of it;
set the Vessel in a cool place two or three Days, and you will find little
Crystals on the Sides, which you are to separate; evaporate again half the
Liquor that remains, and remit the Vessel to the Cellar, as before; there will
shoot out new Crystals: Continue doing thus, until you have got all the Tartar:
Dry the Crystals in the Sun, and keep them for use. The Crystal of Tartar is
Purgative, and Aperitive: It Is good for Hydropical and Asthmatical Persons, and
for Tertian and Quartan-Agues. The Dose is, from half a Dram to three Drams, in
Broth, or some other proper Liquor. Salt of Tartar is made in the following
manner: Take four Pounds of good White-wine-Tartar, beat it fine, make it up in
Half-pounds, in several Sheets of Brown Paper, dip them in Water, place them in
the midst of a Charcoal-Fire, cover them over therewith, let the Fire burn out,
you will find at the Bottom Tartar calcined in black Lumps; take the Tartar
thus calcined, beat it grossly, put it into a Pipkin, or Iron Pot, full of
Water, set it over the Fire, and let the Water boil till half is consumed; then
take it off, and let it settle; decant it as clear as you can, pour on a little
more Water upon the Faeces, and let it boil, then decant it as before; taste
the Water, whether it be salt, and proceed as before: Do so as long as you find
the Water tastes salt; afterward filter all the Liquor poured off, through
Paper, and boil it up to a Salt. Tartar Vitriolated is made in the following
manner: Put into a Glass-Body what quantity you please of Oil of Tartar made
per Deliquium, which is nothing but the exposing Salt of Tartar for some Days
in a Cellar, in a wide Glass-Vessel, till it turns to a Liquor: Pour upon this
Dissolution of Tartar, by little and little, Rectified Spirit of Vitriol; there
will be a great Effervescency: Continue to drop more in, till there is no
farther Ebullition; then place your Cucurbite in Sand, and evaporate the Spirit
with a little Fire, there will remain a very white Salt, keep it in a Vial well
stopped. It Is a good Aperitive; and is also a little purgative. It Is given in
Hypochondriacal Cases, in Quartan-Agues, King's Evil, and in all other
Diseases, wherein it is necessary to open Obstructions, and to force Urine. The
Dose is, from ten to thirty Grains, in some proper Liquor.

W.
WInteran-bark, in Latin Cortex Winteranus.
It turns up in Pipes, like Cinnamon, but is larger, and thicker; of a light
yellow Color, and of a very hot, biting Taste. It comes from Nevis, Antego,
Montferrat, and other Places. It Is Cephalic, and Stomachick; but the chief Use
of it is for the Scurvy. Take of the Conserve of Scurvy Grass, Roman-Wormwood,
and Fumatory, each two Ounces; of the Powder of the Winteran-Bark, and of the
Roots of Angelica and Wake Robin, each two Drams; of the Species of the three
Sanders one Dram and an half, of the Powder of Crab's-eyes one Dram, of Salt of
Wormwood two Drams; with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the Bark of
Citron make an Electuary. This is good for the Scurvy.

Indian Woad, or Indico, in Latin Glastum Indicum.
The Root is given in Decoction, for the Stone, and against Poisons. It Is
supposed that Indico is proper for the Jaundice.

Z.
ZEdoary, in Latin Zedoaria.
It Is an hot and dry Root; it discusses Wind, is good for the Biting of
Venomous Creatures. It stops a Looseness, suppresses Vomiting, and is good in a
Windy Cholick. It Is used nowadays by Physicians, against the Contagion of a
Pestilential Air, and for Hysteric Fits. Take of the Roots of Zedoary, of the
Seeds of Daucus, of the Roots of Lovage, each two Ounces; of Red Myrrh and
Castor, each half an Ounce; of the Roots of Peony four Ounces, of Misleto of
the Oak, gathered when the Moon is past the Full, three Ounces; pour upon them
two Quarts of Feverfew-water, and half a Pint of Spirit of Wine; digest them
three Days, and afterward distill them: The Dose is one Spoonful, either by it
self, or with some proper Water. This is used for Hysteric Fits.

THE English INDEX.
A.
Page ABele-tree, See Poplar. Acacia, 195 Alcali, 198 Adder's-tongue, 1
Adder's-wort, See Bistort. Agarick, 196 Agnus Castus, 197 Agrimony, 2
Ague-tree, See Sassafras. Alcost, See Costmary, 52 Aldertree, 3 Black Alder,
ibid. Ale-hoof, See Ground Ivy. Alaxander's-foot, See Pellitory of Spain.
Alexanders 4 Alleluya, See Wood Sorrel. All-good, See English Mercury.
Almond-tree, 198 Aloes, 200 Amee, See Bishop's-weed. Amomum, 207 Anacardium
Occidentale, ib. Anacardiums, 208 Angelica, 4 Animae Gummi 208 Annise, ibid.
Apple Tree, 5 Apricock-tree, 8 White Archangel, 8 Stinking Arrach, 9 Arsmart,
10 Artichoke, 11 Asa-Foetida, 210 Asarabacca, 11 Ash-tree, 12 Avens, ibid.
B.
BAlsam-tree, 211 Peruvian Balsam, 212 Balsam Copaiba 213 Balsam of Tolu. ibid.
Balam of Chili, 215 Balaustians, ibid. Barbery-tree, 13 Barley, ibid.
Gardan-Basil, 14 Wild Basil, ibid. Baulm, 15 Bay Tree, ibid. Bdellium, 215
Beans, 16 Bear's-breech, 216 Bear's-foot, 17 Beech-tree, ibid. White-Beet,
ibid. Sea-Beet. ibid. Benjamin, 217 Ben-Nut, 218 Wood-Betony, 18 Bil-berries,
ibid. Birch-tree, 19 Birth-wort, 219 Bishop's-weed, ibid. The Greater Bistort
20 Bitter-sweet, See Woody Nightshade. Bitter-Vetch, 221 Black-berries, See
Bramble. Black-wort, See Comfrey. Upright Blite, 21 May-Blossoms, See Lilly of
the Valley. Blue-Bottles, 22 Borrage, ibid. Box-tree, 23 Brake, See Fern.
Bramble, 23 Brazile-wood, 221 White Briony, 24 Common Brook-lime, 25 Broom, 26
Broom-Rape, 27 Butcher's-Broom, ibid. Buck-bean, See Marsh-Trefoil. Buckram,
See Cuckoe-pintle. Butter-flowers, See Crow-foot. Buck-thorn, 28 Bugle, 29
Bugloss, 30 Bur-dock, 31 Burnet, 32 Butter-bur, 33 Butter-wort, 34
C.
CAbbage, 34 Sea-Cabbage, 35 Field-Calamint, ibid. Calf's-snout, 36
Camel's-Hay, 222 Cammock, See Rest-Harrow. Camomile, 37 Camphir, 222 Cancamum,
See Gum Animae. Canela, See Cinnamon. Capers, 225 Caraways, 38 Cardamoms, 226
Wild Carrots, 39 Carthamus, 226 Cassia, 227 Cassidony, See Staechas.
Cassummuniar, 230 Catmint, See Nep. Celandine, 39 The Lesser Celandine, 40 The
Lesser Centory, 41 Chaste-tree, See Agnus Castus. Common Wild Chervil, 42
Cherries, 44 Cheese-Renning, See Lady's Bad-straw. Chestnuts, 45 Chick-weed, 47
Chiches, 233 China, 232 Cinnamon, 234 Cinquefoil, 236 Citrons, 237 Cloud-berry,
48 Cloves, 240 Coccus Baphica, See Kermes. Cockle, 242 Coco-nut-tree, ibid.
Coculus Indus, ibid. Coffee, 243 Colly-flower, 49 Coloquintida, 245
Colt's-foot, 49 Columbine, 50 Comfrey, 51 Contrayerva, 246 Coral, ibid.
Coral-tree, 249 Sea-Coralline, 52 Cork-tree, 249 Cornel, 52 Costmary, ibid.
Costus, 249 Cotton, ibid. Coubage, 250 Cowslips, 53 Indian-Cress, 250
Garden-Cress, 53 Water-Cress, 54 Cross-wort, 55 Creeping Crow-foot, ibid.
Round-headed Crow-foot, 56 Water-Crow-foot, 57 Crown-Imperial, 250 Cubebs, 251
Cuckow-pintle, 57 Cucumbers, 58 Wild cucumbers, 59 Cudweed, ibid. Cummin, 250
Currant-bush, 60 Sweet Cyperus, 251 Cypress-tree, 60
D.
ENglish Daffadil, 61 The Greater White Daisies, ibid. The Lesser Daisies, 62
Dandalyon, ibid. Danewort, 63 Darnel, 64 Date-tree, 252 Dill, 64 Dittander, 65
Dittany of Crete, 252 Sharp-pointed Dock, with curled Leaves, 66 Sharp-pointed
Dock, ibid. The Dock called Monk's Rubarb, 67 Dodder, ibid. Common Dove's-foot,
69 Dragons, ibid. Dragon's-blood, 253 Common Drop-wort, 68 Duck's-meat, 70
E.
EArth-nut, 70 Ebony, 254 Egglentine, 71 Eildber, See Jack by the Hedge. Elder,
72 Dwarf-Elder, See Dane-wort. Elecampane, 72 Ellebore, 255 Black Ellebore, 256
Elm, 74 Endive, ibid. Eringo, ibid. Euphorbium, 257 Eyebright, 75
F.
COmmon Fennel, 76 Hog's-Fennel, 77 Fenugreek 78 Common Male-Fern. 79
Female-Fern, ibid. Flowering-Fern, 80 Feverfew, 81 Fig Tree, ibid. Fig-wort, 82
Filberd, 83 Filipendula, See Drop-wort. Fir, 84 Fistich-nut, 258 Sweet Smelling
Flag, 84 Flax, 85 Marsh-Flea-bane, ibid. Flix-weed, 86 Common Purple
Flower-de-Luce, 86 Yellow Water-Flower-de-Luce, 87 Fluellin, ibid. The Lesser
Spik'd Fluellin, 88 Fox-glove, ibid. Frankincense, See Gum-Olibanum, 276
Fraxinella, 259 Fumetory, 90
G.
GAlangal, 260 Galbanum, ibid. Garlic, 90 Gentian, 262 Wild Germander, 91
Ginger, 262 Goards, 263 Goat's-beard, 93 Goat's-Rue, ibid. Golden-rod, 94
Goose-berry-bush, 95 Canary-Grass, 264 Cotton-Grass, ibid. Dog's-Grass, ibid.
Oat-Grass, ibid. Goose-Grass, 96 Gromwel, ibid. Ground Pine, 97 Groundsel, 98
Guaiacum, 264 Gum-Ammoniacum, 270 Gum-Arabick, 272 Gum-Caranna, 273 Copal,
ibid. Elemi, 274 Gotta, ibid. Lac, ibid. Olibanum, 276 Opoponax, 277 Sagapenum,
ibid. Sarcocolla, 278 Tacamahaca, ibid. Tragacanth, ibid.
H.
HArt's-tongue, 98 Heliotrope, 280 Hellebore, See Ellebore. Hemlock, 98 Common
Hemlock, 99 Hen-bane, 101 Herb Bennet, See Avens. Herb-Grace, See Rue. Herb
Robert, 101 Herb True-Love, See Herb Paris. Hermodactiles. 280 High-Taper, See
Mullein. Holly, 102 Hony-suckle, 103 Hops, ibid. Hore-hound, 104 Horse-tail,
105 Hound's-tongue, ibid. House-leek, 106 Hypocistis, 281 Hyssop, 107
Hedge-Hyssop, 279
J.
JAck by the Hedge, 107 Jalap, 281 Jerusalem-Artichoke, 283 White Jessamine,
108 Jesuite's-bark, 283 Jew's-ear, 108 St. Joh'ns-wort, 109 Florentine-Iris,
289 Jujubes, 290 July-flowers, 110 Juniper, ibid. Climbing-Ivy, ibid.
Ground Ivy, 111
K.
KErmes, 291 Kidny-Beans, 112 Common Knot-grass, ibid.
L.
LAdy's-bed-straw, 112 Lady's-mantle, 113 Lady's-smock, 114 Lark's-spur, 292
Lavender, 115 Lavender-cotton, 116 Spurge-Laurel, ibid. Lead-wort, 292 Leeks,
117 Garden-Lettice, ibid. Lignum-Aloes, 293 Colubrinum, ibid. Molucense, 294
Lignum-Nephriticum, 294 Lignum-Vitae, See Guaiacum. Lilly of the Valleys, 117
Water-Lilly, ibid. White Lilly, 118 Lime-tree, ibid. Limons, 295 Liquid Amber,
296 Liquorish, 118 Liver-wort, 119 Lovage, ibid. Lung-wort, 120 Lupines, ibid.
M.
MAce, 296 Madder, 120 White Maidenhair, ibid. Maithes, See May-weed, 125
Common Mallows, 121 Marshmallows, ibid. Vervain-Mallow, 123 Manna, 297
Marigold, 124 Marjoram, ibid. Master-wort, 125 Mastick-tree, 298 Maudlin, 125
Meadow-sweet, 126 Mechoachana, 299 Medlar-tree, 126 Melilot, ibid. Melon, 127
English Mercury, ibid. Dog's-Mercury, 128 Mezereon, 300 Milfoil, 129 Milk-wort,
ibid. Mint, 130 Misleto, ibid. Mony-wort, 131 Moon-wort, ibid. Cup-Moss, 132
Moss on a dead Man's Skull, ibid. Mouse-ear, 133 Mug-wort, ibid. Mulberry-tree,
134 White Mullein, 135 Dusty Mushroom, ibid. Mustard, 136 Hedge-Mustard, ibid.
Myrobalanes, 300 Myrrh, ibid. Myrtle-tree, 137
N.
CEltick Nard, 303 Navel-wort, 138 Nep, ibid. True English Stinking Dead
Nettle, 303 Nettle, 139 Nigella, 304 Nightshade, 139 Nipple-wort, 140 Nutmeg,
304 Nux Vomica, 308
O.
OAK-tree, 140 Oak of Jerusalem, 308 Oats, 141 Olive Tree, 308 Onion, 142
Oranges, 311 Orchis, 313 Orpine, 142 Orrach, See Arrach. Orrice, See Iris.
Oyster-green, 314
P.
HErb Paris, 142 Parsley 143 Parsley-piert, ibid. Garden-Parsnip, 144
Cow-Parsnip, ibid. Panax Herculis, 314 Peach-tree, 144 Pear Tree, ibid. Pease,
145 Pellitory, ibid. Pellitory of Spain, 315 Pennyroyal, 145 Peony, ibid.
Pepper-wort, 147 Round Black Pepper, 315 White Round Pepper, ibid. Periwinkle,
147 Pimpernel, 148 Pine Tree, 149 Pitch, 316 Plane-tree, 317 Plantain, 149
Plum-tree, 150 Poley-mountain, 317 Pomegranate, ibid. Polypody, 150
Poplar-tree, 151 Red Poppy, 152 White Poppy, 153 Potatoes, 318 Primrose, 154
Mock-Privet, 319 Prunes, 154 Psylium, 319 Pulsatilla, ibid. Pumpion, 155
Purslain, ibid.
Q.
QVince-tree, 155
R.
RAdish, 155 Horseradish, ibid. Rag-wort, 156 Rasberry-bush, ibid. Common
Reed, 320 Restharrow, 157 Rocket, ibid. Wild Rocket, 158 Roses, ibid. Rosemary,
160 Rubarb, 320 Rue, 161 Rupture-wort, ibid. Ryce, 321
S.
SAffron, 162 Sage, ibid. Wood-Sage, 163 Sage of Jerusalem, 323 Sampire, 163
Sanders, 323 Sanicle, 163 Sarsaparilla, 324 Sassafras, ibid. Savine, 164
Savory, 165 Saw-wort, 326 Saxifrage, 165 Scabious, ibid. Scammony, 326
Scordium, 166 Scurvy Grass, ibid. Scottish Scurvy Grass, 327 Sebestens, ibid.
Self-heal, 168 Sena, 327 Shepherds-purse, 169 Silver-weed, ibid. Skirrets, 329
Smallage, 170 Smilax, 329 Snake-weed, 330 Sneez-wort, 171 Solomon's-seal, ibid.
Sope-wort, 172 Sorbe-tree, ibid. Common Sorrel, 173 Sheep-Sorrel, ibid.
French-Sorrel, ibid. Wood Sorrel, ibid. Sothernwood, 174 Marsh-Sparagus, ibid.
Spatling-Poppy, ibid. Male-Speedwell, 175 Common Spignel, 176 Spinache, ibid.
Spindle-tree, ibid. Spleen-wort, 177 Sponge, 330 Squills, ibid. Staechas, 332
Staves-acre, 333 Storax ibid. Straw-berry, 177 Straw-berry-tree, 334 Succory,
178 Sugar, 334 Sun-dew, 179 Swallow-wort, 337
T.
TAmarinds, 337 Tamarisk, 180 Tansie, ibid. Tarragon, 181 Tea, 338 Teasel, 181
Dwarf-Carline-Thistle, ibid. Milk-Thistle, 182 Blessed-Thistle, 183
Thorn-Apple, ibid. Christ's-Thorn, 339 Thorow-wax, 184 Throat-wort, ibid. Wild
Thyme, ibid. Mastick-Thyme, 339 Toad's-Flax, 185 Tobacco, ibid. Tooth-wort, 186
Tormentil, ibid. Marsh-Trefoil, 187 Turbith, 339 Turmerick, ibid. Turnep, 187
Tutsan, 188
V.
GArden-Valerian, 188 Common Vervain, 189 Vine, 340 Violets, 189 Viper-grass,
190
W.
WAlnut-tree 190 Wall-flower, 191 Wayfaring-tree, ibid. Wheat, 192
Whitlow-grass, ibid. Winter-Cherry, ibid. Winter-green, 193 Winteran-Bark, 348
Woad, ibid. Woodroof, 193 Wormwood, 194
Z.
ZEdoary, 348
Nomenclator Latinus.
A.
Page ABies, 84 Abrotanum, 174 Abrotanum foemina, 116 Absinthium, 194 Acer
majus, 124 Acacia, 195 Acetosa vulgaris, 173 Acetosa arvensis lanceolata, ib.
Acinos, 14 Adiantum, 120 Agaricus, 196 Ageratum, 125 Agrifolium, 102 Agrimonia,
2 Agnus castus, 197 Alcali, 198 Alcca, 123 Alchymilla, 113 Alkekengi, 192
Alliaria, 107 Allium, 90 Alnus, 3 Alnus nigra baccifera, ibid. Aloes, 200
Alsine, 47 Althaea, 121 Ammi, 219 Amomum, 207 Amygdalus, 198 Anacardium
occidentale, 207 Anacardium, 208 Anagallis aquatica, 25 Anagallis mas,148
Androsaemum, 188 Angelica 4 Anime gummi, 208 Anisum, ibid. Anonis, 157
Antirrhinum, 36 Aparine, 96 Apium, 170 Aquilegia, 50 Arbor corallii, 249
Argentina, 169 Aristolochia, 219 Artimesia, 133 Arum, 57 Asa foetida, 210
Asarum, 11 Asparagus 174 Asplenium, 177 Atriplex olida, 9
B.
BAlanus myrepsica, 218 Balaustia, 215 Balsamita, 52 Balsamum verum, 211
Balsamum e Peru, 212 Balsamum copaiba, 213 Balsamum de Tolu ibid. Balsamum de
Chili, 215 Barbarea, 157 Barbaris, 13 Bardana, 31 Battata 318 Battata
canadensis, 283 Bdellium, 215 Behen album, 174 Bellis major 61 Bellis minor, 62
Benzoinum, 217 Beta alba, 17 Beta marina, ibid. Betonica, 18 Betula, 19
Bistorta, 20 Blitum, 21 Borago, 22 Botrys, 308 Branca ursina, 216 Brasica, 34
Brasica florida, 49 Brasica marina, 35 Brazilia arbor, 221 Brionia alba, 24
Buglossum, 30 Bugula, 29 Bulbocastanum, 70 Bursa pastoris, 169 Buxus, 23
C.
CAepa, 142 Calamintha, 35 Calamus aromaticus, 84 Calendula, 124 Camaemelum, 37
Camphora, 222 Cannabis, 100 Caova, 243 Cardamine, 114 Cardamomum, 226 Cardiaca,
132 Carduus Benedictus, 183 Carduus Mariae, 182 Cariophillus aromaticus, 240
Carum, 38 Cassia, 227 Cassummuniar, 230 Castanea, 45 Centaurium, 41 Cerasus, 44
Cerefolium, 42 Chamedris, 91 Chamemorus, 48 Chamepytis, 97 Chelidonium, 39
China, 232 China-China, 283 Cichoreum, 178 Cicuta, 98 Cicutaria, 99 Cinara, 11
Cinnamomum 234 Citrullus, 240 Coculus indus, 242 Cochlearia, 166 Coloquintida,
245 Coniza, 85 Consolida, 51 Consolida regalis, 292 Contrayerva, 246 Corallium,
246 Corallina, 52 Corona imperialis, 250 Cortex winteranus, 348 Corylus sativa,
83 Costus, 249 Cotula foetida, 125 Crithmum marinum, 163 Crocus, 162 Cruciata,
55 Cubebae, 251 Cucumis, 58 Cucumis sylv. 59 Cucurbita, 263 Cuminum, 250
Cupressus, 60 Curcuma, 339 Cuscuta, 67 Cyanus, 22 Cynocrambe, 128 Cyperus, 251
D.
DActylus, 252 Daucus, 39 Dens Leonis, 62 Dentaria, 186 Dipsacus, 181
Dracontium, 69 Dracunculus hortensis, 181
E.
EBenus, 254 Ebulus, 63 Endivia, 74 Equicetum, 105 Erigerum, 98 Eringium, 74
Eruca, 158 Erysimum, 136 Euonimus, 176 Eupatorium cannabinum, 100 Euphorbium,
257 Euphragia, 75
F.
FAba, 16 Faenum graecum, 78 Ficus, 81 Filipendula, 68 Filix mas, 79 Filix
foemina, ibid. Foeniculum, 76 Fragraria, 177 Fraxinella, 259 Fraxinus, 12 Fucus
marinus, 314 Fumaria, 90 Fungus pulverulentus, 135 Fungus Sambucinus, 108
G,
GAlanga, 260 Galbanum, ibid. Galega 93 Galeopsis, 303 Gallium, 112
Gariophylli, 110 Gentiana, 262 Geranium columbinum, 69 Geranium robertianum,
101 Gossipium, 249 Gramen avenaceum, 264 Gramen caninum, ibid. Gramen
tormentosum, ibid. Gratiola, 279 Grossularia, 95 Guaiacum, 264 Gummi
ammoniacum, 270 Gummi arabicum, 272 Gummi caranna. 273 Gummi copal, ibid. Gummi
elemi, 274 Gummi gotta, ibid. Gummi lac, ibid. Gummi olibanum, 276 Gummi
opopanax, 277 Gummi Sagapenum, ibid. Gummi sarcocolla, 278 Gummi tacamahaca,
ibid. Gummi tragacanth, ibid.
H.
HEdera arborea, 110 Hedera terrestris, 111 Heliotropium, 280 Helleboraster, 17
Helleborus albus, 255 Helleborus niger, 256 Hepatica, 119 Hermodactylus, 280
Herniaria, 161 Hippolapathum, 67 Hordeum, 13 Horminum, 47 Hyosciamus, 101
Hypericon, 109 Hypocistis, 281 Hyppocellinum, 4 Hyssopus, 107
J.
JAcobea, 156 Jalapium. 281 Jasminum album, 108 Ilex coccigera, 291 Iris
florentina, 289 Iris vulgaris, 86 Iris palustris lutea, 87 Jujubae, 290
L.
LActuca sativa, 117 Lampsana, 140 Lapathum acutum, 66 Lapathum acutum crispum
ib. Laurus, 15 Lavendula, 115 Laureola, 116 Lenticula palustris, 70 Lentiscus,
298 Lepidium, 65 Levisticum, 119 Lignum Aloes, 293 Lignum colubrinum, ibid.
Lignum molucense, 294 Lignum nephriticum, ibid. Lilium convallium, 117 Linaria
lutea, 185 Linum, 85 Linum catharticum, ibid. Lithospermum, 96 Lolium, 64
Lunaria, 131 Lucoium, 191 Lupinus, 120 Lupulus, 103
M.
MAcis, 296 Malva vulgaris, 121 Malus, 5 Malus armeniaca, 8 Malus aurantia, 311
Malus cydonia, 155 Malus limonia, 295 Malus persica, 144 Mandragora, 297 Manna,
ibid. Marrubium album, 104 Matricaria, 81 Mechoacanna, 299 Melilotus, 126
Melissa, 15 Melo, 126 Mentha, 130 Mentha cattaria, 138 Mespilus, 127 Meum, 176
Mezereon, 300 Millefolium, 129 Morus, 134 Muscus arboreus, 120 Muscus
pyxidatus, 132 Myrobalani, 300 Myrrha, ibid. Myrtus, 137
N.
NArcissus, 61 Nardus celtica, 303 Nardus indica, ibid. Nasturtium hortense, 53
Nasturtium aquaticum, 54 Nasturtium indicum, 250 Nicotiana, 185 Nigella, 304
Nummularia, 131 Nux moschata, 304 Nux pistachia, 258 Nux vomica, 308 Nymphaea,
117
O.
OCymum, 14 Ophyoglossum, 1 Opium, 310 Orchis, 313 Oriza, 322 Orobranche, 27
Orobus, 221 Osmunda, 80
P.
PAeonia, 145 Paliurus, 339 Palma coccigera, 291 Panax coloni, 48 Panax
herculis, 314 Paralysis, 53 Parietaria, 145 Herba Paris, 142 Paronychia, 192
Pastinaca, 144 Pentaphyllum, 237 Pepo, 155 Percepier anglorum, 143 Perfoliata,
184 Periclymenum, 103 Petasitis, 33 Petroselinum, 143 Phaseolus, 112 Phaseolus
zurratensis, 251 Phylerea, 319 Phyllitis, 98 Pilocella, 133 Pimpinella, 32
Pinguicula, 34 Piper rotundum album, 315 Piper rotundum nigrum, ibid. Pisum,
145 Pix, 316 Platanus, 317 Plumbago Plinii, 292 Poligala, 129 Poligonatum, 171
Poligonum, 112 Polyrizos virginiana, 330 Porrum, 117 Portulaca, 155 Primula
veris, 154 Prunella, 168 Prunus, 154 Psillium, 319 Ptarmica, 171 Pucedanum, 77
Pulegium, 145 Pulsatilla, 319 Pyrethrum, 315 Pyrola, 193 Pyrus, 144
Q.
Quercus, 140
R.
RAnunclus repens, 55 Ranunculus bulbosus, 56 Ranunculus hederaceus albus, 57
Raphanus rusticanus, 155 Raphanus sylvestris, ibid. Rapum, 187 Rhabarbarum, 320
Rhamnus catharticus, 28 Ribes, 60 Rosa, 158 Rosa solis, 179 Rosmarinus, 160
Rubia tinctorum, 120 Rubus, 23 Rubus idaeus, 156 Ruscus, 27 Ruta, 161
S.
SAbina, 164 Salvia, 162 Salvia agrestis, 163 Sambucus, 72 Sanguis draconis,
253 Sanicula, 163 Santalum, 323 Saponaria, 172 Sarsaparilla, 324 Sassafras,
ibid. Satureia, 165 Saxifragra, ibid. Scabiosa, ibid. Schaenanthus, 222 Scilla,
330 Scordium, 166 Sebestens, 327 Sena, ibid. Seratula, 326 Serpillum, 184
Sinapi, 136 Sisarum, 329 Smilax, ibid. Solanum liguosum, 139 Soldanella, 327
Sophia chirurgorum, 86 Sorbus sylvestris, 172 Sphondilium, 144 Spinachia, 176
Spongia, 330 Staechas, 332 Stavis agria, 333 Storax, ibid. Stramonium, 183
Suber, 249
T.
TAmarindi, 337 Tamariscus, 180 Tanacetum, ibid. Telephium, 142 Tilia, 118
Tormentilla, 186 Trachelium, 184 Tragopogon, 93 Trifolium acetosum vulg. 173
Trifolium paludosum, 187 Triticum, 192 Turbith, 339
V.
VAccinia nigra, 18 Valeriana, 188 Verbascum, 135 Verbena, 189 Veronica mas, 87
Veronica spicata minor, 88 Viburnum, 191 Virga aurea, 94 Vinca per vinca, 147
Viola, 189 Viscus, 130 Vitis, 340 Vlmus 74 Vmbilicus veneris, 138 Vrtica, 139
Z.
ZEdoaria, 348 Zinziber, 262
The Table of Diseases, etc.
A.
ABcess of the Liver, page 272 Aches, 109 Afterbirth, how to be expelled, 16
Agues, 13. 38. 42. 283 Tertian and Quartan, 109. 161 Air, to perfume it, 110 To
correct it, 161 Alexipharmicks, 21. 224 Almonds of the Ears fallen, 191
Anasarca, 147 Animal Spirits, to strengthen them, 208 Animal Spirits dull, 243
An Anodine Pultis, 13 An Antidote against Infection, 5 St. Anthony's Fire, 26.
72 Apoplexy, 44. 117. 231. 158 Appetite, how it may be provoked, 13. 17. 163.
210 Apples that are best for making Cider, 6. Apples sour and harsh, good in
Fluxes of the Belly, ibid. Apples sour and harsh, good in Fevers, ibid. Apples
sweet, somewhat hot and loosening, ibid. Apples a little acid are agreeable to
the Stomach, and cheer the Heart, p. 6 Apples, the best time to eat them, 7
Aqua Lactis Alexiteria, 126 Aqua Mirabilis, 40 Aromaticum Rosatum, 159 Asthma,
24. 31. 33. 36. 174. 186 Astringent Bags, 114
B.
BAlsam of Sulphur, 210 Apoplectick, 306 Balls for Colds in Horses, 210 To
wash Clothes, 80 Barly-water, 13 Barrenness, 47 Baths, 3. 140 Beer, to keep it
sweet, 86 Is good in the Stone, 103 Belching sour, 53. 260 Belly, to loosen
it, 17. 104 Bellies bursten, 1. 2. 34. 36. 74. 114. 171. 186 Birch-wine, 20
Bird-lime, 102 Biting of a Mad Dog, 33. 161 Of Serpents, 94. 238 Of a Viper,
161 Bleeding of the Hemorrhoids, 41 Bleeding at the Nose, 138. 139. 170. Blood,
To cleanse and strengthen it, 2 To remove it when settled in the Eyes, 107 To
purify it, 22, 90 How to quicken it when coagulated, 13 For the Spitting of
it, 21. 31. 101. 149 To stop it, 20. 21. 129 Voided by Stool, 17
Bones broken, to be united, 51. 171 Bones, to strengthen them, 174 Botches in
the Face, 170 Bowels, how they may be strengthened, 13. Brain strengthened, 38.
130 Brandy, to make it, 342 Bread made of Roots, in great Scarcity of Corn, 80
Breath, for the Shortness of it, 16. 36 Breath stinking, 5. 15. 125. 137
Breast, to make it solid, 114 Breast, for the Hardness of it, 130. 192. Breast,
for the Chilness of it, 212 Bruises, 80 Buboes, to cure them, 34 Buboes
pestilential, to break them, 82. 143. 166 Burns, 63. 72. 80. 142 Burns, to take
out the Fire, 100.
C.
CAncer, 35. 60. 117. 183. Carbuncles, 161 Caries of the Bones, 224 Cassia
extracted without Sena, 229 Cataplasm To be applied to the Feet, 136 For hard
Swellings, 142
Catarrhs, how they may be cured, 13. 16. 92 Cephalicks, 304 Chaps In Cows
Dugs, 34 In the Hands, 34. 180 In the Lips, 195
Cheese, to preserve it from Worms, 20 Cherries Most esteemed in England, 45 An
Error in eating them, ibid.
Chil-blains, 136 Childbed Purgations, an immoderate Flux of them, 254.
Childbed Purgations, to provoke them, 15. 81 Children's Bellies, to loosen
them, 298 Choler, To evacuate it, 40 To purge it, 130 To qualify it, 117 To
suppress it, 17
Cinnamon Water, with Barley, 14. 236 Clothes, to cleanse them from greasy
Spots, 172 Clothes, to perfume them, 240 Clyster Carminative, 128 To empty the
Bowels, 337 To stop a Looseness, 318
Cholick, 16. 37. 103. 141. 186. 209 Cholick that is flatulent, 39 Conception
that is false, 253 Concoction helped, 38. 155. 237. 243 Confection to refresh
the Spirits, 124 Confection of Kermes, 292 Conserve of Oranges, 313 Conserve of
Roses, 159 Consumption, 50. 51. 105. 149. 161. 188. 317. 334. Consumption
Scorbutic, 20 Contagion, to prevent it, 84 Contractions of the Limbs, 108
Contusions, 171 Convulsions, 37. 231 Convulsions of Children, 44 Convulsions
that are flatulent, 254 Convulsions that are painful, 244 Complexion, to clear
it, 74 Compound Peony-water, 146 Powder of Sena, the Greater, 328 Powder of
Sena, the Lesser, ibid. Scordium-water, 166 Water of Gentian, 262 Water of
Hors-radish 156
Cordial Flowers, 30. 110. 191 Corns, 106. Cosmetick, 259. 295 Cough, 33. 50.
74. 82. 91. 121 Cough that is Hooping, 132. 133 Cough, when old, how cured, 16.
39 Cough that is tickling, 112. 159 Coral prepared, 246 Courses, To force them,
11. 14. 16. 153. 164 To stop them, 120 To provoke them, 15. 24. 25. 33. 43.
145. 162. 301 Immoderate Flux of them, 21. 52. 150. 195. 234
Crudities and Wind in the Stomach, 53. 212. 251
D.
DEad Child, to expel it, 26. 54. 164. 253 Deafness, 215 Decoction Pectoral, 82
Decoctum Senae Gereonis, 229 Defluctions on the Eyes, 101. 214 Defluctions, to
stop them, 325 Delivery, to hasten it, 16. 24. 66. 115. 302 Diabetes, 61. 208
Diacodium, 153 Diagridium, 326 Diarrhaea of long Continuance, 161 Dia Satyrion,
313 Diet-drink, 2. 39 Diet that is nourishing, 16 Difficulty of Breathing, 6.
50 Digestion, 39. 127 Dimness of Sight, 76. 123 Diseases Of the Breast, 13. 78.
93. 235 Of the Brain, 15 Of the Womb, 15. 24. 81 Of the Bladder, 15. 122 Of the
Joints, 16. 111 Of the Head, 18. 44. 117. 145. 162. 232. 332. Of the Nerves,
18. 110. Of the Spleen, 24. 27. 177. 180 Of the Liver, 24 Hypochondriack, 30.
44. 132. 151 Of the Eyes, 48. 109. 254 Occasioned by drinking cold Beer when
the Body is hot, 62 Pestilential, 94 Of the Lungs, 5. 88. 107. 120 Phlegmatic,
125 Peculiar to Women, 134 Of Horses, 132 Vterine, 161 Of the Ears, 212
Diseases cold, of Men and Beasts, 260. 325 Diseases of the Reins, 237. 294.
296. Dissolution of Coral, 247 Distillation On the Eyes, 107 Of Guaiacum, 268
Of Gum Ammoniack 270 Of Vinegar, 346
Diuretic Medicine, 32 Diuretics, the frequent Use of them occasions Ulcers
in the Bladder, 174 Dropsy, 2. 4. 11. 12. 20. 24. 26. 27. 72. 87. 92. 118.
178. 180. 194
E.
ELectuary of Roses, 160 Electuary for Coughs, 210 Electuary Called
Diacarthamum, 227 Called Diacassia, 228 Lenitive, 229 Solutive of Citron, 239
To help Concoction, 262 Of Sassafras, 325
Electuarium Diaprunum, 150 Elephantiasis, 36 Elixir Proprietatis, 301 Elixir
Salutis, 328 Epithem for the Eyes, 79 Empyema, 100 Emulsion, 199 Eruptions of
Blood, 101 Excrescencies on the Eyelids, 277 Excrescencies of the Fundament, 41
Expectoration, to help it, 139 Extract Of Cassia, 228 Of Hellebore, 256 Of
Opium, 310 Of Rhubarb, 322

F.
FAce, how to beautify it, 16. 20. 58. Face, to take off Spots from it, 16. 20
Fainting, 130. 260 Falling of the Fundament, 196 Falling Sickness, 15. 23. 25
30. 89, 118. 130. 131 255 False Conception, 253 Fatness, to cause it, 322
Fevers, 13. 22. 71. 150. 173 178. 191 Fevers Pestilential, 33. 238 Malignant,
99. 224 That are Burning, 117 To assuage the Heat of them, 170 Chronical, 125.
212
Feverish Heats, 19 Felons, 142 Fish, to take them, 242 Fistula, 35. 156. 175
Fits of the Mother, 231 Fleas, to drive them away, 145 Flies, to drive them
away, 11 Flowers of Benjamin, 217 Flummery, 141 Fluxes, 23 Fluxes, to stop
them, 79 112. 160 Flux of the Courses immoderate, 33. 141. 195. 234 Fluxes of
the Belly, 47 Fluxes of the Hemorrhoidal Veins, to stop them, 200 Fluxions on
the Teeth, 13 Fluxions on the Joints, 196 Fomentation, astringent, 215 Foulness
of the Tongue, 319 Fractures, 184 Fractures of the Scull, 276 Freckles, 200
French Pox, 23. 32. 75. 163 172. 232. 233. 264. 324 325 Frenzy, 78
G.
GAlbanum, how to purify it, 261 Gangrenes, 108. 301 Gargarism, 24. 51. 74.
135 155 Garlic, an Observation of the Use of it to an Old Man that was almost
killed by traveling a long Way in the Snow, 91 Giddiness of the Head, 38 115.
238 Gonorrhaea, 75. 177 Goose-berry-Wine, 95 Gout, 18. 31. 92. 97. 128 Gravel,
a Remedy for it, 16 67. 86. 95. 96. 165. 243 Green Sickness, 15 Gripes, 36
Gripes of Children, 87. 149 199 Gums that are putrid, 237
H.
HAir, to thicken it, 151 Hair, the Falling of it, 201 Hardness of the Spleen,
how it may be softened, 12 Hardness of the Breast, 130 192 Headache, 18. 57.
307 Headache inveterate, 53 244 Head scabby, 176. 345 Health, to preserve it,
161 Heart To cheer it, 13. 15. 23 33. 162 To comfort it, 14. 22 The Palpitation
of it, 15. 98
Heart-burning, 8. 33 Helmont's Liquid Laudanum, 311 Hemicrania, 81 Hemlock, an
Observation of some that eat it instead of Parsnips, 99 Hemorrhages, 33. 101
Herbs that are Of a dry Nature, 12. 17 18. 20. 21. 31 Mollifying, 22. 37. 78
Attenuating, 12. 18. 54 Astringent, 13. 19. 21 23. 31. 33. 184. 186 196. 237
Discussing, 13. 18 Cephalic, 13. 18. 160 189. 304 Cordial, 13. 15. 22. 33
Cooling, 13. 19. 21. 22 41. 101 Hot, 17. 18. 20 Cleansing, 18. 20. 31 Hepatick,
18. 26. 63 Splenetick, 18. 26 Thoracick, 18 Vterine, 18. 39 Vulnerary, 18. 30
Diuretic, 18. 31. 39 174 Resolving, 20 Opening, 20. 28 Healing, 25 Moistening,
25. 41 Nephritick, 26 Pulmonick, 31 Diaphoretick, ibid. Lithontriptick, ibid.
Alexipharmick, 33. 166 Digesting, 37 Stomachick, 38. 304 Anodyne, 53. 99
Herbs that are Pectoral, 81 Herbs that are Sudorifick, 111 Hickops, 39 Hickops
Flatulent, 209 Hickops proceeding from a cold Cause, 65 Hiera Picra, 206
Hip-Gout, 74 Hoarsness, 49. 136. 145. 199 333 Homer's Nepenthe, 22 Honey of
Roses, 159 Honey of Squills, 330 Humors, to correct them when sharp, 122
Humors that are crude, to concoct them, 162 Hysteric Diseases, 261 Hysteric
Fits, 144. 174. 349 Hysteric Tincture, of admirable Virtue, 25
J.
JAlap Resin, 281 Jaundice, 2. 11. 13. 20 22. 30. 40. 42. 100. 104 120. 161.
162 Ill Habit of Body, 100 Imposthume, 166 Inflammations, 47 Inflammations, to
take them off, 3. 26 Inflammations of the Nervous Parts, 191 Inflammations And
Ulcers of the Liver, 252 Of the Eyes, 6. 22. 175 178. 222 And Swellings of the
Hemorrhoids, 8 Of the Mouth, 13. 108 184 Of the Throat, 184 Of the Jaws, 35 Of
the Paps, 98 Of the Testicles, 101 233
Ink, how to make it, 141 Joints, to strengthen them, 13 Joints and Sinews, to
comfort them, 15 Issues, 57 Itch, 4. 17. 20. 66. 67. 90 185
K.
KIbes, 138 King's Evil, 8. 62. 82 83. 89. 126. 135. 192. 232 233. 270. 315.
324 Knots of the Nerves, 216
L.
Labor, when hard, to ease it, 118 Leanness, to cause it, 12. 345 Lees of
Briony, 25 Leprosy, 35. 185 Lethargy, 54 Lice, to kill them, 115. 177 185
Lime, to burn it, 80 Liquid Laudanum, 153 Looseness, 13. 19. 86. 234 Loss of
Speech, 315 Lozenges to be held in the Mouth in Plague-time, 5 Lungs, to
cleanse them, 14 Lungs, to open the Stoppages of them, 162
M.
MAdness, 15. 109. 149 Magestery of Coral, 247 Magisterial Water of Worms 216
Malignity, 34 Mandrakes counterfeited, 24 Mange, 17 Marmalet of Quinces, 155
Masticatory, 333 Matthew's Pill, 153 Melancholy, 14. 15. 22. 27 30. 68. 180
Meliceris, 207 Memory, to quicken, 208 Milk, To increase it, 65. 77 149. 197 To
dissolve it when curdled, 130 To drive it away, 143 To lessen it, 263
Mirth, to procure, 193 Miscarriage to prevent, 20 Mixture for Women before
Delivery, 157 Morphew, 42 Mother-fits, 15. 25. 48. 108 Mucilage how to make,
279
N.
NAture how to restore, 11 Nauseousness, 77 Nerves Wounded, 105 Pricked, 212 To
strengthen them, 115 Vncover'd, 224
Nipples sore, 140 Noises in the Ears, 218 Nutmegs, an Observation of cating
them immoderately, 305
O.
OBstructions, 26. 235 Obstructions, to open them, 13. 243 Obstructions Of the
Liver, 2. 28. 30. 119 Of the Lungs, 6 Incident to Women, 9. 23 Of the Kidneys,
116 Of the Courses, 28 Of Urine, 39 Of the Bowels, 92 Of the Bladder, 119 Of
the Womb, 139
Ointment For Obstructions of the Liver, 34. 226 Of Marshmallows, 122
Populeon, 151 Of Roses, 160 Of Gum-Elemi, 274
Opium, 153 Orange-water, 313 Orvietan, 260 Over-fatness, 77 Oxymel of Squills
Simple, 331 Oxymel of Squills Compound, ibid. Oil Of Nutmegs, 306 Olives, 309
For Lamps, 52 Of St. John's-wort, 109 Of Roses, 160 Of Camphir, 224 Of Capers,
226 Of Cinnamon, 235 Of Cloves, 240 Of Myrrh, per deliquium, 302 Nard, 303

P.
PAins to ease, 37. 118 Pains of the Sides, 6. 35 121 Pains Of the Stomach, 111
180 In the Head, 53. 209 Hypochondriack, 182 Venereal, 51
Pains Of the Joints, 232. 306 Of the Bladder, 264 Of the Nerves, 306 Of the
Ears, 8. 165
Palpitation of the Heart, 98 Palsy, 115. 186. 225. 270 Palsy of the Hands,
163 Palsy of the Throat, ibid. Peripneumonia, 182 Piles that are blind, 26
Piles that are painful, 135 185 Pills Of Hound's-tongue, 106 For an Ulcer of
the Bladder, 164. 273 Of Agrick, 196 Of Hiera, with Agarick, 197 Of Storax, 333
Pilulae Aggregativae, 202 De Aloe Lota, ibid. De Aloe Rosata, ibid. Cochiae
Minores, 203 Foetidae, ibid. De Gutta Gamandra, ibid. De Hermodactylis, ibid.
Imperiales, 204 Macri, ibid. Mastichinae, ibid. De Opopanace, ibid. Rudii, 205
Ruffi, ibid. Sine quibus, ibid. Stomachicae, 206 De Succino, ibid. Cochiae
Majores, 245
Pimples on the Face, 20 Pin and Web in the Eyes, 149 Plague, 16. 58. 70. 183
Plague-water, 94 Plants have generally more Virtue in hot Countries than in
cold, 237 Plaster For the Navel, 9 Opiat, 154 Cummin, 250 Ammoniacum, 271 Gum
Elemi, 274 For the Stomach, 278 Of Hermodactyles, 280
Pleurifie, 58. 63. 85. 127. 152. 199 Poison, 16. 50. 183 Powder to be used in
Malignant Diseases, 34 Powder Diafenna, 329 Powder Thuraloes, 207 Preservative
against the Plague, 33. 73. 161. 185 238 Prolifick Water, 207 Pultis Anodyne,
13 Purge For the French Pox, 268 For the Head, 108 For Mad People, 255 Cooling,
338 Strong, ibid.
Purges for Children, 178 298 Purges for Choler, 34. 227 Purges for Phlegm, 11.
24. 34 Purges for Melancholy, 68 151. 257 Purges for Watery Humor, 4. 24. 26.
274 Purging Beer for Children, 321 Purging Potion, 35 Pushes in the Face, 177
Pustles Pocky, 196 Putrefaction to resist, 60* 108 Putrefaction of the Gums,
170
Q.
QVeen of Hungary's Water, 344 Quinsie, 85. 108. 152
R.
RED Face, 83. 264 Redness of the Eyes, 159 Reins, to cool them, 177 Reins to
strengthen, 48 Remedy for an immoderate Flux of the Courses, 52 150 Rheums to
stop, 16 Rheumatism, 159 Rickets, 79. 80. 226 Ruptures, 186
S.
SAlt of Tartar, 347 Sauce to provoke Appetite, 27 Scabby Head, 54 Scammony
prepared, 326 Sciatica, 51 Scirrhus, 27 Scirrhus, of the Liver, 105 Scirrhus of
the Spleen, 216 Scurvy, 23. 25. 26. 35. 48 55. 58. 66. 84. 115. 136 156. 163.
167. 168. 180 187. 348 Sealing-wax, 275 Secret Letters, 295 Secundine to expel,
104 253 Seed Incontinency, 197 Seed to increase it, 198 Serpents biting, 36. 94
Shortness of Breath, 16. 36 Sight to quicken, 49. 73. 76 201 Silkworms to
nourish, 135 Sleep to procure, 53. 101 117. 152 Sneezing to provoke, 48 125
Sores old, 10. 31 Species of the three Sanders, 323 Species Dia Lacca, 275
Spirit of Lavender, 115 Spirit of Watercresses, 54 Spirit of Wine, 343 Spleen
hard, 92 Spleen-Wind, 145 Splinters, 214 Spots in the Skin, 21^ Spring-Broth,
3. 54 Stammering, 44 Starting of the Navel, 164 Stinging of Wasps and Bees, 16
Stomach To strengthen, 4. 11 13. 236 To comfort, 16. 19 Hot, 19. 117 Cold, 47.
110 Cold and moist, 209
Stone, 10. 20. 25. 26. 31 32. 37. 39. 88. 112. 141 142. 143. 149. 175. 191
193. 234 Sudorificks, 12. 34. 72. 183 246 Suffocation of the Womb, 24 81 Sugar
to color, 22 Sugar of Roses, 160 Surfeit-water, 152 Sweetmeats, 44 Swellings
Of the Belly, 85 Of the Breast, 181. 188 To discuss, 118 Under the Ears, 214 Of
the Feet, 72 Hard, 10. 37 Hot, 17 Of the Spleen, 31. 88 92. 211. 216
Syrup Pectoral, 214 Syrup of Ammoniacum, 272 Apples Altering, and Purging, 7
Black-Berries, 24 Buck-thorn Berries, 29 Cinnamon, 236 The Juice of Citrons 239
Coral Simple, 248 Coral Compound, ibid. Hedge-Mustard, 137 Hyssop, 279 Jujubs,
290 July-flowers, 110 Kermes, 292 Liquorish, 119 Marshmallows, 122 Mugwort,
134 Myrtles, 137 The five Opening Roots, 28 Oranges, 313 Peach-flowers, 144
Peony, 146 Pomegranates, 318 Poppies, 152 Quinces, 155 Rasberries, 157 Dried
Roses, 160 Roses Solutive, ibid. Rubarb, 321 Staechas, 332 Succory with Rubarb,
178 Violete, 189

T.
TArtar to make Crystals, 346 Tartar Vitriolated, 347 Teeth to cleanse, 41. 244
Teeth, to preserve them from Putrefaction, 41 Teeth, to settle them when loose,
191 Tetter, 35. 40 Thirst to extinguish, 17. 19 173 Tincture for the Cholick,
111 Tincture of Benjamin, 217 Cinnamon, 236 Myrrh, 302 Roses, 159 Saffron, 162
Tongue that is dry, 107 Toothache, 10. 23. 110 Throat sore, 160 Trembling of
the Limbs, 243 Troches of Agarick, 196 Troches of Alhandal, 245 Troches of
Myrrh, 301 Tumors to discuss, 343 Tumors, to ease them, 13 Tumors, to eat
them down, 56 Tumors of the Hands and Feet, that itch, 140 Tumors inward, 50
Tumors Oedematous, 214 Tumors, to ripen them, 65 118. 121 Tumors
Scrophelous, 148 188
V.
VEnomous Creatures to drive away, 86 Venery to provoke, 11. 17 Vinegar of
Roses, 159 Vinegar of Squills, 331 Viscous Humors, to expectorate them, 55
Ulcers, 26. 30. 35. 51 175 Ulcers putrid, 22. 183 Ulcers hot, 50 Ulcers
malignant, 34 Ulcers of the Lungs, 50. 93 322 Ulcers corroding, 51. 182 Ulcers
of the Bladder, 62 273 Ulcers of the Paps, 102 Ulcers of the Mouth, 102 237
Ulcers of the Reins, 105 273 Ulcers Fistulous, 106 Ulcers of the Matrix, ibid.
Ulcers of the Vrinary Passages, 107 Ulcers that are Cancerous, 113 Ulcers Pocky
in the Fundament, 166 Ulcers of the Privy Parts, 196 Ulcers, to dilate them,
262 Ulcers painful in the Fundament, 276 Ulcers that are Gangrenous, 280
Ulcers, to cicatrize them, 318 Ulcers, to keep them open, 330 Volatile Salt,
like that of Hart's-horn, and endued with the same Virtues, 73 Vomits, 11. 183.
332 Vomiting to stop, 19. 21. 23 130. 299 Vomiting Blood, 112. 150 Urine
Involuntary, 3. 149 252 Urine, to provoke it, 4. 11 12. 16. 30. 33. 38. 136 156
Urine, Heat of it, 13. 24 127. 118 Urine, the Passages to cleanse, 295 Urine
bloody, 20 Uvula fallen, 191 Swellings of the Uvula, 185 316
W.
WArts, 20. 34. 56. Watching, 209 Water Gruel, 141 Weariness to remove, 3
Whites, 8. 47 Wind how to expel, 16. 38 143. 209 Wind in the Stomach, 77 Wind
Hypochondriack, 96 Wine, how to make it taste pleasantly, 13 Wine, to color
it, 22 Worms to kill, 17. 52. 80 164. 312 Wound-Herbs, 1. 51. 148 163. 168
Wounds, 10. 26. 258. Wounds, to cleanse them, 88 Wounds with Fluxion, 184
Wounds of the Head, 274 Wounds, to heal them, 33 49. 169 Wounds inward, 114
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
EExellent Purging Pills, prepared by the Author, are to be sold by Mr. Henry
Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. They cure the Scurvy, the
most reigning Disease of this Kingdom. They purge the Head, Breast, Stomach and
Reins, and cleanse the Blood; and are a very proper Purge for those that cannot
confine themselves when they want Purging, but are forced to go abroad about
their Business, The Price of each Box is 1 s. 6 d. With Directions for Use.

Books printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
COllections of Acute Diseases, in five Parts: 1. Of the Small Pox, and
Measles. 2. Of the Plague, and Pestilential Fevers. 3. Of Continual Fevers. 4.
Of Agues, a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, Quinsie, and the Cholera Morbus. 5ly and
Lastly, Of the Bloody Flux, Miscarriage, of Acute Diseases of Women with Child,
a Rheumatism, Bleeding at Nose, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and several other Diseases.

A Collection of Chronical Diseases; viz. the Cholick, the Bilious Cholick,
Hysteric Diseases, the Gout, and the Bloody Urine from the Stone in the
Kidneys.

Promptuarium Praxeos Medicae; seu Methodus Medendi, praescriptis
Celeberrimorum Medicorum Londinensium concinnata. Et in Ordinem Alphabeticum
digesta.

All Three published by the Author of this Herbal.

The General History of the Reformation of the Church, written in Latin by John
Sleidan, faithfully Englished. To which is added A Continuation to the End of
the Council of Trent. By E. Bohun, Esquire;. In Folio.

Pains afflicting Humane Bodies: Their various Difference, Causes, Parts
affected, Signals of Danger or Safety; showing the Tendency of Chronick and
Acute Diseases, for a seasonable Prevention of fatal Events. With a Tract of
Issues and Setons. By E. Maynwaring, M. D. Octavo.

Pia Desideria, or Divine Addresses: In Three Parts. 1. Sighs of the Penitent
Soul. 2. Desires of the Religious Soul. 3. Ecstasies of the Enamored Soul.
Illustrated with 47 Cuts. Written in Latin by Herm. Hugo. Englished by Edm.
Arwaker. Octavo.

The Art of Catechizing, or The Complete Catechist: In Four Parts. 1. The
Church-Catechism resolved into easy Questions. 2. An Exposition of it, in a
continued, full and plain Discourse. 3. The Church-Catechism resolved into
Scripture-Proofs. 4. The whole Duty of Man reduced into Questions. Fitted for
the meanest Capacities, the weakest Memories, the plaintest Teachers, and the
most uninstructed Learners.

Lately published, Country-Conversations: Being an Account of some Discourses
that happened in a Visit to the Country last Summer, on diverse Subjects;
chiefly of the Modern Comedies, of Drinking, of Translated Verse, of Painting
and Painters, of Poets and Poetry.


