A Sober Guess CONCERNING Several Dark Prophesies IN THE REVELATION, Especially
The XI. Chapter.

Extracted out of several Authors Expositors on the APOCALYPSE.

By T.P. Minister of the Gospel, P. P.

1 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well
to take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place, till the day come,
etc.

LONDON, Printed, etc.

TO THE READER.
THe reverend and learned Author of this ensuing Treatise, having had of late
an unpleasing liberty from his Ministerial Employments, wherein he has for
these many years last past been exercised with much acceptance, and precious
fruit, and being studious how he might best serve his Generation, and improve
his time and talent for common benefit, did engage himself (moved no doubt
thereunto from above) to the study of the book of the Revelation, and to make a
search into the deep Mysteries contained in it, the rather that he and others
by his means might the better understand the mind of God in the way of his
providential dispensations, which are so variously interpreted, and at which so
many stumble and fall. The Province, the task, though difficult, yet is proper
for him, and men of his capacity to undertake, to whom the Arcana Coeli, the
lively Oracles, the mysteries of the Kingdom of God are committed, and whose
duty it is to make Visions plain.

In this work the Author has labored ad sudorem, ad pallorem; and no doubt
found it to be dolor in oculis, as the Psalmist phrases it. When he had
labored much in this work, and had brought it ad umbilicum, knowing and
considering with himself, as Piscator did upon the very same occasion, That we
know but in part, prophecy but in part, and that the spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets, he willingly offered his papers to the perusal,
and submitted them to the judgment and censure of his Brethren, and among
others, to me, the least of all, whose acquaintance with the Author and his
work within not many hours bears the same date. And I must profess I count it a
mercy to have acquaintance with both, and do cordially own the Work for the
Authors sake, and the Author for the Works sake.

After I had saluted the Treatise, a limine, I found more and more
encouragement to pass further and further into it, and having perused it was
fully concurrent in my judgment upon it, with others that had run the lines
before me, that it was Opus praelo dignum, and did heartily press the
publication of it, as that which would be of precious use, and much for benefit
to such as desire to move by the Apocalyptique line, wishing that being well
taught it might have the fairest gales, and a most gainful trade.

Reader, the Treatise is now in thy hand, and will thou not take cognizance of
it, and be acquainted with it? Solomon gives it for the character of a fool,
That he has a price in his hand to get knowledge, and has no heart to it;
will it be for thy honor to be so charactred? When the little book mentioned
Rev. 5. was held in the hand of him that sat on the Throne, and none found
worthy to open it, and look into it, John was deeply affected, and wept much,
to think that a Book that would be so much for the Churches benefit, should
remain a sealed book. God has made gracious provision formerly, and now of
late, that by Labors and Lucubrations of this and other the faithful servants
of Christ, this mysterious book should be opened, and elucidated, the (...)
explained; and shall not this precious provision be accepted and made use of?

Thou have in this Book, which the Author has labored in, an account given in
a prophetical and mysterious way, of a Lamb slain, but alive again, standing on
Mount Zion in a military posture, fighting, and conquering, and going out to
conquer. A Lamb I say, so the great Shepherd of the sheep delights to be styled
and called by his Lambs and Sheep.

2. Thou have an account of a lovely Bride, in beauty and bravery, made ready
for the Lamb her Husband, and the solemnization of their happy Nuptials after
Espousals.

3. Of a foul and formidale Beast, succeeding a great red Dragon, in place and
power, and under specious pretenses of holding correspondency with the Lamb,
making war against him.

4. Of a scarlet colored Whore, having upon her the names of Blasphemy, and in
her hand a golden cup full of abominations, and filthinesses of her
fornication, inebriating therewith the Kings and Princes, and Inhabiters of the
earth.

5. Of the followers of the Lamb, in their numbers witnessing to him, warring
with him, and suffering for him, and then appearing with his fathers name in
their foreheads, with Crowns and Palms, rejoicing and triumphing, having gotten
the victory over the Beast and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the
Number of his name.

6. Of the followers of the Beast, and fornicators with the Whore, receiving a
Beasts mark, and their dreadful doom, as persons that were not the Lambs
Milites conscripti, not written in the Lambs Book of life.

Briefly, Thou have an account of seven Seals, seven loud sounding Trumpets,
seven Vials filled up with hot scorching and scalding wrath, and poured out
upon the Antichristian world. These and other the like mysterious things are
held forth in this Book of Revelations, and in part cleared up in the Writings
of this and other the servants of Christ, make use then of this provision made,
and bless God, that thereby thou art in a fair way to possess that blessing
which in Rev. 1. is pronounced on them, and ascertained to them that read, and
hear, and keep the sayings of this Book. The time hastens wherein the things
contained in it will have their full accomplishment; and then instead of a
prophecy of things to be done, it will turn it self into a History of things
already done; believe it now as a Prophecy, that thou may rejoice in it as a
History. And take heed lest through neglect to labor and search for the right
understanding of this Book, by such holy helps, thou be not found in compliance
with Beast-worship, and fall under the power of that word which is pronounced
in a judicial way, Rev. 22. Let him that is filthy, superstitious, idolatrous,
be so still; which Scripture is doing quick and severe execution at this day.

A word or two more (that I may not hold thee too long at the door) The time is
hastening wherein the Lamb of Zion will complete his victories over the Beast
of Babylon, and then Beast and false Prophet shall be cast into the lake of
fire, and the smoke of their torment shall ascend out of the bottomless pit:
Make it thy care that when others shall be found the marked followers of the
Beast, thou may be found among the sealed followers of the Lamb; while others
defile their garments with Antichristian filth, soil and stain them with
Superstitious and false Worships, thou may have thine close and clean upon
thee, having made them white in the blood of the Lamb; so shall thou be enabled
comfortably to wait for the expiration of the Beasts 42. months, and therewith
the downfall of Babylon, and the expiration of the Witnesses 1260 days, and
therewith their rising again; the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, the coming
down of the New Jerusalem, the solemnization of the Marriage between the Lamb
and his Bride, and bear a part with the Lambs triumphing followers in their
rejoycings, that the Lord God Omnipotent reigns, that he has taken to
himself his great power, and that at last the Kingdoms of the World are become
the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.

FAREWELL.
ERRATA.
Gentle Reader,
THe Authors absence from the Press has occasioned some Mistakes in the
Printing; Thou art desired to correct with thy pen these faults among others,

Page 10. line 7. r. Rev. 17. ll. 17. r. this. p. 11. l. 22. r. w^. p. 20. l.
13. r. Genserieus. l. 19. r. Almains, p. 23. l. 7. add were. p. 23. l. 4. r.
these. p. 24. l. 17. r Togrulbeck, p. 34 l. 25. r. divided, p. 45. l. 28. r
promoting p. 46. l. 25. for his Bride, r. h^s Lords and Cesers. p. 47. l. 3. r.
establish, p. 52. l. 16. r. Jupiter as God, p. 57. marg. r. Aureuem, p. 61. l.
20. ^. ^^^ti^ation. p. 66. l. 3. r. Rev. 21. p. 91. l. 20 r. successors. p. 97.
l. 26. r. diligent, p. 107. l. 13. r. there, p. 109. l. 18. r. secession. p.
116. l. 20. r. sixty. p. 117. l. 14. for was, r. of, p. 121. l. 9. r. And
therefore. p. 126. the Greek words in the marg. place in the marg. of p. 121. p
128. l. 6. r. Appiarius, p. 130. l. 9. perception, p. 169. in marg, r. cure. p.
19 q. l. 20. r. raised, p. 176. l. 7. r. insurrection.

UPON THE APOCALYPSE, Anno. 1662.
THis Book is called a Revelation, because it makes known to us secret hidden
mysteries, and future events. It is called the Revelation of John the Divine,
that is John the Apostle or Evangelist; called John the Divine, by way of
peculiar emphasis, because as an Eagle he soars aloft, writes more sublimely of
the Divinity of Christ Jesus, as in his Gospel and First Epistle, so in this
Book, where Pareus observes there are forty eight arguments of Christ's
Divinity. This John the Evangelist and Apostle was Penman of this Revelation,
who wrote this book after all the books of the New Testament had been penned
and published, he surviving after all the rest of the Apostles, and lived (as
Sophronius thinks) to the third year of Trajan the Emperor, which was in the
one hundred and second year after Christ's birth, as Helvicus computes. It
compleats and seals up the whole canon of the Old and New Testament, cap. 22.
7, 14, 18, 19.

The time when he wrote this Revelation was when he was banished into the Isle
of Patmos, for the Word of God and testimony of Jesus, by that cruel persecutor
Domitian in the fourteenth year of his Reign, says Hierem. Domitian reigned in
all but fifteen years, and his fourteenth year was the 96 year after Christ (as
Helvicus computes) So that from John's writing this Revelation, suppose in the
102 year after Christ, to this present year 1662 are 1560 years.

It is also called the Revelation of Jesus Christ, because he is the author of
it, even Jesus Christ himself, the faithful and true witness, who sent his
Angel to testify the same to John the Apostle, and by him to the Churches,
Rev. 11.22.16.

And though it be called a Revelation, and the Revelation of John, and of Jesus
Christ, because it does make known to us hidden mysteries, and future events,
yet its not without mixture of much intricateness and obscurity; having as
Hierom says, as many mysteries as words. Sundry Books of Holy Scripture are
hard to be understood, especially those that are prophetical; but among all the
prophetical books, chiefly this. It is a book full of obscure and intricate
visions, making known abstruse and hidden mysteries, most mysteriously, and
that in relation to future times; And therefore the profoundest judgment of
interpreters, is here not only excercised but puzzled, so that they must
acknowledge here are many knots they cannot unty, and mighty deeps, through
which they cannot fully wade.

The opening of the seven seals, the sounding of the seven Trumpets, the
pouring out of the seven Viols, who can fully comprehend? Rev.
5.1.6.1.8.6.16.1. The profound Mysteries of the measuring of Gods Temple and
Altar; the Gentiles treading under foot the outward Court and holy City, the
two Witnesses, and the time of their Prophecy, Rev. 11.1, 2, 3. The battle
between Michael and the seven headed Dragon, the woman's Travel, bringing forth,
flight into the Wilderness, Rev. 12.3, 7. the seven-headed, and ten-horned
Beast blaspheming, and prevailing over the Saints, Rev. 13.11. etc. The two
horned beast, repairing the former beast, Rev. 13.14. The beasts Image, Mark,
and number of his name, v. 15. and the number of the beast, 666. The Angels
flying through the midst of Heaven, with the everlasting Gospel, Cap. 14.6. The
casting the beast and false Prophet into the lake. Cap. 19.20.

The first resurrection, and the reigning of the revived Martyrs with Christ a
thousand years, Rev. 20.4, 5.

The binding of Satan the mean while, and loosing him afterward, Rev. 2^.2, 7.
The battle and ruin of Gog and Magog, Rev. 20.8. And in a word, the new
Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, and the finishing the mystery of
God. Rev. 21.2. These and the like profound mysteries, who can completely
understand?

Yea, I verily believe no mortal creature on earth, is able fully to understand
and penetrate into all the profound depths and mysteries of this book, which
has so exercised and puzzled all interpreters. Yet this I think, if some things
therein, by help of divine light, may be cleared, though all cannot, he that
writes shall be a gainer, and he that reads shall be no loser.

Therefore I write this, that I may by Divine assistance give some light to the
understanding of some things in this Divine and sacred Prophecy, the mysteries
therein being revealed, that they might be understood, the true understanding
whereof so much concerns us, and the Church of God in this last hour of the
world.

Now that we may fadom and understand somewhat of this mysterious Book, I will
endeavor two things.

First, To give some light into the main body or substance of this Book.

Secondly, I will endeavor to open and explain some things in the 11. Chapter,
in the History of the two Witnesses, because there are many particular and
important things, which do relate to our present times, and are set down for
the comfort of the Church, which is now afflicted.

To begin with the first, viz. to give some light into the main body of this
Prophecy; now in order to this, ponder and weigh advisedly two things.

First, The Scope or Intent of the Book. Secondly, The Synchronisms, or the
contemporaneousness of the Prophesies therein, how the Visions therein run
parallel one with another, and what an acurate harmony, and sweet consent there
is among them in respect of time.
First, Eye and observe intentively, the scope of the Book, that is, the common
time and Period, whereunto all the particular Prophecies and passages in the
Revolation do jointly run, and wherein they do ultimately determine. For this
is the Pole-st^^ and compass we must steer by; the chief mark, or white, which
must be aimed and levelled at in interpreting this whole book; and all the
mysterious visions therein contained: Like an accurate Archer therefore, keep
the eye of thy judgment fixed steadfastly on the Scope, that so far as
possible, thou shoot not wide, not short, nor over.

Now the Scope or intent of the Revelation 1. Parts of the book.
is more generally to make known to the Apostle John, and by John to the
Churches, the present things that then were, when the Revelation was given, and
the future things that should be afterward from John's time to the end of the
World, as the title of the Book intimates, Rev. 1.1.1.19.

2. More particularly, Jesus Christ intends in this Book to declare the future
condition of the Christian Religion, and Churches of the Gentiles, especially
the European Churches, the remains of the Roman Empire, and the Tyrannical
dominion of Antichrist (those singular subject matters of this book) extending
themselves in Europe peculiarly; or as another learned writer expresses it, to
the same purpose, Christ intends in this book to describe the state of the
Church in the New ^^^ament, The Arocal up; is a Prophefie of the destruction of
the Roman Empire, not only as Heathenish, but as Christian, when as it were, it
was paganised again, and persecuting the Church. Mr. Thomas Goodwin in his
Sermon before the Parliament. 1645.
and also the things that shall come to pass in the Roman Empire, or the fourth
Monarchy, under which the Church of God does subsist, and that in diverse
remarkable Periods of events.

Now this description comprehends three Periods, or three sorts of times.

The first Period contains the time of the Dragon; the time in which the seven
Crowns stood upon the seven heads of the Dragon, Rev. 12.3. when the Dragon
himself under the heathenish Emperors was publicly adored and worshipped, but
the Christians banished, persecuted and put to cruel death: till at last
Constantine the great, came to the Imperial Seat, whereby the reign of the
Dragon came to an end; for he throws down all both Idol-worship, and Princes
that upheld it; So the Dragon was cast out of the Church Heaven, the whole
Empire turning Christian (though as one well said, the Devil did not th^^ turn
Christian) for he stirred up th^^ ^^rian Christian world, to persecute the
Orthodox Christians, as much as Heathen Rome had done, yet notwithstanding the
Church prevailed, was built up, and triumphed until after the death of the good
Emperor Theodesins, at which time the Devil left his shape of a Dragon, and
resigned his Host, his residence and seat, with his great authority unto the
beast with ten horns, that rose out of the Sea, Cap 13.1, 2.

The second period comprehends the time of Antichrists reign, Period 2.
or the time in which the Pope of Rome, as the Antichrist and enstalled
Leiutenant of the Dragon Blasphemeth God and his name, and persecutes his
Saints for the space of 1200 and 60 days, Rev. 13. Which God has permitted as
a scourge to Arrian Rome.
when the Dragon was overcome, and cast out of the Church Heaven, he did cast
out of his mouth Water as a flood after the Woman, Rev. 12.15. i.e. he stirred
up the Septentrional Nations to invade the Roman Empire, So Brightman, Deed.
Piscator, I unius.
intending thereby to root out and destroy the Church; but the earth swallowed
up the flood, in regard these Nations embruned the Christian faith, Some by the
flood understand Heresies, especially Arrianism, overflowing the Christian
world, and so interprers the earth to be the multitude of Christians mer in
general Councels, who defending the true faith, overthrew and drank up these
heresies, as dry ground drinks up water.
remaining in the Roman Empire, and erected several Kingdoms in it.

Seeing then the Dragon saw that he could not maintain the Heathenism wherein
be was openly worshipped and served, he resigneth to the Beast (which rises up
out of the Sea, Rev. 13.7. and is ridden and governed by the great whore of
Babylon, Rev. 133. etc. that is to the Antichrist, who in the time of these
wars, does creep out in the Roman Empire) his power and his seat, and great
authority, Cap. 13. verse. 2. And so makes him his Vicar and Lieutenant, by
giving over to him his Seat and Residence, the City of Rome, and the whole
Roman Empire; whence it came to pass, that about the time the Bishops of Rome
began to seek to have the primacy and preeminence both in Church and State, as
Innocentius the first did, in the year say some, 402. others 406.

The Dragon does resign to his Lieutenant (...), The Dragons delegate or
Inostirute. R^^.
his whole host (for in this sense the seventy Interpreters do use this word
(...), as, Exodus 14.14. and 15.4. as Mat. 24.29.30.) The Host of the Dragon,
are his Angels or Devils, So Mede.
and the Idols in which the Dragon and the Devils are worshipped and served by
the heathen. These (Idols) the Antichristian Popedom has received, and
worshipped under the name of Saints, the Dragon and his Vicegerent, as hereof
the Text speak's, Cap. 13.3, 4. The whole earth did wonder at the beast, and
they worshipped the Dragon, that gave power unto the Beast, and they worshipped
the beast; The Dragon does give also to him great authority, and makes him a
head over great countries, whereof David did prophecy, Psa. 110.6. The time of
his Lieutenantship shall continue forty two Months, i.e. one thousand two
hundred and sixty years.

Upon this follows the third Period which brings Statum Ecclesiae
tranquillum, Period 3.
as the pure, so the peaceable and quiet estate of the Church upon earth.

Seeing at the found of the Trumpet of the seventh Angel, the seventh plague or
the third we do come upon the Roman Empire, and at the same time the seventh
Viol of Gods wrath is poured out ^ wherewith the enemies of the Church are
wholly cut off and destroyed, yea, even the Devil himself shut up in the
bottomless pit, Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. therefore there can nothing but a true and
constant peace ensue; whence it is that the Church of God rejoices with great
joy, with a great voice saying, as Rev. 11.25. The Kingdoms of this World are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for
ever and ever. and v. 17. She gives also thanks to the Lord God Almighty,
because he has taken to him his great power and reigns.

Now unto these three Periods, The scope of the Revellation.
or times, the whole body of the Revelation of St. John, and the parts of it
are directed.

For the Son of God describes in this Revelation, the State of the Christian
Church, and the things befalling to the Roman Empire in relation to the Church,
in a three fold manner.

First, By seven Epistles, Cap. 2.3. Secondly, by a Book Scaled, Cap. 4.5, 6,
7. Thirdly, By a little Book open, Cap. 10. and so following.
He does also appear to John every time in another shape.

First, In the likeness of a Son of man, who suffers in the first Period, i.
e. in his Members, Rev. 1.12. I saw one like to the Son of man in the midst of
the seven golden Candlesticks.

Secondly, By his horns and eyes which are 7 is noted the absolute perfection of
his power and wisdom, and all for his Church against his enemies.
As a beast in the shape of a lamb, having seven horns and leven eyes, chap.
5.6 which does fight in the second period.

Thirdly, As a mighty strong Angel clothed with a cloud, cap. 10. who in the
third period has all things put under his feet, and reigns.

First, In the likeness of a Son of man, in the midst of the seven
candlesticks, cap. 1. verse. 12, 13, 14, 15. These Epistles are by Christ not
only intended to those particular Churches named, but to all the Churches w^h
then were elsewhere in the world, and which should be in all ages till his 2d.
com^ing.
He declares the condition of the Church in general by seven Epistles (for
though these seven Epistles seem primarily and immediately to have respect to
the state of the Church then present, to the state of the seven Asian Churches
especially: Yet secondarily, mediately and Analogically they have respect to
other following Churches, as it were adumbrated and resembled by them) Yea Mr.
Brightman goes further, and makes them to contain in them Prophesies touching
the future state of all the Gentile Churches; and so makes all these Epistles,
as well prophetical in respect of the future Counterpane Churches, as
historical in respect of the present Antity ^e Asian Churches.

So then I say Christ declares the condition of the Church in general by seven
Epistles; whereof the first and second belong to the first period, viz. Ephesus
and Sm^rna.

The third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh to the second period. And the
promises cap. 2, and 3. to the third period. For then those promises made to
the Church conflicting with her enemies and overcoming them (as that chap. 2.7.
I will give to eat of the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God;
parallel to that Rev. 22.14. and cap. 2.3. He shall walk with me in white;
parallel to that, Rev. 7.9, 13. and 19.8. and that chap. 2.26. To him that
overcomes I will give power over the nations, and he shall rule them, etc. and
that cap. 3.21. I will grant to sit with me upon my throne; parallel with Rev.
20.4. All which promises relating to the graceful and peaceful estate of the
Church after her deliverance from her enemies, by their just ruin and
destruction) shall be accomplished.

Secondly, Christ appears to John as a beast in the shape of a Lamb, with
seven horns and seven eyes, and opens the book sealed (the secret and hidden
decree of God) and intimates thereby the things befalling the Roman Empire,
Mede divides the Apocalypse from the fourth chapter to the end of the book into
two Systemes of prophetical Visions, the one containing the fate of the Empire,
from cap. 4.1. to 10. and 8. yea to cap. 12. ver. 1. the other of the Church
from cap. 12.1. to 22.6. both beginning from one Epoch viz. the second, in such
sort as the first, as by comparing c. 4.1. with 10.8. Hence the second
prophecy seems nor to be subsequent or s^ bordinate to the first, but
co^ordinate thereto. These two series of prophesies seems to be plainly
intimated, Rev. 10.11. Thou must prophecy again before many peoples, nations
and tongues; q. d. thou have prophesied once already by virtue of the vision of
the seven seals, and seven trumpets; now thou must prophecy again a second
time, by virtue of the little book thou have eaten up.
under which the Church is built up and preserved, cap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and
distinctly how things shall be carried both in the Political and Ecclesiastical
State; and first in the Political State.

And that both in the first, second and third period.

In the first period, which by opening the first six seals is performed; cap.
6. where in the first five seals, is set forth the condition of the Church
under the Heathen Emperors; but in the sixth, the full of Heathenism under the
Christian Emperors, from Constantine the great, until the death or after the
death of Theodosius is prefigured. In brief the meaning of the first six seals
is this,

That Prince of unspotted righteousness, the rider of the white horse, with his
arrow and his bow in his hand aims at something of high importance (and it is
no less then what he promises his followers at their lowest ebb, Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom) and he hits the mark in the sixth Seal, where the Pagan Empire is
shattered to the purpose by Constantine turning Christian. But to adorn the
course of time till then by some prophetic Remarks, the Riders of the Red,
Black and Pale Horses are brought in, as also most concerningly the cry of the
souls under the Altar; whereby is denoted especially the reign of Dieclesian,
and that ten years unparalleld persecution then commencing; which fifth Seal,
the rescuing of the Empire into the hands of Christ by the subversion of the
Pagan power, does immediately succeed, and is matter of the sixth Seal, figured
out by proper prophetical expressions, as of a great earthquake, the eclipse of
the Sun and Moon, and falling of the stars, which Mr. Mede interprets to be
when by Constantine the Great and his Sucessors, there was such a mighty change
and subversion of the Roman Heathenish affairs (signified here by the great
earthquake) wherein all the heathenish gods were shaken from their heaven,
their Priests rejected, and for ever deprived of their revenue, their Idol
Temples broken, pulled down, burnt, demolished, throughout the whole Roman
world; and the Emperors, Kings and Potentates endeavoring to succor their
endangered gods, themselves subdued, frighted, put to flight, at last none
daring to defend their Roman Heathenish Religion, so terribly crushed and
fallen. This is the first complement of Christ's victory over the Roman
heathenish Empire, the foundation whereof Christ laid in the first Seal. For
the particular accommodation of events to the particulars of the Text, I refer
the Reader to Mr. Joseph Mede in his Commentary upon the Apocalypse, whose
application is very orderly, proper and articulate, in the explication of the
four first Seals, where the lion on the east side of the Israelitish camp is
applied to Christ the Prince from the East; the nature of the lion being
suitable to the thing signified in the vision, viz. victory to him on the white
horse; and the like in the rest. For so the Ox on the West side of the camp is
applied to Trajan from the west; the man on the South side to Septimius from
the South; and the Eagle on the North side to Maximinus from the North; The
natures also of the visions, are suitable to the things that came to pass under
those Emperors.

The mighty slaughters under Trajan and Adrian his successor, are indigitated
by the Ox: The exactness of administering justice, and careful provision of
Septimius, and Alexander Severus, by a man to whom numbering, and measuring, and
administration of justice is so proper.

The extraordinary raging of the Famine, Sword, and Pestilence, under Maximinus,
by the carnivorous Eagle that feeds upon dead Cakasses. All which applications,
as they are easy, natural and distinst, so they are very weighty and worthy
the Spirit of God and his holy Prophets to predict.

2. In the second Period, the seventh Seal is opened, and seven Angels, by
seven Trumpets declare to the Roman Empire by seven judgments, its ruin, Cap.
8.

Which plagues have been fulfilled.

The first Trumpet, Trump. 1.
the Vision of it is hail and fire mingled with blood, Rev. 8.7.
which Haylstones and fire, are symbols of hostile vengeance executed upon
enemies; this was fulfilled in the infestation of the Roman Empire from the
year 395. to 406. partly by Alaricus and the Goths, and partly by the Barbarous
Nations under Ruduguisus, and partly by the Vandals and Alans; these are the
Northern storms of Hailestones, with blood and fire that fell upon the Empire.

The vision of the second Trumpet, Trump. 2.
is the burning mountain cast into the Sea, which was sulfilled by Alaricus his
taking and firing of Rome, verse. 8.
upon which followed a continual spoil of the Empire, till it was dilacerated
into ten Kingdoms; for the Text says, the third part of the Sea became blood,
i. e. the extent of the Roman Dominion, and the collection of the people
therein (which was a third part of the world) was destroyed, the head City
being wasted; the Barbarians at their pleasure wasted her Provinces, deviding
them into new Kingdoms.

The third part of the Creatures died, i. e. the Armies of the Empire for its
defense were irreparably ruined, and the third part of the Ships destroyed, i.
e. all helps and means of traffic, of supporting the power of the Empire
being woefully lost, Rome, being first taken by Alarieus King of Goths, Anno.
410. and after that the Roman Dominion was still miserably dilacerated, till
Anno. 445. Rome was taken again, and spoiled by Genserius, King of Vandalls;
and next year after the Kingdom, as it were divided into ten Kingdoms,
foretold by Daniel and John, viz. 1. Brittons. 2. Saxons. 3. Francks. 4.
Burgundians. 5. Wisigoths. 6. Sueves and Alans. 7. Vandals. 8. Alemuners. 9.
Ostrogoths. 10. Grecians. Trump. 3. verse. 10.


The third Trumpet Vision is the great Star falling into the third part of the
River burning like a Lamp; the Comet Lampadius suppose properly so called; This
was fulfilled upon the Roman Empire, in the extinction of the Western
(aesariate, which was grown very low and obscure, in those inconsiderable
Emperors, Avitus, Majoranus, Severns, Authemius, Olybrius, Glycirius Nepos, the
immediate predecessors of Augustulus, but fell quite, and was extinct in this
prince of sorrow, bitterness and sad misfortunes, whom Odoacer King of Heruli
pulled out of his Throne. 476.

The fourth Trumpet Vision, Trump. 4. verse. 12.
is an Eclipse of the third part of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which proceeds
further concerning Rome; for this Trumpet exceeds the former, and signifies
that that light she shone with under the Ostrogoth Kings, should be extinct,
and she should be dispoiled of Royal Majesty, yea, of Consulship and Authority
of Senate, which ill fate is very properly prefigured, by the obscuration of
Sun, Moon, and Stars; for by these lumina^ies the Scripture sets out the power
and Government of Cities or Kingdoms, Esaia. 13.10. 60.20. Jer. 15.9. Ezekiel.
32.7.

The fifth Trumpet Vision is, Trump. 4. Cap. 9.1, 2, 3.
the Keybearer of the bottomless Pit, and the Locusts; this was fulfilled upon
the Roman Empire by Mahom^t and the Saracens: In the Application of which
Vision, Learned Mede is admirably critical and punctual. The plague therefore
of the fifth trumpet is that false light or pseud oprophet Mahomet sent down
upon earth by the vengeance of God, The star fallen from heaven, is that false
light or prophet Mahomet, sent down upon earth by the vengeance of the God of
heaven. By the star here is meant, say the Annotators upon the Bible, Some
Apostate Minister that fell from the true religion to Mahometism; such as
Sergius of Constantinople, the Nestorian Monk, and John of Antio^h the Arrian,
who are said to affist Mahomet in composing the lying Alcoran. And so this
Trumpet is expounded of Mahomet and the Saracens. Vide Ann^t on cap. 9. of
Apo^alyps.
whose doctrine is the fume of the bottomless pit, and his followers the
Saracens, the locusts here spoken of; as

1. Coming out of Arabia, as the Egyptian locusts did that plagued the
literal Egypt.

2. And then hugely numerous, as the company of locusts use to be.

3. And also making their stay, fo, which you may turn menses quinos, by five
months; which is an allusion to the usual continuance of locusts, Plin. 11.29.
and answers in the prophetical sense to five months of years, that is 150
years, that these locusts infested Italy; and to the twice 150 years that the
Saracenical kingdom continued; so properly are the five months applicable to
them.

4. As also their golden crowns, to the multitude of their conquests, they
having subdued Palestine, Syria, both the Armeniaes, the lesser Asia, Persia,
India, Egypt, Numinia, Portugal, Spain, within the space of fourscore years.

5. The Arabians, whence the Saracens, wore their hair tied up like women.

6. The sound of the wings of their locusts, Rev 9.9.
which was as the sound of chariots and many horses running to battle, does
fitly signify the mighty and swift victories of the Saracens.

7. As also their poisonous Scorpions tails do the venom of the old Serpent,
under the false religion of Mahometism. For all those powers that are not under
the kingdom of light, are part of the powers of the prince of the dark kingdom
the Devil.

8. As is here intimated very clearly, the King over them being the Angel of
the bottomless pit, verse. 1^.
though they pretend to be such zealous worshippers of that one true God that
made Heaven and Earth, which they do mainly in envy and opposition to the
Christians profession of the Trinity, while themselves are in the mean time
under Abaddon, and Apollyon, which signifies a destroyer, and are still as
truly Pagans as the Assyrians and Greeks, that worship Adad and Apollo.

The sixth Trumpet Vision, as the second woe, Tramp. 6.
is the loosing of the four Angels, that were bound in the River Euphrates.
This was fulfilled upon the Roman Monarchy by the Turks; which four Angels at
the River Euprates, Mr. Mede very fitly Interprets to be the four Sultans of
the Turkish Dominion. Bagdad, Cosarea, Aleppo, Damascus, planted on this side,
and that side Euphrates, he Calculating the time of a dar, month and year, that
is 396 years from the Inauguration of Togzulbeck the Prince of the Turks, to
the taking of Constantinople, v. 14, 15.
which is just 396. years, he applying those Myriads of Myriads of horse, verse.
16.
to the known numerosity of the Turkish Armies, who being Persians, by their
long abode in that Country, are called Persee in the Greek History, (...)
Paras, quo nomine in sa^r^s literis vocatur Persia.
so that the foot are in this allusion horsemen too; the Hebrew word signifying
Eques as well as Persia, which allusion to names is used also by Daniel, in
making the He-goat stand for the Kings of the Aegeades, i. e. of the
Macedonians, their brest-plates of Fire, Jacinct and Sulphus he interprets, of
that aspect they seem to have, by discharging their Carbines, or Pistols in the
fight, which makes all their breasts for a time seem fiery, then of a blew
Jacinct color by the smoke; and the most lasting object of sense is the
stinking Sulphur, which representation is to be understood of them nearer at
hand; this invention of Gunpowder (foreseen by that spirit that inspired John,
and not vainly pointed at in these visions, but for the better assurance of the
time they belong to) is again intimated, in that it is said, the heads of their
Horses were as the heads of Lions, because of the terror of their noise,
dreadful, like to the roaring of a Lion, when they discharge against the
enemy. For presently follows, verse 17.
Out of their mouths came fire, and smoke, and brimstone; all were breathed out
together from their jaws at once; this interpretation of Mr. Mede seems very
apposite; before him also Brightman Interprets this of guns, pieces of
Ordinance, and Gunpowder more used by the Turks then any other men; the
greatness of that Gun was almost incredible, which Mahomed used in the
beseiging of Constantinople, for the drawing whereof, seventy Yoke of Oxen, and
2000. men were used, as Laonicus Chalcocondular in his Eighth Book of Turkish
History reports. And those 1200. Jenazaries, which are the ordinary Guard of
his body, are all Gunners.

The tayls of the Horses were as if they had been half a Serpent, verse. 19.
clapped to, and hanging out with her head. Mede makes in Emblem of that sad
after-clap, of their victory over men; the Devil then that Old Serpent, being
ready to parley with them, verse. 20.
and to seduce them to Mallonatism, to drink in the Sarazen, Mohammedan
Religion, whereby they proved very hurtful and pernicious, as the Sarazens
before them.

The calamitous effect, wrought by the loosing of these four Angels, and their
Euphratean Horsemen and Horses, was the killing of the third part of men, i. e.
many of the Roman Empire, which was the third part of the world.

This is amplified by the incorrigibleness and impenitency of the rest of the
Roman Empire, that had escaped the deadly fury of this Euphratean Army of
Turks; though these judgments were inflicted before their eyes on their
brethren, yet they repented not of their sins and abominations.

1. Not of their devil-worship; this worshipping of Demons and Idols, Mede
interprets in the proper sense, and applies it to the rest of the Roman Empire
infected with that we call Papal Superstition and Idolatry: This is very fit
and appropriate, none can deny. 2. Nor of their murders of the Saints, whose
souls cry under the Altar. 3. Nor of their Sorceries. v. 20, 21.
4. Fornications. 5. Thefts, procuring upon the Roman world the judgments of
this Trumpet.
The Application of these two last Trumpet-visions is so particular and
exquisite, that it would make one eager to know the meaning of the seventh and
last Trumper-Vision, which consists of loud praises to the God of heaven, that
all the kingdoms of the world are become the kingdom of the Lord, and his
Christ. Cap. 11.15


This we have in the third Period, when the seventh Angel does found, Period 3.
and withal the seventh Judgment is executed upon the enemies of the Church;
which is the third woe. Cap. 10.
It being a Trumpet of woe to the wicked and unbeleiving, answerable to the
seven thunders that filled the space of the seventh Trumpet, whilst that mighty
and illustrious Angel roars like a lion, and is justly conceived to represent
our Savior Christ, the lion of the Tribe of Judah, who being once stired up,
will never cease pursuing the prey till he has brought all under his feet,
death it self not excepted.

And so I come to speak of the Third Appearance of Jesus Christ to John,
mentioned before p. 13.
in the likeness of a strong Angel, cap. 10. who in the third period has all
things put under his feet and reigns. In this 10 cap. according to Mede
begins the second Prophecy. Here the judicious Reader may be pleased to
consider that the holy Spirit of Christ seems purposely here to have suspended
the actual sounding of this 7th Trumpet, by interposition of so much of the
second prophefie, contained in this I try book, as is parallel with and
contemporary with the first Prophefie, from the very beginning of it, to the
end of the fixth Trumpet; that to by linking, and as it were by looping these
two prophesies together after this manner he might indigitate unto us the right
way of interpreting both these prophesies by parallelling and comparing them
one with another in respect of their visions and mysteries, which are so
notably contemporaneous.
This Angel is said to be be clothed with a cloud, having also in his hand a
little book, which John swallowed down and thereupon prophefies how things
shall come to pass, especially

In the Ecclesiastial State.

In the first Period for 400 years and upwards. Period. 1.
Where 1. The Church is built up under great persecution, chap. 11.1. 2. The
Church is gloriously beautified and clothed with the Sun of Righteousness,
has the Moon under her feet, despises all worldly and earthly things, and
reigns over the works of darkness, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars,
the Apostles, and the wholesome doctrine of the same, chap. 12.1, 2. 3. The red
Dragon, the Devil stirs up many heresies, persecuteth the Church;
Constantiue the Great comes to the Imperial seat, the Dragon is overcome, and
Heathenism extirpated, verse. 4, and following.


In the second Period from the 400. years and upward, Period. 2.
until the end of the 1200. and 60. years, these seven concurrent times are
described.

1. The holy City is trodden under foot by the Gentiles.

2. The two Witnesses clothed with Sackcloth, Cap. 11. ver. 2, 3. to the
10th. the explaining of which I refer to the 11. Chap.

3. The woman fled into the Wilderness, and is fed there, The primitive Church
rescued from heathenish bondage, fled into the wilderness, i. e. into a middle
estate, not wholly hid and invisible, nor yet gloriously visible, but as it
were in a middle condition betwixt both. Rob. The two wings of a great Eagle
given to the woman to by into the wilderness, Mede refers to the Roman Empire,
whose Ensign is an Eagle, and to the two Cesars of the Eastern and Western
Empire, divided as two wings, by whose aid and protection the Church fled into
her wilderness estate.
Cap. 12. verse 6. to 14. As Mary upon the birth of Christ, fled from Herod
into Egypt: So the Woman i. e. the Primitive Church, notwithstanding the
persecution of the Dragon, having brought forth a man Child, (who was to rule
the Nations with a rod of Iron, which primarily belongs to Christ personal,
Psa. 2. Secondarily to Christ mystical his Church and members, which Christ
mystical ruled all Nations by a rod of Iron, subjugating the Roman Empire,
partly by a spiritual Gospelvictory, promoted by Michael and his Angels,
against the Devil and his Angels, rulers in that Empire; partly by a corporeal
conquest afterward, when Christians prevailed and obtained such power and
success under Constantine the great, and his Successors) fled into the
Wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, that they should feed her
there 1200 and 60. days, verse. 6. which is again related, v. 14.

The meaning I conceive is this; the Church, though freed from heathenish
tyranny, yet is afresh embarked in new troubles and persecutions by diverse
enemies; Now during all this time, the Church is in her wilderness condition,
as Israel of old was after their deliverance from Egypt. Thus take the
parallel; Israel delivered from Egyptian bondage under Pharaoh, fled toward
the wilderness, but was persued by Pharaoh, had liberty to worship God in the
Wilderness, where their Tabernacle was erected, there Apostatized from God and
his pure worship, in the matter of the Calf, Baalpeor, Baalam, etc. and was
there exercised with new troubles and afflictions, of hunger, thirst, fiery
Serpents, and of diverse enemies, abode in the Wilderness 40. years, during
which space they made 42 journeys and stations from Egypt to Jordan. And at
last all their enemies being subdued, Numb. 33. from 1. to 50.
they quietly possessed the promised rest, the Land of Canaan: So the Church
being freed from Heathenish Tyranny, under the Red Dragon, fled into the
Wilderness, but was persued and persecuted by the Dragon, had liberty granted
of worshipping God, in the wilderness, by the edicts of Christian Emperors and
Kings, who erected for them Temples, or public places for Christian worship,
yet in that her Wilderness estate, she made many idolatrous defections.
Apostatizing from God and his pure worship; especially to Antichristianisme;
Cap. 12.17. And the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with
the remnant of her seed, etc. Cap. 13.1. And I stood upon the sand of the Sea.
etc. Mede says, the words are to be read not and steti, but and stetit. Cum
Latinis omnibus, and Sire interpr. i. e. The Dragon stood upon the sands, i. to
bring up this beast out of the sea to persecute the woman. Further he says, v.
3. And I saw one of his heads wounded to death. That the word (vidi) is not in
some Editions, as the Complutense reading the sentence thus, The Dragon gave
him his power, seat and great authority, and one of his heads wounded to death,
that it might be healed: or that had been wounded to death; and the healing of
his wounds which is added, this he either saw to be done while he was rising
out of the sea, or as soon as he was risen out of it.
is there exercised with new troubles and persecutions by the Dragon, Beast,
and False Prophet; abides in this Wilderness seat 42. months. At last the
Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, with all her enemies being
vanquished, the Church obtaines the new Heavens, and new Earth, and reigns with
Jesus Christ a thousand years, yea, for ever and ever; the former and following
series of this Prophecy clears this parallel. This state of the Church seems to
last till the seventh Trumpet; So that to this day the Church is still in this
Wilderness-condition, but drawing toward the borders of a far happier estate.

4. The beast with ten horns blasphemeth God, and makes war with the Saints,
cap. 13. v. 5, 6, 7. This ten horned Beast, as was mentioned before, is the
Dragons Delegate or Substitute; he is said to rise out of the Sea; by Sea here,
understand that multitude of ten Kingdoms, into which the Barbarians had
shredded the whole compass of the Roman Territories, out of all which the
Dragon now endeavors to extract, and of which to compose one Roman Dominion,
or that conflux of Armies and people, striving in war like a tempestuous Sea;
He is said to have seven heads, and so is the same beast, cap. 17.3. compared
with verse. 9, 10. His seven heads, are interpreted by the Holy Ghost himself,
to be seven Mountains, whereon the Royal Seat of the Empire of Rome was built,
and seven Kings or kinds of Government, by which the Empire should be governed.

The names of blasphemy, notes his blasphemous idolatries, tending to the
extreme reproach of God, his Religion and Saints; his ten horns, and upon his
horns, Voice out of the Wilderness, p. 38.
ten crowns, these signify that he should not come to his crown by the
strength of his Sword, his Leaders, and his Legions, But of the crowns upon the
horns, see another interpretation. p. 90.
as the Dragon did, but by the base and voluntary submission of all the
Caesar's, Kings and Princes, as should with one Council and Vote, deliver up
their authority and power secular to the devotion and pleasure of the beast;
therefore he wears his Diadems, not upon his heads, as the Dragon did, but upon
his Horns, and upon his Horns ten crowns.

Which ten Horns crowned, say most Writers, denote ten Kings or Kingdoms,
into which the Roman Empire of the sixth head, was divived, all which were to
be conjoined, Mede in Cum. Apoc. part. 2. cap. 13.
into one for carrying of the whore. These 10. horns thinks Mede, belong not to
all the seven heads, but only to the seventh, because the heads flourishing,
the horns flourish; the heads fulling, the horns necessarily fall therewith.
Now these ten horns cannot belong to the first five heads, because in John's
time, these five were fallen already, Rev. 17.10. and consequently their horns
with them; nor can these horns belong to the sixth head, which then was in
John's time reigning; for the Angel tells John plainly, the ten horns are ten
Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet; compare Rev. 17.10. with the 12.
verse. Therefore it remains that these ten horns belong only to the seventh
or last head.

Again, this beast is described by his shape, verse. 2. And the beast that I saw
was like a Leopard, i. e. like unto the Grecian Monarchy, resembled by a
Leopard, and divided into four heads, as this Roman into ten, Dan. 6.7.

The Leopard, is a beast all spotted, Pareus in Apoc. 13.2.
very swift, extreme cruel, a notable Emblem of this present beast, Voice out
of the wilderness, p. 37.
who for his presumption in extolling himself above the Prince of the Covenant,
defiling his Sanctuary, desolating his Sacrifice, burning his Statutes, and
enforcing the humble and meek to the abnegation of the truth, by blood, fire,
strapadoes, and such like exquisite torments, the spirit resembles him to his
Arch-type, Autiochus, descended from the Monarch of Greece, here (as in Daniel)
deciphered by a Leopard, and I saw the beast like a Leopard.

Secondly for his strength, cruelty, and devouring nature, the spirit likeneth
him to a Bear, and his feet were like the feet of a Bear, strong, cruel, and of
a devouring nature, the emblem of the Persian Monarcy; It had says Daniel,
Cap. 7.5. three ribs in the teeth of it, and they said thus unto it, Arise and
devour much flesh.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost likeneth him to the Lions mouth. The Lion was an
Emblem of the first Monarcy, the Baby lonians; the Lions mouth notes strength
and cruetly in tearing, crushing, and swallowing up his prey; yea, herein the
Holy Ghost ascribes unto him the profane and cursed mouth of the Monarch of
Babylon, in commanding the dwellers upon earth, Dan. 7.4
upon pain of fire and furnance, to adore his golden Idol that he had set up.

How notably sets this our the Character of this beast, his parts being framed
of the most notable persecutors that ever were, being a confection or compound,
made up of the terribleness, strength and cruelty of all the three foregoing
Monarchies! hence Daniel admirably describes this fourth Beast, Dan 7.7. as
dreadful, and terrible, and strong exceedingly, And it had great Iron teeth.

Further, the Holy Ghost describes him as by his shape, so by his State and
constitution; he was vested with great power, and Royal Dominion; and herein
the holy Ghost sets down the efficient cause, the manner of acquiring it, and
the event of it.

1. The efficient cause of it, we have in the latter end of the second Verse.
viz. The Dragon; the Dragon gave him his power and his seat, and great
authority; by power Scripture notes, not only strength, but bands, armies and
multitudes of persons; The Dragons Bands or Army, are his Angels or Devils with
Idols their receptacles (says Mede) these he gives to this beast, together
with his Seat and great authority, viz. all that authority which he had in the
heathenish Roman Empire, from which Michael and the Martyrs cast him down,
overcoming him; this he gives to the beast his Substitute, to recover it for
him.

How cunningly now Satan acts, not now as a red Dragon, but as masked in a new
manyformed beast, to draw the Church to Idolatry under the Christian Empire!

2. The manner of his acquiring this Dominion, by healing of his mortal wound,
received in his sixth head, by the barbarous Nations, Or rather according to
Mede, by Michaels Victory over the Dragon.
but now cured by this substituted power of the Beast, in the course of his
seventh and last head, See these two opinions reconciled afterward.
And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, and his deadly wound
was healed, v. 3.

3. The event of this his great Dominion upon the World, generally all admiring
and adoring this beast, thus healed and now termed as the Dragons Deputy, viz.
highly approving of him, and subjecting themselves to him and his power, as
incomparable and irresistible. Adoring in Scripture, is put for yiedling
subjection, Genesis 27.29.37.7. and 49.8. Esa. 45. In obeying the Emperors, or the
Popes Idolatrous, decrees, they not only Worshipped them, but the Devil in
them; for the Dragon gave them that power, and his work they did.
And all the World wondered after the beast, and they worshipped the Dragon, who
gave power unto the beast, i. e. they subjected themselves to the Dragon in the
Beast, and they worshipped the beast, saying, who is like unto the Beast, who
is able to make War with him! v. 3.

Again, this beast is described by these acts which are ascribed to him, viz.
his Acts of Idolatrous blasphemy; and cruel Tyranny.

First, His acts of Idolatrous blasphemy; for the Scripture is wont to set
forth Idolatry as Blasphemous, opprobrious, and contumelious; See Deuteronomy. 31.2.
Jer. 23.25. Isai. 65.7. This whole description is taken out of Daniel, Cap.
7.25. where he speaks of the same Roman beast; but what the Angel declares to
Daniel more briefly. John explains more largely.
this is generally mentioned. And there was given to him a mouth speaking great
things, and blasphemies; and then the continuance of this blasphemous beast is
computed, And power was given to him to continue 42. months, verse. 5. The
objects of his blasphemies, or Idolatries, are particularized, And he opened
his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle,
and them that dwell in heaven, v. 6. thinks Mede, Gods name by Image Worship,
his Tabernacle Christ's body, Here note says Mede, the beasts 42. months are
not to be reckoned from the beginning of his euelty and war against the Saints,
but from the beginning of his blasphemy, i. e. His Idolatry or spiritual
whoredom, which is, when that is attributed to the creature, which properly
belongs to God. Or when any thing beside God is worshipped with Divine Honor,
or when Saints or Angels are invocated, which is to blaspheme them that dwell
in Heaven, v. 5, 6. which invocation of Saints begun says Perkins, to be
brought into the Church, Anno. 3080. and in 20. years and upward, no doubt it
grew up to some height.
(wherein the Godhead dwelt personally) by transubstantiation; them that dwell
in heaven, viz. Saints and Angels; by Angel worship, Saint-worship, or rather
Devil-worship under their names.

Secondly, His acts of cruel Tyranny.

1. Partly persecuting the Saints, And it was given to him to make was with the
Saints, and to overcome them, i. e. with the remnant of the woman's seed in the
wilderness; now this War against the Saints he did not wage from his beginning
but when he came to his strength, 1200. years after Christ; his first
expedition was against the Waldenses and Albigenses, i. e. true worshippers of
Christ, called by that name, whereby multitudes of those people, and other true
Christians were destroyed for seventy years together; first intended against
the Saracens, after turned against the Christians that would not worship and
submit to the beast, besides the destroying of ten hundred thousand of them in
France, if Peronius may be believed, many thousands since slain by the Popes
Champions in Germany, where Charles the fifth made woeful slaughter, especially
at Magdeburge by the Popes appointment; and what bloody work has been made in
Germany, since, for forty years together, by the Emperor, I need not relate;
Not to speak of the many thousands slain in France, Ireland, and England,
besides those many more that have died for Religion, by the bloody inquisition,
by the hands of the Hangman; 3^^o. in the Low Countries, by the command of the
Duke De Alva; 800. here in Queen Mary's days, etc. hence the beast is said to
make himself drunk with the blood of the Saints.

Note here with Master Mede, that this killing by this war of the Beast, is of
another kind, and differs from that against the Witnesses, Cap. 11. his words
are these, The War which the beast wageth against the Saints universally, is
one; and the war which he shall wage against the Witnesses toward his end,
when the Witnesses shall finish their testimony, is another; and this is
manifest from the different issue and event of both these Wars; the first war
of the beast is very prosperous, for by it he obtaines power over kindreds,
tongue and Nations, Cap. 13.7. but the other is fatal to him, and precedes his
ruin and downfall.

2. And as his cruelty and tyranny is partly seen in persecuting the Saints, so
partly also by subduing all to his power, except the elect; And all that dwell
on the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of
life, verse. 7, 8. This is amplified by a conclusion dr^^n from hence, which is
both monitor and consolatory. Monitory to atte^^^nd consider well, who adore
the beast. If any have an ear to hear, let him hear, verse. 9. Consolatory to
the faithful, not worshipping the Idolatrous Beast notwithstanding all his
cruelties inflicted to this end; they are comforted from Gods just revenge, and
retaliation of their Imprisonment, and butcheries upon the beast; He that
leads into captivity, shall go into captivity; and he that kills with the
Sword, must be killed with the Sword; they are also comforted from the eminency
which will appear in their faith and patience, waiting on God till he thus
avenge them of the beast; here is the patience and faith of the Saints verse. 10.

I come now to the fifth concurrent time, under this second period.

That is, the beast with two horns, at the same time, The false Prophet,
beasts or the Pope of (...) and his Clergy, was the Author of nothing for the
Nation that ten horned beath, whereby the power of the Dragon was revived; by a
new Idolatry and Tyranny, brought in after the likeness of the former. Mede.
And the Pope and his Clergy together, do Institute this false Prophet Beast, or
false Church Beast, (...).
drives a trade with his pedling wares, v. 11. to the 18. This is the second
beast, viz. the two horned beast, or false Prophet, the reviver and restorer of
the ten horned beast, which seems evidently to be the Roman Antichrist, viz.
the Papacy or the Pope and his Clergy; so all interpreters do most unanimously
interpret this beast; Pareus, Mede, Piscator, Diodate, Forbes. Now in the
Vision of this beast, note his rise, his character, his power and acts.

First, his Rise, not so noble as the former beast out of the Sea of Worldly
Dominions, but more base out of the earth, a low and mean condition of things;
or not out of the Sea of Armies and people striving in wars as formerly; but
out of the earth silently, without all noise, as the grais or Plants silently
rise; And I saw another beast come out of the earth.

2. His Character: The Character of the beast, is laid down in this threefold
resemblance.

1. He resembles the Lamb in his horns, i. e. his power; And he had two horns
like the Lamb; the Lamb had seven horns, denoting his perfect power, Rev.
(...) 6. This Beast had two horns like him, though not equal to him. Some
think hereby the beast Hypocritically imitates Christ in his meek Lamb-like
power, as Diodate. Some by the two horns understand the double power of binding
and loosing. So Mede; or the secular and Ecclesiastical power or sword Usurped
by the Pope. Some by the two horns like the Lamh, understand the Law and the
Gospel, Voice out of the wilderness.
wherewith the Lamb does save and kill; but as concerning the use and force of
the horns, the spirit says they were therein so contrary to the Lamb, that
when they did open, either to touch the Law, or preach the Gospel, they spoke
and taught like the Dragons Doctors, and like the Priests of Jupiter, Teaching
and Preaching to the Children of the World, that they ought to Worship the God
of Heaven, as the Dragons Priests had taught their Fathers to worship the Gods
of the Heathen. The power of the first beast did consist in Idolatrous worship,
says Mede, which power was given him by the Dragon. Voice out of the
wilderness.


Therefore in the second place he is said to resemble the Dragon in her voice,
And he spoke as the dragon, verse. 11. i. e. by his doctrine and decrees he
patronizeth Idolatry, and persecuteth the Saints, as the Dragon did in the
former beast.

Thirdly, He resembles the first beast in the exercise of his power; And he
exercises all the power of the first beast before him i.e. he causes his new
Christened Cesars to set up a race of sycophantical, high and princely priests
who under a color of practicing the affairs of the Lamb, should cunningly clap
Jupiters coat upon the Lambs back, and bestow all the rites add ceremonies of
Jupiter and his Idols upon Christ; and so by turning Jupiters worship into
Christianism, he might turn the worship of God into Paganism and Idolatry, and
that so he might at least profane and desolate the true worship of the true
God, whose Majesty and truth of Deity they could no way blemish.

And for the better success in this their project, should cause to be erected
throughout all Kingdoms and Nations, certain Covents and swarms of ungodly and
prostituted Clarks, by avouching and maintaining against all comers, that the
Pope in Peter's Successor, and that the Supremacy his Caesar's and his Kings gave
him, is the very Keys of Heaven and Hell; that his Throne and Seat is Peter's
Chayr, and Sea Apostolic; and that the execrable form of Jupiters Worship,
wherein his Bride and Caesar's delighted, is the very true Worship of God, which
the Lamb and Apostles delivered.

Should I say, by these mists, leger-demains and new editions of old Idolatry,
established in the fight of the Beast, V. 12. Conspectu ejus, rendered before
him; is as much as to say, for his sake, or in favor of him.
the self same profanation and devout impiety, which his predecessors, the
Cesars so ardently embraced? for so much the spirit rippeth up in saying, The
Pope of Rome who is the head of this beast, does exercise also the supreme rule
or government of the for esaid beast. Mede.
And all the power of the first beast he did in the i.e. before him, or unto
him; according to that 1 Samuel 2.18 compared with 1 Samuel 3.1.
sight of the beast; and thereby so strongly deluded and seduced the children
of disobedience, as follows in the third place.

Tirdly, The description of his power and acts.

1. He causes the inhabitants of the earth to loath the sacrifices of the God
of heaven, In the presence of the beast, is the same as with him, or in his
behalf, as if he should have said, This two horned beast is Chaplain to the ren
horned beast, so that it ought not to be wondered at if he speak like the
Dragon. Mede Comment. part. 2. cap. 12. verse 12.
and to refuse to worship as the Lord commanded, but to choose rather, as the
Spirit says, to worship and submit to the first beast, i.e. to worship the God
of their fathers, as the Dragon commanded them, just after the prescription of
his Cesars, and manner of the heathen.

And that we may the better discern from whom those Procters of Antichrist
borrowed their Church service, the Spirit remembers he repaired the wound of
the first beast mentioned verse. 3. whose deadly wound was healed.

2. Mede. Hoc fac^um est in prel a cum Michacle and sanctis martyribus.
He seduceth and causes men to make an mage to the first beast who was
wounded; the first Beast being the sixth head (as was formerly showed) of the
Roman Empire, which was heathenish when wounded.

The Roman beast of the seventh head is his image, becoming like him not only
in his kingdom, power and foveraignty, Bestia Bicornu, loquitur ut draco and
imaginem gestit Bestiae prioris: viz. Romani Imperii Idololatrici, eamque in
vitam invocat. Zanch. 2 Thessalonians. 1. T. L.
but also in his new Idolatry or Idol-worship, not of Pagan-worship, but of
Saints and Angels, etc. like thereunto. The image of the Beast, says a learned
writer, is the image of the beasts religion, i.e. such a Christianism as does
counterfeit and represent the Paganism of the Dragon, attiring and decking
Jupiters profanation with the holy and honorable names of God, Jesus, Spirit,
Scriptures, Church, Sacraments, Saints, etc. like excellent Comedians, who deck
themselves with Crowns, Scepters, Purples, representations of Kings, when
indeed they are the Idlest and basest of the people. And as the Lord commanded
his servant Moses, to erect such a Tabernacle of witness here on earth, as
should in all points, be after the Idea, model, and platform of that divine and
eternal Tabernacle, which he saw in the mount: So Antichrist (Lord of misrule)
commands his propudious Clergy, to cause all People, Nations, and Kingdoms, to
set up such a Christianity, as should in all points answer the Idea and model
of that profane and execrable Heathenisme, wherewith he saw the Gentiles
enamored; and thereby so strongly seduced the inhabitants of the earth, that
they verily thought the mystery of iniquity to be pure and undefiled
Christianity, and the abomination of desolation, spoken of in Daniel the
Prophet, to be the only true ancient and apostolic Religion, teaching them
that perish by consenting to lies, that they ought to worship God, as the
Gentiles did worship Jupiter:

That as the Gentiles had their Arae, so Christians must have their Altars; And
as Heathens had their bloody Sacrifices, so Christians must have their unbloody
Sacrifices; most Offer Bread and Wine to God, as the Heathens did to Ceres and
Bacchus; And as the Pagans had their Pontifex Maximus, so Christians must have
their Pope; And as Ethnicks had their Sacerdotes, so Christians must have their
Priests; And as the Dragon, had his Pantheon, so Antichrist must have his
All Saints; And as the Ethnicks had their Supplications, so Christians must
have their Processions; Lustratio, A purging by Sacrifice.
As Gentiles had their Lustrations, so Christians must have their Holy Water;
As the Dragon in his Church Service had his Cerei, Novendiale Sacrum Live. A
Solemnity or Sacrifice at Burials, used nine days after the party was dead.
so Antichrist in his Church Service must have his candles; As the Dragon had
his Novendial Sacrifices, so Antichrist must have his Masses of Requiem;
Hecatombs were Sacrifices, wherein was killed a hundred Beasts.
As the Dragon had his Hecatombs, so Antichrist must have his Trentalls; As the
Dragon had his Colleges Sodalium and Arvalium fratrum, i. e. Priests of
Bacchus and Ceres, Ordained by Romulus; so must Antichrist have his Cloisters
of Monks and Friars; And as the Dragon had his Vestals, so Antichrist must have
his Nuns and Sanctimonials; And as the Dragon did celebrate the birth-days of
his Caesar's, so Antichrist must solemnize the Nativity of his Saints; And as
the Dragon had his Annals, so Antichrist must have his Legends; And as the
Dragon had his Sreularia Spectacula, so Antichrist must have his Jubilees; And
as the Dragon had his Bacchanals, So Antichrist must have his Carnivals; And as
the Dragon had his Lupanaries, Lupanor a Brothelhouse or Srewes.
so Antichrist must have his Stews; and as the Dragon had his Enchanters, so
Antichrist must have his Exorcists; And as the Dragon had his Asyla, so
Antichrist must have his Sanctuaries; And as the Dragon had his Exequies and
Parentals, so Antichrist must have his Dirige, and de Profundis. And as the
Dragon did deifie his Caesar's, so Antichrist must Canonize his Saints; And as
the Dragon had his civil Laws, so Antichrist must have his Canon Laws; And as
the Dragon had his Imperial Rescripts, so Antichrist must have his decretal
Epistles; And as the Dragon had his Tribunitial Intercessions, so Antichrist
must have his ancontroulable Interdictions; And as the Dragon had and used his
Proscriptions, so Antichrist must have and use his Excommunications; And as
that Beast commanded his Heathens to please their Goddess June with Cane
votalibeas, so this beast commands Christians to please their God with Vows;
And as the Deagon had his Triceps Hecate, so Antichrist must have his Triple
Tiara, to signify his triple pretended Jurisdiction; Hexaphorum, A Litter or
Chayr to be cartied up and down by 6. men
And as the Dragon had his Hexaphorum, so must Antichrist be carried up and
down; Briefly as the Dragons Priests did teach the Heathen to Worship Jupiters
God, so Antichrist must teach his Christians to Worship God as Jupiter is. And
look what form of Religion the Dragon had, and what manner of life he led; the
same must Antichrist in his person parallel and maintain; This is the Image of
the Beast, which he causes men to make; and this he effects two ways, He
perswad's them by signs and wonders, that with him they consent to make an
Image of the Beast wounded in his sixth head; which at length being made, at
his bidding, that wound received in v. 13, 14. 2 These. ^. the state of the
Dragon is healed, and the Dragon Deast seems to be revived, Mede.


1. By deceiving them with lying wonders, and counterfeit miracles. 2. By
frighting men, and terrifying them with formidable Edicts, Anathemaes,
Thunderbolts of Excommunication, debarring men even of civil commerce while
excommunicated.
Now it follows verse. 15. Verse. 4.
He had power to give life to the image of the beast, that the image of the
beast should speak, and cause as many as would not worship the image of the
beast to be killed.

By which image of the beast is meant not only (as was showed before) that
Religion which the first beast ( viz. the Roman heathenish Empire had) and the
second beast ( viz. Ecclesiastical Rome) sought to revive, verse. 14. But also a
lively portraiture or representation of that power, and authority, and
sovereignty which the Roman heathenish Empire had.

Now it is said in this 15. verse, Datum est ei dare spiritum, etc. He had
power to give life to the image of the beast; i.e. It is given to the false
Propher, viz. the Pope and his Clergy to give life to the Popish secular power
to speak, i. e. with power and authority to speak, to command and forbid in all
Kingdoms, as well to command by his Edicts those things that were needful for
the defending of his honor and dignity; as also to forbid any other Religion
but the Religion of the Beast; and to punish, and that with death, all those
that would not obey and worship the Beast.

And indeed, all that power that the Image of the Beast, viz. the Popish
Secular power has to rage against the Saints, is given him by the false
Prophet Beast, viz. the Pope and his Clergy. Hence the Pope and the Papacy
affirm, that even Kings and Emperors have from them whatever they have: So that
the German Caesar was not Roman Emperor till he was confirmed by the Pope.

And an Emperor, says Aretius, is but an image of him, chosen indeed by the
seven Electors of Germany, but confirmed by the Pope; for if the Pope confirm
not the new elect, he is no Emperor.

And the matter is so carried in the exercise of this power against the Saints,
that whom the Pope and his Clergy do condemn for Herefie, as they call it, they
forthwith deliver them over to the Secular power to be killed; as ye may often
read in the Book of Martyrs.

In these three last verses, Ver. 16.17, 18.
I will endeavor to explain some things by showing what is probable to be the
sense and meaning of these four things in these three verses. 1. The mark of
the Beast. 2. The name of the Beast. 3. The number of his Name. 4. The number
of the Beast, 666.

And that no man might buy resell, save he that had the Mark, or the Name, or
the Number of his Name.

Now these are three distinct badges, Bright man, Pareus, Forbes.
or characteristical notes of the Beasts Vassals or worshippers. I like well
Forb's his expression of himself in this point, All that follow Antichrist,
have his Name, but in diverse manner.

1. Some have the character thereof, i e. the name imprinted, and are his
proper goods, as having his burning iron and mark; a familiar phrase from the
manner of men; these are Priests and Jesuits, Popish Peers and Prelates.

2. Some have his Name, yet so as they have not his Mark, who have not learned
the deepness of Satan, nor are Antichrists sworn bondmen; these are the common
sort of Papists.

3. Yet some have but the Number of hie Name, i.e. they are so far from being
his sworn and marked slaves, as they are no otherwise his, then so far as they
are counted to be so, and numbered among his: So the Annotators upon the Bible;
The number of his name, i. e. such as are esteemed so to be, and numbered among
such.

And a late learned Writer has further improved this sense. His words are
these.

They that have the number of his name, are a company of men taking part with
Antichrist, in a more remore kind of subjection; such as do hold and bring in
such doctrines, opinions and practices in worship, as men shall reckon and
account them Papists in heart and affection. Such Numerantur Papistae, they aim
at Popery. And though their professions deny it, yet their actions and
corruptions in Doctrine and Worship shall speak it in all men's consciences,
especially of all Orthodox and reformed Protestants, who cannot but so judge
that it is the Pope they fear and worship. Further he says, They shall profess
the Protestant Religion, but in their practices and underhand dealings and
polic^es depress it, and advance the Popish Religion and party, like those,
Tit. 1.16. They profess they know God, but in their works deny him, being
abominable, disobedient, etc. These are justly to be accounted Papists, and
have received the number of his name, which imports a secret cleaving to
Antichrist, and to be of his company, as truly as they that receive his name;
for though in profession they go not so far as to take that name, or openly to
own the Church of Rome, yet really they do that which shall cause all men so to
reckon them. That of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. is a prophecy of this generation of
men. ominus, constituit duos Duces, Mosem and Aaron; totedem Pharo magos orponi
illis voluit. Calv. on Tim cap. 3.
For besides plain Popery, which is prophesied of 1 Timothy 4. to arise in the
latter days, you have in 2 Timothy 3.1. another prophecy of a sort of men that
shall arise in the last days (Popery is prophesied of to be in the latter days)
who have a form of godliness; and shall be despisers of those that are good;
Yea he compares them to Jannes and Jambres, the chief of the Egyptian
Sorcerers, who by their lying miracles did resist Moses, yea and Aaron too,
which is to be understood, though not named in the Text, as Calvin notes, to
which two the witnesses are resembled, Rev. 11. These, says my learned Author,
This was written above 20 years ago.
are the last Champious of the Beast before his fall; ergo, said to be in the
last times, who shall proceed so far as to slay the Witnesses in that Kingdom
which is the tenth part of the City; then this their folly or madness shall
appear to all men, which being discovered shall, be their ruin; for they shall
priceed no further. Amen.

Now touching the number of the beasts name, Verse. 18.
666. how has it puzzled and tortured all writers to satisfy themselves about
the true mystery in the particular intended thereby; I find four opinions
about it, two of them more considerable.

1. Opinion 2
Of those that labor to find out such names especial in Greek or Hebrew (in
which tongues all the letters are numerals, and fignifie some number or other)
as may agree to this Roman beast; the numeral letters of which name or names
may exactly amount to 666. and they especially pitch upon the name Latinos, the
numeral letters whereof come to 666. and multitudes of other names are found
out to like purpose, not only by modern but ancient writers; but this opinion
about (...), Forbs says is so childish an Egyptical toy that he marvels much
how ever any solid mind could propound it for a rare point of wisdom. And it is
the saying of a learned English Writer, Voice out of the wilderne s.
long before Forbs (if I mistake not) They that have thought to calculate and
find out the mystery of Antichrists number 666. in a word, at a word, he says,
they are deceivd, not knowing the power and construction of the Scripture.

Others hold, Opin 2d.
that Antichrists power should begin Anno Dom. 666. so a late learned Writer
has referred the number 666. to the time of Antichrists revealing, Mr Stevens
upon the four metal Kingdoms.

So Ball and Bullinger; which opinion is rejected by Pareus, Comment. Apocalyp.


and year of rising and coming to his full power and supremacy, which was in
Phocas his time; and so would make the 1200 and 60 days to begin then. Which
(saving my respect to such a learned man) I judge cannot be the meaning of the
mystery; because the 1200 and 60. days, and the Witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth begin together. Now the treading down of the holy City (the time when
the Witnesses began to prophecy in sackcloth) and the woman's flight into the
wilderness, where she was fed 1200 and 60 days, is judged by the best Writers
upon the Revelation to be after the death of Theodosius. when the Roman Empire
was overrun by the barbarous Nations, which was long before Phocas his time.

A third third Opinion is also of a learned Writer, Opinion 3d.

To this way of Interpretation of the number 666. learned Marlorat agrees; his
words are these, Losi hujus tot fere sunt expositiones qout exposi^ores. And
then reckons up, and rejects some common opinions about it, and then concludes
thus, Rectius ergo ad tempus Regni Antichristi nonnulli hunc numerum referunt.
-- Vt ad Regem Babylonicum dicebatur Numeravit Deus Rignum Tuum and
perfectissime numeravit illud, Dan. 5.26. Nam completis 70 annis captivitatis
populi ei, per Jeremiam praedictus finis Regni illins aderat, perendeigiture
est ac si diecret Joannes, quemadmodum humana regna dauturnae esse non possunt,
sed certum habent annorum numerum diviaitus, constitatem; ita and Antichristi
Regnum; quod ad piorum consolutionem dictum est, ne putent Antichristi regnum
eternum fore. Nam finem habiturum est, and regum Christi relic amnia cessara.
Felixagitur est qui numerum hune bestia intelligit, cui a Deo datum cognoscere,
etc. Ma, lorat on Rev. 13.1. who queres for this Mey.


who wrote a Treatise many years ago, Anno 1592 called Babylen is fallen; to
which he only sets two letters of his name, T. L. and he interprets 666. to
reveal Rev. 13.18. the secret counsel and purpose of God concerning the period
and final end of Antichrist and his Church dominion. Where rejecting all
opinions but this about it, he says,

1. The word Number is never used in Scripture for the beginning and rising of
any term of time limited and predicted by the Prophets, but only for the end,
period and determination thereof.

2. He calls it the number of a man; by man says he is meant, the total sum of
that succession of beastly men, which make and constitute the existence and
person of one Antichrist; and by the word number is meant the fatal end, and
fual determination of their reign: and government, for so the Finger of God
speaks to Belshazer, God has numbered thy Kingdom i. e. God has ended and
finished the days of thy Kingdom.

So that by the number of the beast, is nothing else but the Period and Final
determination of the usurped tyranny and damnation of Antichrist, which the
Lamb, the Lord and preserver of Israel, for the glory of his name, consolation
of his Church, and confusion of her foes, shall bring to pass in the year which
shall be 666.

3. He says, for as much as the Egg of Antichristianisme, was laid in the
days of Innocent tha first, successor to Anastasins, the first also of that
name, in Anno. 406. And that by express Commission, there was furthermore
granted to the beast, his heirs and successors, 1260. years, for the hatching,
fostring and perfecting this child of perdition and mystery of iniquity, which
being added to 406. by rule of true audit, must needs verify this admirable
judgen ent, which the Spirit of God has here denonnced and determined to make
good upon him in the year which shall be 1666. In which account and discovery
of his end, the Holy Ghost of purpose leaves out the millenary number, as not
only known perfect and immutable, but as respecting also the common use of all
Nations, as well Hebrews. as Gentiles, who in their styles (for brevity sake)
do no less often speak and write by the imperfect number, omitting the
millenary, then after the perfect, adding the millenary, as Munster well
observes.

4. Vide Calindarium Hebraicum Sebastiani Munsteri.
This learned Author triumphantly concludes this his interpretation, in these
words to the Church of Rome.

And in that year shall my Lord of Rome lay down his proud waves; and although
he fortify never so strong, and lay his foundation as low as Hell, and build
his Turrets as high as Heaven, and place his Mitre above the Stars, yet in that
day he shall die the death of the uncircumcised, and perish like the Amorite,
whose fruit is destroyed from above, and root from beneath, Amos 2.9.
and the multitude of his offenses shall consume the multitude of his Forces;
And it shall be more possible for him, and easy to him to weigh the fire, or
measure the wind, or call again the day that is past, or recover the virdure of
the withered grass (as a holy one says) then to avoia this counsel and decree
of his downfall, here determined by the spirit a against him, saying, And the
number of him is 666.

This interpretation is very pleasing; Qui numerum hunc besti a intelligit, ae
Deo datum est cognoscere, etc. Ibid. Marlorat.
and would be less questioned then the former, if it did agree with the
beginning of the verse, which the Author calls a little short Preface of the
Holy Ghost, to prepare his Reader to attention.

Here is wisdom,

That is (says he) here is the discovery of a mystery, a point of high
understanding, and the spirit says, not he that will, but he that can, he that
has understanding, let him count the number of the beast; but I rather incline
to this opinion then the Former.

The 4 opinion is of those that parallel and compare the number of the beast,
Opinion 4
666, with the number of the Lambs company, and the new Jerusalem, 144. which
are set as opposites one against another, and as opposites may serve to explain
one another. To this end, by computation they find that the Lambs number, 144.
is only builded by multiplication of 12. upon 12. and can no otherwise be
multiplied, showing that the true Church of Christ is built only upon the 12.
Apostles doctrine, and still holds the foundation in all that is built thereon.

But on the contrary the beasts number though it seems more compact, accurate,
and uniforme, cannot be raised nor builded upon 12. take what multiplyer ye
will, no, can it be divided or quartered by 12 showing that Antichrists
Apostatical Church rises not on the foundation, much less keeps the
foundation of the twelve Apostles Doctrine, nor can endure to be tried thereby?

Thus far Forbes in his Comment, Rev. 13.18. After him Mr. Potter has further
improved this Opinion. He says it is called the number of the Beast, without
mentioning any name, Iotter.
also the number of a man, without intimating any thing to do with his name.
Now the meaning of Numerus Humanus is such a number as men usually deal with,
and may be numbered by humane art, but it seems there is some skill to be used
herein; for he says (here is wisdom) and let him that has understanding,
calculate the number of the beast. And the Holy Ghost sets down the very number
that is to be numbered 666. which number yet cannot be numbered after the manner
of men (which way notwithstanding is intimated) but by extraction of the roots
of these two numbers, the root upon which the Lambs number and true Church is
raised, 144. being twelve, the Apostolical basis; the Root upon which the
beasts number, 666. the character of the Antichristian Apostatical Church is
raised, being that fatal number twenty five, both which he describes and
amplifies at large.

This Interpretation lights so pat upon the Romish Hierarchy, that a man cannot
but be amazed at so exact a providence; for this learned Writer has out of
History made it even over clear, that 25. is a Character as essentially
interwoven into the Hierarchy of Rome, as 12. is into the State of the new
Jerusalem; and these

Six main things that this Holy City is set out by in Rev. 17.
First, Twelve Gates, Secondly, Twelve Angels at the Gates. Thirdly, Twelve
Tribes writteni on the Gates. Fourthly, Twelve Foundations, with names written
on them. Fifthly, Twelve thousand furlongs, the solid measure of the City.
Sixthly, Twelve manner of fruits of the tree of life.
These six have their opposites exactly in the Roman Hierarchy or City.
First, Twenty five G^^es, whether taken literally or mystically for Churches
to baptize in. Secondly, Twenty five Angels, i. e. Pastors. Thirdly, Twenty
five Titles or Parishes. Fourthly, Twenty five Cardinals. Fifthly, Twenty five
thousand furlongs, the perimeter of which Cube, is the circuit of Rome, as the
perimiter of the Cube twelve thousand Furlongs, the circuit of Jerusalem.
Sixthly, Twenty five Articles of the Creed, which should be the food of the
tree of life to all beleivers.
In these essential matters, and in many other things besides, has he
evidently shown how exactly the Root 666. is applicable to the Roman Hierarchy,
the two horned beast; to whose Treatise I refer the Reader for further
satisfaction, also to Dr. More, who approves this opinion, and answers the most
material objection against it, in his Book of The Mystery of Godliness, Book
fifth, There is another opinion I have met with of the number 666. since the
funishing this Treatise, which though new, and different from all the former,
yet is worthy of consideration; I refer the Reader to the Treat se Entitled,
Christ and Antichrist, or 666. multiplied by 2 whereby the true number of
Antichrists reign is discovered.
Page 196. I confess I like this opinion far better then the first, as being in
my judgment, 1. More grave and ponderous. 2. More certain and determinate. 3.
More conform and suitable to other mysteries revealed in this book. 4. More
accurately discriminating between Antichrists false Apostatical Synagogue, and
Christ's true Apostolical Church. 5. And in the right computing whereof, more
true Theological, spiritual, and heavenly wisdom will be found.

Thus much of the fifth concurrent time under the second Period, and therein a
description of the Beast with two horns, Cap. 13. wherein I have been more
large then I intended; I come now to

A sixth concurrent time, under this second Period.

That is, at the same time ( viz. of the holy City being trod under foot, and
the two witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth, The State of the Church, and
virgin company during these distresses and persecutions.
and the woman fled into the Wilderness, and of the ten-horned and two horned
beast, Cap. 13.) the hundred and forty four thousand sing a new song, Meretrix
a Ioanne conspr^itur in desert^. Cap. 17.3, 4. Ergo tempus bestigest tempus
deserti Mede.
and live without blame, Cap. 14. v. 1, to the 6. In which Verse is set down,
the true hurches, or Virgin companies constant and pure adhering unto Christ in
the midst of Anti^bristian Idolatries and persecutions, described in a vision
of the Lamb, and his company standing on Mount Zion; when the world wondered
after the beast, and worshipped him, then the true Church did adhere to, and
attend upon the Lamb. I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on Mount Zion, and with
him 144000. having the name of him and of his father, written in their
foreheads, verse. 1.

1. Their standing with the Lamb on mount Sion, intimates the notable stability
of the Church against all Antichristian Machinations. 1. The Lamb stood as in
his Watchtower, vigilant over his Church for her protection, and they stood as
his Servants and soldiers attending upon him.

2. Their number 144000. is the same number before mentioned in the
preparatories to the seventh seal, Rev. 7.4. the number of the true Church,
which is built upon the Doctrine of the 12. Apostles; as this number is built
only on twelve (as was before observed) this number is here opposed to the
number of the Beast 666. in the close of the former Chapter, which can by no
means be built upon twelve.

3. They are said to have his fathers name on their foreheads, or rather the
name of him, and the name of his father, etc. which more fully expresses their
Character as opposite to the name of the beast; hereby they are distinguished
from the beasts worshippers; this notes their true profession of, and
subjection to the Father and the Lamb.

4. verse. 2.
The voice from Heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a
great Thunder, and the voice of Harpers harping with their Harps, ver 2.
signifies their pure Gospel Worship, described by the numerous multitude of the
Heavenly singers (whereunto these 144000. conform themselves) resembled to
waters, thunders, harpers.

5. verse 3.
The new song they sing] is either a new Gospel song since Christ's coming,
opposite to the old before Christ's coming, or new in respect of new conferred
benefits under the Gospel, among which this preservation of his 144000. from
Antichristian defilements was no small one; the Scripture is wont to call for
new songs for new mercies; Here by song we may understand all Gospel Worship,
by a Synecdoche, the part for the whole, And during the Beast, Dominion none
could worship the Lamb purely without Idolatry upon earth, but those that were
redeemed from the earth; that is, bought by the blood of Christ, and brought
out of Popery from Antichrists earthly Church, Cap. 12.12.

6. And where it is said They are not defiled with women, verse. 4. verse. 4.
and to follow the lamb, etc. is signified their spiritual chastity, not being
guilty of spiritual whoredom and Idolatry; and their constant attendance upon
the Lamb, in all states and places, and their peculiar relation to God and the
Lamb, (they being peculiar fruits to him, redeemed out of the profane mass of
the Idolatrous world) is expressed in the latter end of this fourth verse.

7. And Lastly, it is said of them, verse. 5.
In their mouth was no guile, and that they are without fault before the Throne
of God, which notes both their integrity and innocence; their integrity, In
their mouth was found no guile: Some Greek Copies read, no lie; Idols in
Scripture are called lies, and Idolaters Liars; Isa. 28.15. Ier. 16.19.
it seems to note their freedom from Idolatry, and they did not Hypocritically
profess and pretend to be Christians, and yet Idolatrously adore the beast.
Finally, their innocence in Gods account is annexed as a reason of the former,
And they are without fault before the throne of God, verse. 5.

The Seventh and last concurring time, in the Angels prophecy of things that
shall come to pass in the Ecclesiastical State, Cap. 10. See before.
relating to the second Period, Is

The Whore of Babylon, i the Popish Hierarchy ruling and riding the Beast with
ten horns, i.e. the Princes and Potentates which adhere to the Papacy at their
own choosing and liking; Cap. 17.
Cap. 17. ver. 3. I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of the
names of blasphemy, having seven beads and ten borns.

And the woman was arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with gold,
etc. verse. 4. where the Whore of Babylon is described.

1. By the monstrous beast whereon she sits, cruel and bloody, noted in her
color; full of Antichristian Idolatries, most opprobrious and reproachful to
God, noted in her names of blasphemy. and besides seven-headed and ten-horned;
so that it is the very same beast formerly described, cap. 13.

2. By her luxurious and meretricious array and ornaments; And the woman was
arrayed in purple and scarlet color (like the beast she sat on) and deeked
with gold and precious stones, and pearls. By her whoredoms she had obtained
all these costly deckings; and for winning the greater credit and custom to her
whoredoms she was thus gaudily and thus glitteringly attired. Popery is a
sumptuous, gaudy and glittering Religion.

3. By her intoxicating cup whereby she amorously allures and enchants her
lovers to spiritual lewdness with her, having a golden cup in her hand, full of
abomination, and filthiness of her fornication. verse. 4.
An allution to the custom of Whores, Joseph. Mede.
who in golden cups are wont to give amorous draughts to their Lovers, to
provoke and to inflame their love and lust. Now what Religion in the world has
outwardly more specious, curious, golden pretenses, but inwardly more
abominable cursed Heresies, Blasphemies, Superstitions, Idolatries, showing
gold without, deadly poison within!

4. Her whores name. Touching which note.

1. Where it was wrtten, viz. on her forehead, intimating she was an eminent
notorious whore indeed; And upon her forehead was a name written; Tertullian De
pudicit. Sen. Cont. 2. Lib. 1. verse. 8.
An allusion to the ancient custom of Stews and Brothel-houses, that on or over
the doors of their Cells and Chambers, were wont to write the names of the
Whores, as Tertullian, Seneca and others intimate. But if the Whore was famous
indeed, her name and praise was written, not only on her cell, but on her
forehead.

2. Her name it self, describing in great part her nature, Mystery, Babylon the
Great, the Mother of Harlots, or Fornications, and Abominations of the earth,
v. 5.

This name shows 1. that this Whore is Babylon, not proper, but mystical
Babylon. 2. That this, mystical Babylon is the Mother and most notorious
author of all the abominable Idolatries, those spiritual whoredoms in the
whole world. This can intend no other but Rome.

5. Her extreme cruelty, and bloody tyranny against the Saints, emphatically
expressed, being drunk therewith, she had swallowed so much, verse. 6. This
Metaphor from drunkenness denotes the height and extremity of her bloodiness;
witness Anchrists butcheries of the Saints under the names of Waldenses,
Albigenses, Leonists, Wicklivists, Hussites, Lutherans, Hugonites, etc.
condemned and destroyed by Antichrist, because they would not drink of Romes
whorish cup. All Ecclesiastical Histories and Martyrologies since Antichrists
rise and reign, fully declare this Whores bloodiness, especially in her Spanish
Inquisition. See Foxes Acts and Monuments. Especially consider the late Irish
massacres designed and acted by bloodthirsty Papists, to the utmost of cruelty
in Ireland, 1641. as may be seen in Doctor Jones his Remonstrance of the state
of the Rebellion in Ireland; And in the Declaration of the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament, touching the rise and progress of that Rebellion,
ordered to be published July, 25. 1643.

This causes in John great admination at the strangeness of the Vision of the
Whore, in the latter end of verse. 6. And when I saw her, I wondered with great
admiration.

Which gave occasion to the Interpretation of this Vision more clearly; And the
Angel said, Wherefore did thou marvail? Rev. 17.7. The City or Whore of Rome
is said to sit upon a Beast, viz. the fourth Beast mentioned in Daniel, which
is the Roman Monarchy. And what City or people has so ridden the Roman Empire,
as Rome has done? They that suffer themselves to be thus ridden by her, are
Abettors and Supporters; they are Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues over
whom this proud City reigns. The Catholic Roman Church they are commonly
called by themselves; but by the holy Ghost, The Beast on which the woman sit.
Usher Rev. 17.18. in his Sermon before King Charles, on Ephesians. 4.13.
I will tell thee the mystery of the woman and of the Beast that carries her,
whichha th seven heads, and ten horns, ver. 7.

Hereupon the Angel does more clearly interpret and explain the Vision.

1. The mystery of the Beast carrying the Whore. 2. The mystery of the Whore
her self.
First, The Angel explains the mystery of the Beast in the Whole, and in the
Parts.

First, in the whole, the Beast is interpreted,

1. Partly, According to his Many-form State, or fourfold form and condition of
this one and the same Beast. The Beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and
shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition. The beast thou
saw, 1. was. And 2. Is not. And 2. shall ascend out of the bottomless pit.
And 4. Go into perdition. This very Interpretation it self seems to be a riddle
and a paradox, that needs a further interpretation. To omit variety of men's
opinions, sundry whereof rather obscure then clear this present Description;
This seems plain to be the sense.

As the whore is after interpreted to be the great City which reigns over the
Kings of the earth; viz. Roms; for what other City in John's time did so reign?
So the Beast that carries this Whore, what can it be but the To this agrees
Irenaus, Lactantius, Jerome, which restimony of the Ancients Cornelius a Lapide
considering, professes that he will not tergiversari but grants, that by
Babylon is meant Rome.
Roman Empire? which though for substance it was one, One Beast, yet for
States, conditions and manner of Government, was multifarous or many form, as
here described, viz.

This Beast the Roman Empire Was, that is, before John's time, when this
Revelation was given, it was but in another form and state then in John's time,
i governed by Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemviri and Tribunes, all which were
past in John's time.

And is not, i.e. this beast the Roman Empire is not in John's time, under those
or any of those five manners of Governments; but under a sixth, viz. of Cesars,
and those both Heathenish and Christian. This sixth head of this beast, that
ruled in John's days, viz, the Heathenish Cesars, they became no Christians till
Constantine. Yet the whore sits not upon this beast, as under any of those
forms or states of Government; but on the Beast under another form, which
should rise up after them six, as then not in being. And is not, viz. the beast
under the Pontificial or Papal Government.

And shall asc^nd out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition; that is,
says Mede, that form of the beast in which he shall carry the Whore, shall be
the last form of the beast, beyond which he should not p^^long his life. Now
what form of this Beast shall ascend out of the bottom ^ss pit? or the abyss
(as it is in Greek) this word abyss may be taken either for the Abyss of the sea,
or the Abyss of hell: Now take it either way, The sixth head the Ceasars heathen
and Christian, was deadly wounded. The Heathen Cesars received a deadly wound
by Constantine and his Successors, who overcome the heathen Emperors, and
rooted, our their hear^ (...) Idolatry, etc. The Christian Cesars received by
the bath (...) Nations a deadly wound, who dilaterated the Empire into ten
Kingdoms; And the deadly wound of the heath (...) Cesars was bea^ed by the
substituted (...) Be^^^, (...) course of his seventh head, and by his how
Idolatry, or Idol-worship, not of Pagarworship, but of Saints and Angels, The
deadly wound of the Christian Cesars was healed, when the Roman Empire divided
into ten Kingdoms, was again made up into one for the (...) of the Whore, by
the subtilty of the Dragon and false Prophet.
it agrees to that form of beast that carries the Whore. For that Beast that
arises out of the Abyss of the Sea, having seven heads and ten horns, as also
out of the Abyss of Hell, for the Dragon Satan gives him his power and seat,
and great authority, Rev. 13.2. The Cesars heathen and Christian were the
beasts sixth head or form: The beast at last under the Christian Cesars,
received by the barbarous Nations a deadly wound, the Empire beginning to be
divided about Anno. 456. into ten parts, or Kingdoms, viz. of Britons, Saxons,
Franks, Burgundi^^^, Wisigoths, Sweves and Alans, (...), Almanes, Ostrogoths,
Grecians, as Mr. Mede has observed out of Sigonius.

This distracted state or form of the beast, under these ten Kingdoms, at
least, though really, and in substance the same with that under the Cesars, yet
seems to be another distinct power, and as it were the seventh King, Rev.
17.10. which was to continue but a short space, but is indeed the same with the
6. viz. the Cesars.

The Roman Empire thus torn into ten, at last by the subtilty of the Dragon,
and the false Prophet (the two horned beast Antichrist) is recollected, and all
the ten united as in one Empire under the Pope, Rev. 13.3, 12, 13, 14.
as head and Monarch thereof, and so his deadly wound was healed; And this is
the Pontifician or Papal head, the only form of the Beasts State and
Government (which seventh bears the Whore) this Pontifician head, or form of
the Emperors Government (in respect of that changed and miserably dilacerated
Cesarship, Re. 17.12.
which was as the seventh) seems to be as it were the eighth head or King, but
really, and indeed is but the seventh and last head of the Roman beast, and
this Papal head goes into perdition, and in him the Roman Empire shall be
utterly abolished.

2. As the Beast in the whole is interpreted partly by his many form state, or
a fourfold form, so partly according to the Worlds wonderment after this beast
(whereby it is evident that this is the self-same seven headed beast, and ten
horned which was formerly described, Cap. 13.) Rev. 13.1, 3, 4.
And they that dwell on the Earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in
the book of life from the foundation of the World) when they behold that beast
which was and is not, and yet is, (...).
or rather as some read it (and yet is at hand) for so it notably agrees with
the former description in the beginning of the verse. The beast was and is not,
and shall asound out of the bottomless pit; or it ^ay thus be explained,
retaining the ordinary reading. The Beast that was, i. e. the Roman Empire that
was under five former sorts of Government. And is not, i. e. is not as yet
under the seventh or last form or sort of Government, viz. Pontificial or
Papal. And yet is, that is, under the sixth form of Casars at present in John's
time, verse. 8.

Thus the beast in whole is interpreted.

Secondly, The Beast is interpreted in his Parts, viz. his seven heads and ten
horns what they are; An Emphatical intimation of the singular wisdom required
to the true discerning of these mysteries, being first premised, And here is
the mind that has wisdom

First, The seven heads of the beast, are interpreted to be seven Mountains and
seven Kings, that by this double accommodation, this interpretation might be
more sure, Partly to seven mountains; the seven heads are seven mountains, on
which the woman sits; verse. 9. That is, these seven heads are seven hills
upon which Rome is built, viz. the Capit^line, Palatine, Calian, Aventine,
Aesqui^^^, Viminal, and Quirinal Mount. For the honor of which seven mountains
(says Parens) an Annual (...) was observed on the third of the I^^s of
December, either in memory of Romulus the builder of the seven mountained City,
or of Servins Tullus, who to Romnlus four Mountains added three more, seven in
all; Partly to be seven Kings, i. e. seven orders, forms or kinds of Governors
or Governments of this Roman, Kingdom or Empire, whereof Rome is the Imperial
seat.

And there are seven Kings, verse. 10.
viz. seven orders or sorts of Rulers; Kings Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvirs,
Dictators, Cesars, Pon^^ficrans, or Popes; Five are fall ( i. e. in John's time
the first five, viz. Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvies, Dictators) And one is
( i. e. Cesars, then in being in John's time;) and the other is not ye come; (
i. e. the dilacerated state of the Cesarship or, Cesartan Empire into ten
Kingdoms at the least, by the Barbarians, as was before intimated,) this was
as it were a seventh head, but was indeed but of the sixth, being the same in
substance with the Cesars, but was not come in John's time, and was but to
continue a short space, till the Dragon and fall Prophet had reunited, and so
healed this wounded and dilacerated state of the Empire. Therefore in the Text
it is added, And when he comes, Rev. 13.2.
he must continue a short space, verse. 10. And the beast that was, and is not,
even he is the eighth, and is of the seventh; and goes to perdition, v. 11.
That is, the Roman Empire that was under five heads or forms of Government,
before John's time, and under the sixth head of Cesars in John's time (which
Cesars were changed as it were into another and seventh form in its dilacerated
state of the ten Kingdoms) yet is not, i.e. In John's time, is not yet brought
under the last head or form, viz. the Papal, which is the eighth ( i.e. in
respect of the change of the Cesarship into ten Kingdoms, which seemed to be
as a seventh, but was indeed only part of the sixth head) and the Papal head
is of the seventh i.e. he is indeed the last and seventh head, or form of this
beast (in the course of which seventh head he carries the whore) and in this
state or form the beast shall be utterly destroyed. Thus of the seven heads and
their Interpretations.

2. The ten horns of the Beast are Interpreted to be ten Kings, Bestia
decemcornupeta seu secularis, est unia versitas illa december plu^m nus Regnorum
(in quae Caesarum post exturbatum ^raconem, Imperium Barbarica plaga
dissilierat) in unam denuo Rempull came Romanam, redintegrata Draconu impierate,
coalescentium. Mede. Cap. 13. page. 181.
or ten Kingdoms, viz. those ten before mentioned Kingdoms, into which the
Empire of the Cesars was divided by that deadly wound of the Barbaman Nations,
which ten Kings or Kingdoms were not yet sprung up in John's time, but into
which afterward, the body of the Roman beast, in the course of his last head
should be dilacerated, by the deadly wound of the Cesarean head: And which ten
Kings should unanimously give all their power to the beast, for his restitution
and reparation, under the Government of his seventh and last head (For unto
this seventh head only, and not to any of the six aforegoing these ten horns
belong) Now these ten horns are interpreted and described,

First, Partly by their constitution, as has been now explained, v. 12.13.

Secondly, Partly by their hostile persecution against the Lamb in his Members.

These shall make war with the Lamb, viz. by making War with the Saints, and
overcoming them 42. months, as was before declared.

Thirdly, Partly by their overthrow by the Lamb, Christ Jesus and his Saints,
at last; which overthrow is confirmed both by the Lambs Regal power, and by the
Saints three victorial properties. And the Lamb shall overcome them; for he is
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him are called and
chosen, and faithful, v. 14.

Hitherto of the interpretation of the Mystery of the beast carrying the Whore.

2. Now of the Mystery of the Whore her self, carried by this beast, which is
here also interpreted. Herein note, 1. Her Ample Dominion. 2. Her utter
destruction, and 3. Topical Denomination.


1. Her ample Dominion, over peoples of many Nations and Languages, signified
by the waters where the Whore sits; And he said unto me. The waters which
thou saw where the Whore sits, are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations,
and Tongues, 1.15.

2. Her utter destruction and judgment which the Angel promises to tell John's
is described.

First, By the Instrumental means of her destruction, the ten horns upon the
beast.

Secondly, by the degrees of her destruction from these ten horns.

And the ten horns which thou fawest upon the beast, shall hate the whore, and
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire. verse. 16.


These degrees of their destroying her shall be, 1. Their hatred of the Whore,
with whom they have committed fornication. 2. Deserting of her, betaking
themselves to Christ's pure worship. 3. Denuding of her, or making her naked,
both by words, laying open her filthy and abominable whoredoms and Idolatries,
etc. and also by deeds, withdrawing her respective revenues from her, which
were wont to be given her. 4. Eating her flesh, not only by retaining to their
own use, her rich incomes, Carnes nostras illi manducant qui nos persequuntur,
Aug. in Locum Tom. 8.
but also by opposing and persecuting her, which in Scripture language is as
eating of ones flesh, Job 19.22. Psa. 27.2. 5. Burning of her with fire; When?
the punctual time cannot particularly be determined, but it hastens apace, and
cannot be far off, if the fifth viol be now running, which shall be poured out
upon the form of the beast, which is now the judgment of many learned
Divines; Let the Saints strive mightily with God, and pray the Whore into
flames, for her ruin approaches; And some of those Kingdoms that helped to
raise up the Whore, shall be as ready to pull her down.


Thirdly, Her utter destruction is also described, by the principal cause
thereof. Gods providential dispensation according to his Word, who can as
easily make these ten horns unanimous to her ruin, as they were to her rise
and reign; For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his Will, and to agree,
and to give their Kingdom to the beast, until the words of God shall be
fulfilled, v. 17.

3. We have thirdly and lastly her Topical Denomination. The Holy Ghost so
clearly indigitates, and as it were names her, that he that runs may read and
not mistake. That this Whore is Rome, the known Motropolis and Royal Seat of
the Roman Empire, Ribera in Cap. 17. Bellarmin. l. 2. de pont. Romans Cap. 2.
Papists themselves confess. And the Woman which thou saw, is that great
City that reigns over the Kings of the Earth.

This is that beast that goes to perdition or Destruction.

Of which Destruction God causes her to be

First, Forewarned, cap. 14. verse. 6. and following verses. Which premonition
is described in the Vision of three Angels, It is called the everlasting Gospel
in opposition to those innovations and traditions of men, under which the
Churches of Christ had labored a long time. Vide Mr. Bridge his Sermon on Rev.
14.8.
i.e. Evangelical Ministers preaching the everlasting Gospel against the Beast
and Beast-worshippers.

1. The first Angel exhorts all that had given their names to Christ by
profession, to consider how Gods judgments were now inflicted upon the
Heathenish Idols and Idolaters, and therefore to worship God the Creator only
and purely, ver. 6, 7.

This Angel, learned Mede interprets of the Council of Constantinople in the
East, consisting of Three hundred thirty seven Bishops, wherein the worship of
the Virgin Mary, and invocation of Saints was opposed, 720. And of Frankford
Synod in the West under Charles the Great consisting of about 300 Bishops,
790th. year of our Lord, which damned both the worshipping of Images; and also
the second Council of Nice that established it. Others interpret it of diverse
in England, Pareus, Brightm.
as Killington, Langland, especially Wicklife, about Anno 1371. and of diverse
in Bohemia, John Husse, Hierom of Prague.

2. The second Angel (the first Angels doctrine being despised) denounces
Babylons irrevocable ruin from that time forward, till it be consummated for
their obstinacy and impenitency in Idolatries: The substance of the Angels
doctrine is a commination of Babylons fall, with the reason of it, verse. 8.
Babylon is fallen, it is fallen, i.e. she is now fallen initially, and shall
fall totally and finally. This Angel, Mede interprets of the Waldenses and
Albigenses, who first of all other renounced Romish Idolatries, and many
followed them, which falling off from Rome was the laying of a foundation from
Babylons fall, till it should be utterly ruined.

3. The third Angel, going beyond the former, warns all the Worshippers of
the Beast what horrible vengeance hangs over their heads, and would fall upon
them if they persist still in following and worshipping the Beast, and not
renounce him. And the third Angel followed him, saying with a loud voice, If
any man worship the beast and his Image, and receive his mark, etc. the same
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, etc. verse. 9, 10, 11, This Angel,
thinks Brightman and Mede, was M. Luther, with his associates and Successors,
who so vehemently opposed Papal doctrine and superstition; whereupon followed
the eminent Reformation of the German and other Churches. Luther (says Pareus)
left this Fatidical verse behind him, Pestis eram Vivens, moriens er mors tua,
Papa. O Pope, I was thy plague while I had breath; And though I dye, yet I will
be thy death.

Parens thinks this Angel to be understood of Luthers succession to the end of
the world, from Anno 1546. because no fourth Angel follows, but Christ sitting
on his white throne of judgment.

Secondly, As Babylon is forewarned, so her punishments and plagues are not
only threatened, As the seals brought in judgments upon the Pagan world,
Trumpets on the Christian world, as ruled by Christian Emperors; so the seven
last vials are poured out upon the Antichristian world: Cotton on the Vials.

These seven plagues are compared to the plagues of Egypt, as Sores, Blood,
Darkness, Frogs, Thunder and Lightning. And in the pouring out of these vials
understand nothing but mere divine wrath, no mercy runs out of the vials.

Further note, As the seven Trumpets were sounded to the ruin of the Roman
Empire, so the seven Vials are poured out to the ruin of the Beast, and to the
gradual ruin of the Beast they all tend: For every Vial is a degree to the
Beasts destruction, who as he rose, so he shall rall by degrees.


but gradually inflicted; which dreadful judgments and the actual inflicting
of them are represented under vials, and the pouring forth of these vials,
which vials are full of the wine of that wrath of God poured out without
mixture, Rev. 14.10.

This we have in Chap. 15, and 16.

Thirdly, When no reformation does follow (as did not; for in pouring out of
the Vials, it is said, cap. 16. verse. 9. They blasphemed the name of God, etc.
but repented not to give him glory, so verse. 11. they blasphemed God because of
their plagues, but repented not of their deeds) God passes sentence upon her,
and destroys her; which destruction is briefly touched upon, chap. 17. but is
largely and pathetically described cap. 18.

Whereupon in the third Period follows the description of the great joy and
triumph of the Church over the total ruin and destruction of her enemies,
Period. 3.
chap. 19. and the desired peace and tranquillity of the Church. In this 19.
Chapter is set down the victorious triumphs and gratulations of them in heaven,
i.e. the Church, Saying Hallelujah, Salvation, and honor, and glory, and power
unto the Lord our God, ver. 1. And that 1. For the judgment of the great whore
justly executed upon her, verse. 1.
for her wicked Idolatries, and persecuting cruelties against the Saints. verse.
2.
2. For the Dominion of Christ; Hallelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent
reighneth. verse. 6.
Parallel to that in Rev. 11. to 18. 3. For the marriage of the Lamb, verse. 7.
ver. 7. Let us be glad and give honor unto him, for the marriage of the Lamb
is come, etc. whose marriage garments are freely given her by Christ, verse 8.
And all the marriage guests which are called to the marriage Supper of the
Lamb, verse. 8.
are pronounced blessed, verse. 9.


And because this victorious Triumph, and gratulation of the Church is for the
total ruin and destruction of her enemies; therefore as in the former part of
the Chap. John speaks of the judgment of the whore, so in the latter part of
the Chap. he speaks of the judgment of the beast, and false prophet, together
with their Armies of Adherents, warring against the Lamb and his Army. These
Adversaries are all mustred together under the sixth Viol in Armageddon; Rev.
16. 13, 14, 16.
now the seventh Viol (the exposition whereof is yet continued) describes the
event of the battle in Armageddon, Cap. 19.11. to the end.
viz. the beast and his adherents are entrapped and ensnared easily, and
suddenly royled by Christ; the Beast and the false Prophet are both taken, as
wild beasts, in Nets and Gins, and are jointly executed in a most dreadful
manner, being both cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with Brimstone; Their
whole Army put to the Sword; and the Fowls invited and filled with their flesh,
and enriched with their prey.

This is to be understood of Chricts final victory, not only spiritually but
corporally, over the beast and false Prophet (now vexed and enraged at the
judgment of the Whore,) and this by some remarkable and dreadful demonstration
of his providence.

In the 20. Cap. is set down the judgment of the Dragon, that old Serpent the
Devil and Satan, that had incited and used as his instruments, the whore,
beast, and false Prophet, and their followers, to oppose and persecute the Lamb
and his Saints; and the 21. and 22. Chap. contain the Churches happy estate,
upon her enemies destruction, and the glory of the new Jerusalem.

These things we may see and learn by observing intentively the scope of the
boon of the Revelation of Saint John, that is, the common term and period
whereunto all the particular prophesies and passages in the Revelation do
jointly run, and wherein they do ultimately determine.

Now having done with the scope or Intone of the Book, I am next according to
the method I propounded in the beginning, to speak of the

Synchronismes
Which we must powder and weigh advisedly, in order to the understanding of the
Prophecies contained in this book; concerning which I will premise four things.
1. A Synchronisme of Prophecies, is a concurring or meeting together of things
foretold in those Prophesies, at the same time, or which may be said to be
contemporaneous, or coaetaneous, of the same time and age, that fall out or
come to pass in the same intervals or spaces of time, or if I may so phrase it,
that time together.

2. The order of the seals, and in them of the Trumpets, is certain and
indubitable; the same certainly which the number assigned to them both does
indigitate or point to as it were with the Finger, viz. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
The Seals are opened one after another in order, in opening of the seventh Seal
whereof, the Trumpets are sounded one after another successively.

3. Therefore the rest of the Prophesies compared, first with themselves, and
then with the Seals by Synchronismes, the order of the whole Revelation will
be made manifest.

4. These Synchronismes are not built upon the Hypothesis or argument drawn
from any interpretation, not do they lean or stay upon the praejudgement of the
event of things, but upoon the innate Characters of the visions themselves, and
are Apodictically or demonstratively true, to any that have but a competency of
wit and patience to peruse them; as these Synchronismes; The treading underfoot
of the outward court, the Witnesses prophesying in sackeloth, the Woman in the
wilderness, the ten horned and two horned Beast, the sealed servants of the
Lamb, the whore of Babylon, the succession of the first six Trumpets, (the
chief matters of the Apocalypse, being comprehended within these Synchronismes)
All these are circumscribed within the space of 1200. and 60. days, i.e. years.

5. The dililent and heedful comparing together of visions that are
contemporary, will notably and especially help to the more certain defining,
and, determining of the beginning and period of future times, foretold in this
book, and so to the true understanding of the Revelation; It being one of the
greatest difficulties of the Revelation, punctually, and certainly to find out
the beginnings and periods of the times therein intended.

Now in laying them down I will follow my former method, and without prejudice
to any man's judgment, I may pursue that method which to me seems most clear
and genuine, most plain and easy to be understood; how-ever the disposing of
the Method will not alter the matter.

The contemporaneousness of these Prophecies, or of the visions in these
Prophesies, stands thus.
1. The first six seals appertain to the first Period, viz. that time when Rome
was heathen; the sixth whereof signifies the mighty change of things to the
advantage of the Church, the Empire becoming Christian. The Visions that are
synchronal to the time of the six seals, Rev. 12.
are the fight of Michael and the seven-headed dragon, about the child's birth,
wherewith the woman travailed; the measuring the Temple and Altar and them that
Worship therein, which are Symmetral or commensurable to the Angels measure.
Rev. 11.
Mr. Mede interprets the fight of the seven-headed Dragon and Michael, the
conflict of the Church of Christ, with the Pagan cruelty till Constantine and
Theodosius his time, which therefore as it is synchronal, so it has great
Cognation with the visions of the six seals. For the Archer on the white Horse
aims at that effect, all the time of that bloody Battle, which he hits and
reaches in the completion of the sixth Seal.

The inward Court of the Temple that is measured, signifies the pure Christian
Church, before it was adulterated by a kind of Christian Paganism; which
condition also of the Church, has a plain cognation with other things
synchronal; as their resolute opposing the Dragon, and their being so serious
in their Religion, that they preferred it before their own lives, so that the
measure of the Temple and the Altar, and the battle of the seven-headed Dragon
and Michael, are contemporaneous to the six first Seals, and one to another.

2. The six first Trumpets, sounding under the seventh Seal, appertain to the
second Period, when the Empire was turned Christian, and Paganized again under
Christianity. So they appertain to the Churches apostasy, and the cruel
persecution of the Members of Christ in this Apostasy. Now I will show you
these things that are synchronal to the six first Trumpets.

1. The unmeasured outward Court of the Temple or holy City given to the
Gentiles to be trodden under foot, Rev. 11.2.
42. months.

2. The Lords two Witnesses (at last to be overcome and killed by the beast,
after they have finished their testimony) prophesying in Sackcloth 1200 and 60.
days. chap. 11.3


3. The Woman that brought forth the man child, and fled from the Dragon into
the Wilderness, chap. 12.6.
and was nourished there 1200 and 60 days, or for a time, times, and half a
time.

4. The seven-headed, and ten-horned beast, after the deadly wound of his last
head was healed, blasphemeth God and his Tabernacle, c. 13.5, 6, 7
and them that: dwell in Heaven, warreth with, and overcomes the Saints 42,
months.

5. The two horned beast or false Prophet, who restores the first beast, Rev.
13.11. to the end of the chapter.
and exercises all the power of the first beast before him, whose deadly wound
was healed, etc. whose number is 666.

6. The Lambs Virgin Company 144000 redeemed from the earth, who alone could
learn and sing the new song, standing with him on Mount Zion; the Fear and
worship of God is commanded, Rev. 14.
the ruin of Babel, and them that worship the beast is threatened.

7. Babylon the great Mother of Harlots and abominations of the earth, sits
upon the seven headed beast, now in the course of his seventh head, being
ten-horned, Chap. 17.
making the inhabitants of the earth drunk with the Wine of her Fornication,
and going to perdition, with which does Synchronize six of the seven Vials of
Gods wrath, destroying the beast which are also contemporaneous to the sixth
Trumpet. For pouring out the Vials does bring mine and destruction upon the
beast, as is manniest from the text; for the conquerours of the beast, do sing
the song of Moses, Cap. 15.2, 3. And further it does speciaily appear from the
first Vial, Cap. 16.2. which caused a noisome fore to fall upon the men that
had the mark of the beast, and on them that did worship his Image. And from the
fifth vial, v. 10. which was poured upon the throne of the beast, and his
Kingdom was full of darkeness; also from the sixth Vials pouring out, provoking
unclean spirits like Frogs to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, beast, and
false Prophet, who by their subtle art of deceiving, shall draw the Kings of
the earth, and the whole world, i.e. all the Beastian party together to battle
against Christ, to their utter ruin and destruction; therefore the pouring out
of six of the seven Vials and destroying the beast, are contemporaneous to the
sixth trumpet, also contemporaneous one to another.

Thus I have showed these seven Synchronals to the six first trumpets founding
under the seventh Seal, which are also contemporaneous one to another.

Now these Visions that are Synchronal to the six first Trumpets, though they
be more then any Synchronals besides, yet they have all a near cognation and
manifest colligation one with another.

The general summary of the condition of times they point out, is the Apostasy
and degenerating of the Church, which yet is never conceived so all, but that
there are some pure Apostolical Christians in it; and therefore to present the
two sotts of Professors of Christianity, there are two sorts of Visions.

1. Those of the Whore of Babylon, the ten horned beast, and the two-horned
beast relating to the degeneracy of Christensom.

2. The two Witnesses mourning in Sickcloth, the Virgin company, the sealed of
the Lamb, to those that kept me purity of the Church, all these Synthronize
with the six first Trumpets, out of which is blown the wrath of God upon the
Roman Empire, as is but just by reason of their Apostasy: As it is also equal
with God to protect his own then; And therefore the company of the Lamb are
Sealed and marked, to he kept from the common calamities.

Again, Note, the general Apostasy could not have crept in,

1. If the Ecclesiastical and Secular power had not conspired; Which may refer
to the time of Inn entius for then this Apostasy did first sprout out, when
Rome obtained at the Emperors hands priority of place, suffrage and censure
over all; for as the tree pulls up the creeping Ivy, so the primacy of the
Church of Rome pulled up the aspiring supremacy of the ^ishop thereof; which
Church ^rthem nency and pro^^ on a^^ct long ruffling and shouldering) was first
obtained at the lands of Honorius (though alter wards upon great concertation
or Daggers-drawing, 't was by other Cesars and Kings confirmed, renewed and
^^ptiated, and at last completed in Pho^s his time, (...) and ^) who by the
advantage of the w^^ness and death of his eld^s ^rother, Ar^^us having obtained
power and protectorship, subjected the Church of the East Empire (which most
withstood the West and Roman supremacy) with all other Churches whatsoever, to
the Church and Sea of Rome; At the instan^ ^^it and importunity of the then
Bishop of Rome, whose name was then Innocent the fust, in the First year of his
creation, and in the year of Redemption. 406.
therefore there is the two-horned beast as well as the ten-horned beast;
Against which are opposed the two mourning Witnesses, the one sustaining the
person of the faithful magistracy, the other of the faithful Ministry.

2. And this Apostasy consisting much in gross dolatry, and vain superstition,
which according to the Scripture language is termed whoredom: This state is
also set out by the Vision of the Whore of Babylon, Rev. 17. To which is
opposed the Virgin company, Rev. 14.4.

3. There is lastly the like cognation or affinity between the six first
Trumpets, and the six first Vials. For as the trumpets were sounded to the
ruin of the Roman Empire, so the Vials are poured out to the ruin of the
Beast; out of the first, viz. the Trumpets, the wrath of God was blown upon the
Roman Empire; out of the other, viz. the Vials, the wrath of God is poured out
upon the beast his Worshippers, his seal and throne, and all his partakers, to
their ^^ter ruin and destruction. And thus of the Synchronismes that relate to
the second Period.

Thirdly, The Seventh Trumpet appertains to the third and last Period; The
Churches recovery out of her Apostasy, and her graceful and peaceful estate
from that time.

Now the Synchronals that are contemporary to the seventh Trumpet, and commence
at the ending of the Sixth (under which the mystery of God shall be finished)
and to the innumerable company, of white robed; palm-bearing Triumphers of all
Nations, Kindreds and Peoples, and poagues, and also contemporary to each
other, are 1. The pouring out of the seventh Vial (to the beginning only of
the seventh Trumpet.) 2. The binding of Satan a Thousand years. 3. The first
resurrection, and reigning with Christ a thousand years. 4. The holy City, the
New Jerusalem, prepaved as a Bride ador^e ^o for her Husband (in the light
whereof the Nations of them that are saved shall walk, and whereunto the Kings
of the earth shall bring their glory) comes down from God out of heaven.


These are the last Synchronals that are contemporary to the seventh Trumpet,
and commence at the ending of the sixth, and end at the day of Judgment,
properly so called, that immediately leads to Hell or Heaven.

These are contemporaneous Visions or mysteries in the Prophesies of this
sacred Book, which give great light to the Revelation, and are truly the key of
it; therefore necessary to the understanding of it.

They that attempt the interpreting of the Revelation without the guide of
Synchronisms taken from the innate characters of the Visions themselves, do
cast themselves upon unnatural, distorted and impossible applications. This may
be the reason why many learned men of note (we do not speak of all) have been
much mistaken in their Expositions (for to say nothing of that reason given by
some, viz. That the ancient Interpreters in the primitive times, have applied
to these times, many things which yet as then had no relation to them; the
modern Interpreters following their steps, not minding so much the History as
the Authority of the Interpreters, have thereby led themselves and others out
of the way) This I conceive to be the main reason, the method and harmony of
the Revelation is not observed. In the Revelation all things are set down in
good order, what from time to time should come to pass; the Synchronisms or
concurrencies of times, are set down one after another, and the Revilation and
changes in the Ecclesiastical and Civil States, are exactly and punctually
distinguished; even as an excellent and well versed Historian is wont to do in
the description of humane astions; Dot contrary to all this many interpreters
do pervert, overturn and disturb the method; seek and find out byway boof
error; the things which as Rela^n, belong to one and the same time, they see
down as following one another; what shall come to pass after the call of Baby^^
they place before it, ofttimes not knowing themselves where they stack, or how
they shall wind themselves out.

Besides they mistake and confound the States one with another; not observing
where mention is made of the Exclesiastical or Civil State: So that many times
they apply Monastical matters, and the actions of Antichrist, to that which is
in the Revelation spoken of the Civil State. Hence it is that the more one does
read some Expositors, the more one is confounded.

But by the benefit of this key or guide of Synthronisms, easily appears how
natural a sense is made of every Vision, and how perfectly answerable to
History and events.

And thus much of the main body or substance of the Book.

Now before I come to the Eleventh Chapter, I will here set down something
concerning the time of Antichrists beginning.

If we search the instant of his beginning we shall hardly find it, seeing in
the Apostles time it began to work under a mystery, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. but if we ask
the time when he should be revealed, we find it in Scripture to be at the ruin
of the Roman Empire, which being the only obstacle to Antichrist, was first of
all to be taken out of the way, that afterward Antichrist might be displayed
in his colors by these three degrees 1. Of a voluntary succession and removal
of the Imperial Throne from that very place where Antichrist should place his
Chair. Hence learned Usher says, Rome became the seat of the Beast by the
means of the trans^^ting of the Seat of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople.
2. The second of a violent oppression of Christendom by a foreign people, viz.
Goths and Vandals, which Antichrist by glosing and flattery, must win by little
and little to the embracing of his abominations, for the more speedy and surer
planting of his ten several horns. 3. The third of a fraudulent Usurpation of
a double sword, the one spiritual in the Church, the other temporal in the
Commonweal, by Antichrist himself then peeping abroad.


For the first it was to sall out at or about the three hundredth year after
Christ; about that time was the voluntary changing his seat, dividing his
Empire, which Chrysostom expounds to be the removing of the let. 2 These. 2.7.

For the second, the overrunning of Christendom by the barbarous Nations, when
Antichrist did crouch at the feet of those Tyrants, fawning and flattering
them, till out of them such Kingdoms might be settled as might give their
power to the beast: This was to fall out about the four hundredth year after
Christ.

For the third, when by these horns he was hoysed up to that huge height of
unjust Usurpation, as to exalt himself above Kings and Emperors, ruling not
only in the external and temporal estates, but even in the faith and
consciences of men, this was about that year after Christ, which some
interpreters make the number of his name to intimate unto us, Rev. 13.18.

PART II. Concerning that great Question, when did the 1200 and 60. days begin,
I will here set down further
THe great Earthquake, Rev. 11.13.
whereby the Kingdoms of the grand Antithrist, the whore of Babylon, and all
their supporters shall be utterly subverted in all Nations, drawn near. It may
possibly be with us as it was with the people of the lews, when our Savior
Christ name in the flesh, or with the Churches of the Gentiles, when Antichrist
came, Our Savior was both come and gone, before the Jews generally would know
him for the Messiah; and Antichrist was grown to his full age and stature,
before the world took any notice of him: So Antichrist is near his end, and
going a pace to perdition, before the most of Gods people, do so much as begin
a little to discern it.

That this grand earthquake is at hand, appears because the Beast Antichrist,
who is to fall by it, is so well stricken in years, and so near his end.

The whole term of his life and reign without the womb, (for the mystery of
iniquity was framing this Embrio even from the Apostles times, 2 These. 2.7.) is
42. months, Rev. 13.5. or 1200. and 60. days, that is so many years, putting a
day for a year, as Numb. 14.34. Ezekiel. 4.6. Now these years grow toward their
full period; for it is well nigh so much time since they begun; this will be
made to appear by these two Indices.

First, it is almost so long time since the Papel state became the seventh head
of the Roman Monarchy.

Secondly, because is almost 1200 and 60. years since the ten Kings began, and
the Beast began with them, as may appear. Rev. 17.12.

First, It is almost so long since the Papal state became the seventh head of
the Roman Monarchy; Indice or Evidence first.
and when it began to be that head, then it began to be the beast. Rev. 17.11.
that we may understand this, we are to look upon the Text. Rev. 17.9, 10.11.

Here is the mind that has wisdom; the seven heads are seven Mountains, on
which the woman sits; and there are seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is,
the other is not yet come, See the same Exposition of these words before on the
17.th.
And when he comes he must continue a short space; and the beast that was and
is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seventh, and goes to perdition.

The seven heads of the Roman Monarchy signify two things.

First, Seven hills, upon which the woman si^s; i. e. upon which the City was
built, (for the City is called the woman. verse. 18.) the seven Hills what they
were, see before, page 78, 79.

Secondly, The heads also signify seven Kings, i. e. seven several forms of
Supreme government, that have been in Rome; what these also are, see before,
Page 78. Of these, five are fallen, when the Apostle received the Revelation,
that is, Kings, Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dictators, Consuls.

One is] That is the Emperor, a Soldier, chosen for the most part by the
Armies.

And the other is not yet come] He does not say the seventh, but the other;
This sense of the words, though not the same with that I give on Chap. 17. Page
81, 82. yet meeting with it in a learned Writer since, I thought good here to
put it down, and leave it to the judgment of the Reader, to choose which
Interpreration he likes best.
pointing no doubt at the Christian Emperor, who did-not differ from the Heaven
Emperor, as a distinct form of Government (for they were both Soldiers, and
chosen by the Soldiers) but in the quality of his person, the one hating and
persecuting, the other loving and protecting Christian Religion.

And when he comes, he must continue a short space] For the Empire when it came
into the hands of the Christians, stood but a short time in its strength, a
matter of seventy or eighty years, from about the middle of the reign of
Constantine the great (for till then he was exercised with mighty Wars against
the Heathen Emperors) unto the end of the ra^^n of Theod^sius the great, from
about Anno. 316 or 320. to 395 or 397.

It follows in the next verse, the beast that was and is not, even he is the
eighth and is of the seventh, viz. The Papel state was in respect of the bulk
of the Empire, whereof he is a horn [And is not] i. e. it has not any present
existence in the Apostles times, as the seventh head; for the time of that is
not yet come. Even he is the eighth, and is of the seventh] that is, he is the
eighth, if you make the Christian Emperor one; but he is indeed the seventh;
for there is but seven heads, and he is but the seventh distinct form of
Government, Kings, Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dict^ors, Cons^ls, Emperors, and the
seventh, Popes.

Now here lies the Argument.
It is (...) to wards the end of the 1200 end 60. years, since the Pope became
the head of the Roman Kingdom. Ergo the Earthquake that must ruin him and his
Kingdom, draws near. To make this appear, we are to know, as some have
observed, there were diverse degrees of the fall of that vast body of the Roman
Empire; one after the death of Julian the Apostate, about Anno. 365. For then
the barbarous Nations invaded, and made huge Havoc in the Provinees of the
Empire. A second was about Anno. 410. when Rome it self was sack by Alaricus
the Goth, and the Empire dismembered. A third about Anno. 455. when ten Kings
were risen up instead of the Empire, to which let me interpose one notable one
(out of a learned writer) about Anno. 395. at the death of Theod^si^s the
great; the barbarous nations had made many attempts before, but were from time
to time, especially by his valor repelled; 2 These. 2.7. The time of
Antichrists revealing is when he who lets is taken out of the way; now this
(...), or he that did let the (...) pearing of Antichrist, is interpreted by
Anrient and la^^ Writers, (...) be the Roman Empire, not then wholly
demolished, but divided and weekened; it was divided after Theadosius, into
Eastern and Western, (...) in the East, and Arcadius in the Wost; now the
Western Empire was the (...) which was taken away by the death of Arcad. us.
But upon his death they brake in like an huge inundation, bore down the Empire
before them, shivered it in a hundred pieces, so as it near recovered any more.
This great mine of the Roman Empire, was six years adoing; for so great a body
as the Empire, could not by created means be ruined in a short time. And it is
very remarkable, both because it made so great a change in the Kingdoms of
Europe and Afric, planting them almost universally with new nations and
names; and in special because that storm brought our forefathers into this
Land, settling here a new Nation and language. It is thirdly also observable,
because in it the sixth Head of the Roman Monarchy, the Emperor went off and
the seventh the Pope came on; only the question is about which of these times
and degrees was the Empires destruction.

Not so high as Julians death; for the Empire stood in good strength after that
for thirty years at least; nor so low as 455. when it was quite broken, and not
long after lost its very name; but somewhere between, viz. either about 406. or
410 years after Christ, when Rome it self the head of the Empire was taken. Now
if the beasts reign began about or between 406 and 410 then the ruining
earthquake must needs approach, considering how many years are gone of the 1260
years.

Object. The sixth Head of the Empire continued long after the death of
Theodosius the Great.

Answ. 1. Not in strength, but was still more and more broken unco its
dissolution.

2. Rome became the the Seat of the Beast, by the means of translating the sear
of the Empire from Rome to Constantinopl^, from whence ensued the parting the
Empire into two parts, by which division it being weakened, and alter also
sundred in affection as well as in place, was the easier to be entered upon and
obtained by the Pope, especially after the death of Arcadius. Bishop Usher sum
of Christian Religion. p. 443.
It is not absurd to imagine that the sixth head and the seventh might be in
some degree together.

For first, it is but a comparison, not like that natural head, of which there
can be but one atonce, more makes a monster; and truly this Reast is a monster.
Besides the Impesial and Papal Head did not so thwart or cross one another at
first, as afterward they did; so as it might be with them, as Logicians say of
contrary qualities; they may consist together in the same subject, gradibus
remissis, non intensis; they might both of them have their power and not
entrench one upon another. Popes at first meddled in a manner only with the
matters of the Church, as being desirous to settle their Ecclesiastical
authority; and the Emperors on the other side almost wholly busied themselves
about the Civil State to govern and defend the Empire.

And yet further (which may lessen the absurdity) before that you shall have in
the Roman Government sometimes as it were two heads at once; as Consuls who
were for a year, and a Dictatator chosen it may be for three months, or for six
months, upon some extraordinary exigencies and necessities of State, who was
for the time supreme, as namely in matters of war, as the Consuls were supreme
for other Civil affairs.

The Earthquake whereby Antichrists Kingdom is to be ruined, approaches,
Indice or Evidence 2.
appears by this second Indice or Evidence.

Because it is almost 1200 and 60 years since the ten Kings began, and the Beast
began with them, as may appear Rev. 17.12. The ten horns which thou saw are
ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet, but received power as Kings
one hour with the Beast.

The ten Kings are the many Kingdoms that sprung up out of the ruins of the
Empire, as the Kigdoms of France, Spain, etc. These are called horns aptly,
because Antichrist does with them as the beast does with his horn (so the
Dragon, i.e. the Heathen Empire had done before them, while they were his born,
Rev. 12.3.) that is, propugn himself, and oppugn his adversaries; for this has
been Antichrists course all along, to push down and to gore even to death, for
the most part, all those that opposed his Idolatries and Heresies in all
nations by those horns, i.e. by the Kings and people of those Nations, who have
given their power and strength to the beast, Rev. 17.13. and who do generally
continue it to the Beast with one mind and consent.

Which have received no Kingdom as yet. For when the Apostle wrote, there was
no such Kings in rerum natura, or existent in the world, as the King of France,
the King of Spain, etc. These Kingdoms were then horns of the Dragon, i.e.
Provinces of the Empire, and therefore in the description of the Dragon chap.
12.3. the Crownsare not said to be upon the horns, i. e. upon the Kingdoms, who
had then no Kings of their own; but upon the Heads, i. e. upon the Imperial
head at Rome. As for instance, this land Britain, was in the Apostles time a
Province or Kingdom, but it had no King of its own, and so no Crown; that was
upon the head of the Emperor at Rome, and he had supreme power over this
Island; but when as these Kingdoms became the horns of the beast they came also
to have peculiar Kings of their own; England had and has its King, and France
its King. And to go on in the description of the Beast, the Crowns are not said
to be upon the heads, but upon the horns, And upon his horns ten crowns, Rev.
13.1.

But received power as Kings, one hour with the beast, The Roman Empire was by
little and little, so divided, that Anno. 403. some horns appeared.
i. e. The Kings and the beast began their reign together; now the Kings and
Kingdoms began to arise above 400. years after Christ when the Empire began to
be destroyed; Clavis Apo^alypt.
Histories do not speak much of them under the name and notion of Kings, till
after 400. years, or about 410. but the truth is, Histories are very confused
and no wonder; for those were times of strange confusion.

The beast is said to begin with them at one and the same time, or as the word
may be interpreted the first hour; the word in the Greek Text, that signifies
one, signifies also first; and so it may may be interpreted, the beast began to
rise the very first hour the Kings began to rise, rather then the first hour
after they were risen; for therein is a difference of many years, it being
almost 60 years from the first breaking of the Empire, before the ten Kingdoms
were set up in it. That the word that is here translated (one) is used also to
signify first, For two or three years we must not pinch much; it is hard to
make an exact account so as there be no mistake as to time, Modicum non curat
nec prator nec propheta.
we may see in many instances, as Luke 24.1. (...), which is word for word, one
day of the Sabbath or week, but it is generally rendered (and so the meaning is)
the first day of the week, the women came to the Sepulcher. Now if the Kings
and the beasts begun their reign together, so long since as between 400. and
410. then is this Earthquake which is to ruin him, and them also if they
persist in his service ( Dan. 2.44, 45. Rev. 19.18, 19.) near at hand.

Quest. What reason have we to think that the Pope about that time began to be
the great Antichrist?

Answ. For answer, we are to know there are two particular characters of the
Beast, as some Divines observe out of the Text, the former the cause of the
latter, viz. 1. Blasphemy, for he is full of the names of Blasphemy, Rev. 17.3.
by which understand Heresy and Idolatry. 2. Cruelty, for he is
ascarlet-coloured beast, and makes war with the Saints, Rev. 13.7. but both
these flow from a higher principle, which is as I may say (proprium quarto
modo) and a more convertible character of the beast, and that is his primacy or
supremacy: This supremacy has in it two things, that make it up; one is a
clayming authority over the consciences of men, and so over their faith and
worship; 2. the extending of his power to all Churches and Nations.

I will not say these two are the same things, nor that they issue from one and
the same root; but surely this I may say, they are near a kin, and have their
roots not far asunder, because they are generally still found in one and the
self-same person.

That both these meet in the grand Antichrist, will appear.
First, He arrogates authority over the soul; So much I take to be intimated in
these words of Daniel, speaking of him, Dan. 7.25. He shall speak great words
against the most high, and think to change times and Laws; that he shall
arrogate power to himself, to change Gods Laws, as in coining and altering
Articles of faith, appointing worship for God, etc. (high words, great words
against God^) 2 These. 2.4. He, as God, sits in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God; how does he do that? viz. by Lording it over the
consciences of Gods people, as if he were God, and thereby deprives Christ of
one of the principal flowers of his Crown, which is to have dominion over the
faith; see more for this, Rev. 13.5, 6, 15, 16.

Secondly, the great Antichrist is to extend his power, at least presumptively
and intentionally, where he cannot do it actualy, over all kindreds, tongues,
and Nations. Rev. 13.7.

It is Antichristian to claym such authority, The Title of Pontifex Maximus
renounced by Gratian and Theodosius after him, was after the death of
Theodosius the first, taken up by the Pope who holds it to this day; So that
what ever the Ropes name be, Poutifex Maximus is his ordinary style, Cotton on
Rev. 13. verse. 16.
though but over one man, or one Church; It is more Antichristian to claym such
authority over many Churches; more Antichristian to claym this Authority over
whole Provinces; still more Antichristian to claym it over many, Princes and
Kingdoms; but yet all these do not amount to the grand Antichrist; Why?
because there may be a greater. But now he that claims such Sovereignty over
all the Churches in the World, is the grand Antichrist indeed; for there can be
no greater. Now this the Pope does; yea, that he may be sure to challenge as
large a dominion as Christ has; he does not only arrogate authority over all
the World, but also in Heaven and Hell, where Christ has power, yea in
purgatory, where Christ has no power.

He that will but look upon the sentence condemnatory of Pope Leo the tenth, in
his Bull against Luther, will find this true, wherein he does not labor to
convince Luther of error by solid demonstrations out of the Word of God, (...)
but mainly because his doctrine was contrary to the decrees of Popes, etc. He
does also charge and command Patriarch^, Metropolitans, Primats, Archbishops,
Bishops and all other Ecclesiastical Orders downward, even to the begging
Friar^; and then all Kings, Electors of the Empire, Princes, Dukes, and so on,
and at last all men throughout the whole univerful world (the very voice
proper, and native language of the grand Antichrist) on pain of the great
Excommunication, that they do not embrace Luthers doctrine, nor adhere to, or
favor his person.

Now the Popes challenged this supremacy in some degree soon after the fourth
Century; Pope Innocent the first drew all Appeals from other Bishops to the
Apostolic Sea, according to former Statutes and Customs, as be he says in his
Epistle to Victricius. Innocent. Epist. 2. ad V^cori^ium. Majores cansae ad
s^dem Apostolicam sicut Synodus statuit, and beata consuaetudo exigit, A^no 404
or 406. post judicium Episcopale reseruntur.
not to speak of their claiming the title of Universal Bishop, nor yet their
assuming the title of Pontifex Maximus, the name of the chief Heathenish Priest
among the Romans, which dignity many of the Emperors had annexed to their
Imperial greatness (which Grecian the Emperor first renounced, Anno 380: and
the rest after him) they did about that time plainly arrogate and usurp a
judiciary power over Councils and Churches.

As in the time of Innocentius the first, who did sue for, and obtained of the
Emperor Honorius, Priority of place, suffrage and censure over all Churches: In
his time therefore Historians report, the Roman Church began to swell with
pride, and to usurp Jurisdiction over other Churches.

And this appears by the insolent letter which this Pope Innocent the first
sent to the fifth Council of Carthage, in which Council the heresy of Pelagius
was condemned. This Council sent their letters to this Bishop of Rome,
expressing therein the decree of the Council. See Sympsons History of the
Church. Cont. 5.
The answer that this Innocentius returned to this Council, was intermized with
words of swelling pride, as if no decree could be firm unless it had the
allowance of the Roman chair.

Besides they did then claim this prerogative, that Appeals ought to be made to
the Bishop of Rome from all Churches, and he to give the last definitive
sentence: yea, so zealous were they about this time, that three Popes, Zosimus,
Boniface, Coelestine, did in the sixth Council of Carthage, in which Saint
Augustine was present, in the cause of one Appianus, who had appealed out of
Afric unto Rome (as many had done before) not only challenge the receiving
of Appellations from all Churches, but also forge a decree of the great Council
of Nice, which had been almost a hundred years before, to support it. This was
by the Fathers of the Synod indeed then rejected, and the pretended Canon found
to be forged and spurious: yet this was a right by the Popes then challenged.
Before the Council of Constantinople which some reckon to be in Anno 381.
others in Anno 383. Wolphius Lection. memorab. Tom. 1. p. 131. says, Hoc
scilicet tempore gliscebat Antichristus Rome, i.e. Antichrist did then begin to
appear at Rome, etc. yea that very Council of Constantinople, consisting of 150
Bishops, moderated by Nectarius Archbishop of Constantinople, did acknowledge
the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, only reserving to the Bishop of
Constantinople the second place among the Bishops; and immediately after this
Council the Bishop of Rome did mightily labor to draw all causes to his own
Consistory. Morn. Mystery of Iniquity, p. 40.


But this Supremacy they were ambitious of long before, as learned Brightman
and others observe; for in the first great Council of Nice where Constantine
was present, the Bishop of Rome was not there: of whose absence Bellarmin gives
two reasons:

1. It did not seem convenient that the Head should follow the Members.

2. Because in the Eastern Councils always the Emperor was present, or his
Ambassador who did challenge the first, Bellarm. l. 1. de Council. and Eccles.
c. 29.
at least material place to himself. Lest therefore he should either suffer
this, or else make a tumult, he would not go to the Council, but rather sent
his Ambassadors. Hence Brightman concludes That in the time of this Council,
the man of Rome, though not outwardly and openly, Home Romae. Brightman
Antichrist Nascen. Antichrist Crescent. Antichrist Re^nant and Triumphant. He
was the first, when he usurped an universal Authority over all Bishops. See Dr.
Crackinthorp his Treatise of General Councils, cap. 13. p. 186.
yet inwardly and secretly did lift up himself above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.

From all which I conclude, that about 400 years after Christ, the grand
Antichrist was not only as a great big Embrio swelling in the womb and ready to
come forth, but rather as a child lately born lying in the cradle; that it is
probable, yea, I may say, more then probable, that between 403 and 410
Antichrist begun.

Daniel speaking of these horns, intimates that the little horn Antichrist that
grew so great, should come up after the rest Dan. 7, 24.

verse. 8. And as it was in the Vision, so it was in the accomplishment indeed;
he rose imperceptibly, because the world mistook what manner of Creature he
should be.

No, we may rather suspect that Antichrist was up before the Kings, the Papacy
having such strange appearance of him, before any of the Kings sprung up. Rev.
17.12.
And so some read these words; (...), not (...)
They received power as Kings one hour; not with the Beast, but after the Beast.

Thus I have given two Indices or Evidences to prove, and that a priori that
the 1200. and 60. days are near to a period. And so the Earthquake that must
ruin the Beast, is at hand.

But there are two other Evidences of it a posteriori, which are more certain
and more indubitable.

1. The slaying of the Witnesses, or rather their lying dead in the street of
the great City, which precedes the great Earthquake, which shall be at their
resurrection.

Centemporary with which resurrection (as a second Evidence) is the pouring out
of the fifth Vial upon the throne of the Beast; Some think this vial is now
about to be poured out.
for at the pouring out of this Vial, this great Earthquake begins, and so
continues and ends not till the pouring out of the seventh Vial.

Of the first of these see the following.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE XI. CHAP. OF THE REVELATION.
THere are many important things contained in the Revelation of Saint John,
which do relate to our present times, especially in the 11. Chap. and in Chap.
16. in the Description of the pouring out of the Vials of Gods wrath. This 11.
Chap. is the heart and kernel of the whole Book.


The eleventh Chapter goes through all the three Periods of times before
mentioned, and is as it were an abridgement of the whole Revelation.

It is declared unto John how things shall come (...) the Christich Church.

In the first Period, verse the first. Period. 1.


In the second Period, verse. 9.10.11. Period. 2.


In the third Period, from verse 11. to the end. Period. 3.


Verse. 1
In the first Period, verse (...) thus writes John. (...)
And there was given unto me a Read, like unto a Rod, and the Angel (...)
saying, Wise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that
worship therein.

Here he gathering and building of the Christian Church is commanded unto John,
under the measuring of the Jewish Temple (...) Jerusalem; the length whereof
not 60. Cubits; breadth 20. height 120. which Cubical number of the Dimensions
of the Jewish Temple, hold of ^^th of the mystical Temple, the number of the
New Testament, the number of them that are sealed, which is 144,000. By which
is meant the regular purity of the Church, and Religion at the first, which is
set forth under the particular vision or mystery, of measuring the inner Court
of the Temple, situate immediately next the holy of holies, where God dwelt
between the Cherubins; Intimating that the Primitive Church, and Religion
therein immediately next unto Jesus Christ and his Apostles, was exactly
examined by, and conform to the measuring reed of the written word of God, and
therefore singularly pure and holy. The Church was then gloriously beautified,
and clothed with the sun of righteousness, Cha. 12.1.
had the moon under her feet, despised all earthly and worldly things, and
reigned over the works of darkness, and she had upon her head a crown of twelve
Stars, the Apostles and the wholesome Doctrine of the same, Chap. 12.2.

But though this was a time of great purity, yet it was a time of great
persecution, under which the Church was built up at that time; then the Dragon
under the Heathen Emperors raged against the Church; the Christians were
persecuted, banished and put to cruel death, killed like Sheep appointed to
the slaughter; hence not only the Temple but also the Altar is said to be
measured, and them that worship therein, i.e. in the inner Court, where the
Altar of burnt Offerings stood, where the Priests did Sacrifice, called
Thysiasterium. Hereby the holy Ghost means, the Christian Church should be
exposed to afflictions and persecutions, suffer many grievous forments and
tribulations; therefore he ^^^seth the suffering, and miseries they should
undergo to be measured out to them, whereby he sets certain bounds to the
Tyrants, beyond which they cannot go; and when they are come so far, then must
vengeance overtake them; hence it is that the sacrificed souls of the Martyrs,
who were slain for the word of God, and testimony of Jesus, and lie under the
Altar (as slaughtered Sacrifices) cry with a loud voice to the lord, holy and
true for vengeance, Rev. 6. verse. 9, 10. yet under all these persecutions they
did worship, i. e. serve ^o da^ with purity, so with perseverance so the end;
they did stick close to him in all sorts of persecutions, even to the yiedling
up and sacrificing of their bodies and lives.

Now the persecution of this pure Apostolical Church continued 300. years, till
at last Constantine the great came to the Imperial seat, whereby the reign of
the Dragon came to an end; the Dragon was cast out of the Church-heaven. Rev.
12. This regular purity of the Church, ordered according to the Scripture rule
and standard, continued till after the death of Theodosius; it continued till
the beginning of the 42. months, when the Devil left his shape of a Dragon, and
resigned his host with his residence and seat and great authority unto the
beast with ten horns, See before, p. 10, 11.
when it rose out of the Sea, Rev. 13.1.

Verse 2. But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out and measure it
not; for it is given to the Gentiles, and the holy City they shall tread under
foot, forty two months.
Here in this verse and verses following, the second period is set down, viz.
under the Antichristian Vicar in two Synchronismes or concurrences of times.

First, the Gentiles tread the Holy City under foot 42. months.

Secondly, The two witnesses prophecy in sackcloth, 260 days.

To begin with the first, where begins the Churches Apostasy from her primitive
Apostolical purity, which is set forth under the particular vision of the
outward Court of the Temple, further distant and remote from the holy of
holies, signifying the Church succeeding the Primitive Church, in the following
ages, should not be in Religion so regular, and conform to the Canon and
measuring reed of Gods word, as the primitive Church, but should grow irregular
and exorbitant, in gentilish idolatrous worship, Profaning it, as if
heathenisme were again revived; for heathemish Idolatry by Popery is brought in
again; The Heathens worshipped Saturn, Jupiter, Juno, Venus, etc. in the Popish
Religion, Mary, Peter, Paul, George, are set up in stead of these, and called
upon in time of distress; so there is but little difference between them.

Here more particularly let us consider,

1. A prophetical direction to leave out the outward Court, or holy City, and
nor to measure it; the outward Court and holy City seem to be all one, the
latter exegetical to the former; For the outward Court was the Place for the
holy City, or the people of Israel to meet for divine worship; yea, in the
wilderness, the Tabernacle having but one court (into which ordinarily it was
not lawful for any to enter into, but the Priests and Levites) there was no
outward Court, but the tents of Israel, or the Holy City. So these words,
outward Court and holy City, mutually explain one another. So then by the
outward Court here is to be understood, the outward worship and service of God,
which consisted in the outward appearance, and a company of superstitious
ceremonies, whereof God takes no notice but rejects it; leave it out, measure
it not, says the Angel.

2. We have a reason of this direction, for it is given to the Gentiles, etc.
i. e. this outward Court or holy City unmeasured is given to the Gentiles, i.
e. It was to be left out, or cast out as profane, and that which God will make
no account of, yea, to be given to the Gentiles to be trodden under foot 42.
months. i. e. it shall be given or left by Gods just dispensation to the
Gentiles, vix. to them that exercise Gentilish Idolatrous Worship, the event
whereof should be treading under foot the holy City, as the Gentiles trod
Jerusalem under foot, hostilly possessing and overthrowing the City, to which
this Text here seems to allude; Luke 21.24. by being trodden by the Gentiles is
meant the imitation of Pagan Worship, introduced by the Apostasy of
Christendom. Dr. More.
so the Church typified by Jerusalem, should be possessed and profaned by
Romish Gentiles, and their Idolatries; the meaning is (as Mr. Mede well
observes) the Antithristian Apostasy, which he calls Redivivus Ethuicismus,
Heathenisme revived, shall prevail over the Christian Church, and shall bring
in a new kind of Idolatry, into the places where the true religion was
professed, or the imitation of Pagan Worship. This came to pass after
Constuntine, and immediately after the death of Theodosius; the ^^oths, Huns,
and Alans, with other barbarous Nations, invade the Roman Empire, ruined and
destroyed the same on all sides, whereby the Church (in this sense) as the holy
City began to be trod under foot, and the Antichrist had an occasion given to
break forth and show himself. And this treading under foot shall continue 42.
months, parallel with the time of the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth, which
follows.

Verse. 3. And I will give (...) to my (...) Witnesses, and they (...) Prophecy
two (...) ^^^dred and sixty days (...) in sackcloth.
Here we (...) the Concomitant ^^ent attending upon this defiled and deplored
estate of the Church; the Lords (...) Wi^ness^s prophesying all the while in
Sackcloth (...) continually bewayling and lamenting the (...).

For we must know that the Apostasy and degeneracy of the Church was never
conceived so ill, but there were some pure Apostolical Christians ^^it. The
Apostasy though general, ^ver all tough^^ kindreds, and Nations, yet it was
not so universal in all individual persons, but them were a remnant according
to the election of grace; Rev. 11.4.
as in the ^^alitish Apostasy, the Lord reserved 7000 that had not bowed their
knees to Baal, so in this antichristian defection, the Lamb (...) Mount Sion
had twelve times twelve thousand that adhered to the Doctrine of the twelve
Apostles, Rev. 14.1, 4, 5 And as the Lord had his Saints during all the reign
of Antichrist, so he raised up his magistrates, and his ministers, who in (...)
several successive ages, in several phares, testified against the Tyranny,
spiritual whoredoms, and Idolatrous worships, and deceiving frauds of
Antichrist.

It is true, as the generality of the people, so the generality of the
Magistrates, ^uinees, and Priests in those times did worship the Beast, even
all that dwell upon the worth, whose names wore not written (...) the Lambs
Book of Life. But in this general defection both of people, and of (...) guides
a ^^^trachers; the Lamb had a rem^^^t with him (who were called, Rev. 17.4.
and the (...), and faithful) even an afflicted poor rem^ent of Pastors as well
as of people, reserved in the midst of Balysia; who during the reign of
Antichrist solidwed the Lamb; did not defile their garments, but preached and
prayed, and li^^d, and died in their constant and cons^^^^^ us opposition of
the man of Sinle appears not only from this verse, but also from chap. 12.
verse. 6. that the Church, during the whole time of the (...) of Antichrist
should be in a sad, la^^entable, and wilderness condition; yet margre all the
fury of the ten-headed and two horned Beast, the Church as preserved safe all
that time in the Wilderness; she is fed and nourished Forty two months. See
Jus Divinum Ministerii Anglic. p. 35.
This woman is not only kept alive in the Wilderness all the time of
Antichrists reign, but she is (...) and nourished there by Gospel
Administrations.

She is fed by the two Witnesses (for the prophesying of the Witnesses is
contemporary with the woman's flight into the Wildernese) even as Elias was
nourished in the Wilderness, Doctos More makes the two Witnesses to be the two
Testaments, as well as Magistracy and Ministry. Doctor More his Mystery of
godliness, Book 5. chap. 17. page 207.
and kept safe (...) the fury and rage of Joz^^^^. And as God by good Obadiah
preserved a hundred Prophets of the Lord alive all the time of Ahaba bitter
opposition against them: Even so the Lord had his good Obadiahs: some faithful
Magistrates to encourage, support, preserve and nourish the faithful Ministers
of Christ (though in a wilderness condition) all the time of Antichrists
prevalency. And as the two-horned Beast, and ten-horned Beast, the
Ecclesiastical and Secular power conspired and united together in the general
Apostasy, which else could not have crept in: so against these are opposed as
united together, the two mourning Witnesses, the one sustaining the person of
the faithful Magistrate, the other of the faithful Minister. Now the Text faith,

I will give power to my two Witnesses. These two Witnesses prophesying, were
not two Individual persons, Enoch and Elias, as Bellarmin and other Papists
affirm: But a succession of holy men, not in private, but in public station,
stirred up all that time to testify the truth of Christ against Antichrist.

By the two Witnesses in general, This noted by their Prophesying in Sackcloth.
are meant (says Mr. Mede) all the Interpreters and Assertors of Divine truth,
who should by their daily complaints bewail the foul and lamentable pollution
of Christ's Church:

And in particular it is conceived by the two Witnesses to be meant (say
learned Expositors) the faithful Teachers and Governors of the Church, Clavis
Apoc.
both Ecclesiastical and Political: More especially say the London Ministers in
their Jus Divinum Ministerii Anglicani) the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, who
are called Witnesses of Christ, Acts 1.8. and whose proper office it is to bear
witness to truth and holiness, against all Heresies, Blasphemies, Idolatries
and ungodliness of Antichrist.

To these Witnesses power is given, To such I, will give power that they may
edify and propagate the Church, and preserve the same against all Heresies and
hostile attempts. Clavis Apocal.
i. e. Authority and Commission; yea, the power of Christ is bestowed upon
them, by which they are enabled not only to pray and to mourn, but to
prophecy, not so much by prediction of things future, as by preaching the
everlasting Gospel. It was a mighty power from on high that a few condemned,
persecuted Ministers should have gifts to be able, and power to be courageous
to preach against the Son of perdition, when all the world wondered after the
beast.

To my two Witnesses.] Two, because very few in comparison of the Ministers of
Antichrist, who were innumerable; and because two Witnesses were sufficient to
confirm any truth; but chiefly they are called two, like their types; in
allusion to Moses and Aeron in the Wilderness; on Elijah and Elisha, when the
Israelitea^ or shipped the Calves and Beal; ^^ ^orobabel and Joshua in Babylon,
and (...) the return of the Istatitie from raptivity.

And they shall Prophecy, These sackcloth Propheciars, were not only Saints
who mounfully bewailed the abominations of those times, that the Holy City
should be trampled under foot, but such as by way of Office were distinguished
from others; Mat. 10.41.
Prophets distinguished from righteous men, and Prophets distinguished from
Saints. Babylon is therefore ruined, because in her is found the blood of the
Prophets and of the Saints, Revelat. 17.24.

Twelve hundred and sixty days] These are not natural days, but prophetical,
every day taken for a year, as Ezekiel. 4.6. Numb. 14.14. the days of their
Prophesying in sackcloth, are twelve hundred and sixty years, and so expire not
till the 42. months of the Beasts reign be expired. For months taken
prophetically as before, every day for a year, and reckoning for every month
30. days; now multiply the 42. by the 30. and the reign of the Beast is, 1200
and 60. years; and though there be great difficulty, when to begin the rise and
reign, and most expositors herein much vary, yet in the continuance there is a
general accord, and none can rationally make any question of it.

Now if we descend from the words of this Prophecy, and come to observe the
answerable events in History, we shall find that in every age there were
Witnesses opposing the (...) canny, Idolatry, and Blasphemies of Antichrist;
their particular names, times, places and their manner of resisting the man of
sin, it would be too large to infirst upon; From the 600. year of Christ, to
the 16. century, See a Catalogue of the Witnesses in their several ages, in the
Ministers of London, their Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici. page. 53. Also
the Histories of the Maegdeburgon. See also Illyricus his Catalog. Testium
Veritatis. Also Jacob. Usher, de Eccles. Success. and Statu And Mr. Sim.
Birckbeck his Treatise called Protestants evidence.
yet a Catalogue is given of them by Protestant writers, As,

Our famous Jewel for 600. years, from the time of Christ and his Apostles,
has abundantly proved, that the truths professed in the reformed Churches,
were maintained by the Ancients.

And in the succeeding centuries, when the man of sin began to prevail, there
were in their several ages godly and learned Ministers, who opposed Popish
errors, defending the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and of Communions to be
received in both kinds, justification by free grace, disclaiming the
defilements of worship, in adoring Images, invocation of Saints, praying for
the dead, worshipping relics, declaiming against his supremacy, and Title of
universal Bishop, as Antichristian.

Yea, Protestant writers make mention of Magistrates as well as Ministers,
opposing Antichrist; yea in this one Kingdom you shall find in History before
the Conquest, Kings for piety called Saints, opposing the insolency and
wickedness of the Church of Rome; King Edgar acknowledged no Supremacy in the
Pope, but says, the care of the Church, ad nos spectat, it belongs to the
King, and not to the Pope. Yea, when the Popes were swelled to that hight, that
Kings kissed their feet, yet then the Kings of England opposed their Usurpation.

Object. If the Witnesses Prophecy 1200 and 60. days, then they Prophecy after
they are slain.

Answ. In that sense they are said to be slain, they may prophecy in sackcloth;
nay they will necessarily do so, viz. perform their witness with sadness and
mourning; Their finishing their Testimony, does not cause their Prophesying to
cease; their suffering and their slaying, is the most glorious part of their
sackcloth Prophecy. And so I proceed to the fourth Verse.

Verse. 4. These are the two Olive trees, and the two Candlesticks, etc.]
That is they are like unto Zerubbabel and Joshua, restorers of the Jewish
Church under the Babylonish Captivity, in resemblance to whom, the two
Witnesses should endeavor to bring the Church out of Antichristian bondage and
slavery. These are represented by two Olive trees, Zach. 4.^
standing on the two sides of the Candlestick, continually supplying it with
Oil; But why two Candlesticks when Zachary mentions but one? See the conjecture
of Mr. Mede upon this Chap.
The Candlestick signifying the Church of these times, maintained with
spiritual supplies, not by strength or armies, but by Gods special blessing and
influence: the Olive Trees extraordinarily dropping Oil for light into those
Candlesticks.

Verse. 5. And if any will hurt them, fire comes out of their mouths and
devoureth their enemies: And if any will hurt them, he must in this manner be
killed.
Here the witnesses are compared to Elijah and Elisha, restorers of Gods pure
Worship from Baalitical Idolatry. In this allusion is signified a double power
which is granted to them.

First, A power to avenge themselves against their Enemies, not by any external
fire or sword-power (when hurt by them) but their revenge like fire proceeds
out of their mouth; it is by the mystical fire of the word they preach,
denouncing Gods wrath against their wickedness.

As Elisha called for fire from Heaven upon the Captains and their fifties; 2
King. 2.9, 10, 11.
If any shall hurt them, he must in this manner be killed, i. e. spiritually
and mystically by the word of their prophecy, which as fire devoureth them,
according to that of the Prophet, Jer. 5.14. he makes his word a savor of
death unto death to them; they have ever the vengeance in a readiness for their
enemies, 2 Cor. 10.6. Thus they avenge their own wrong; but how the wrong done
to the Church?

Secondly, Therefore secondly they have power to avenge the Church of Christ,
against the defilers, and Gentilish prophaners thereof. These (says the Text)
have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their Prophecy, viz.
Mystical rain. As Elijah shut Heaven that it rained not on Israel, almost
consumed with drought and famine, in the days of his Prophecy, till he had
destroyed the false worship and worshippers of Baal; So these Witnesses by the
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, have power to shut heaven against the
Idolatrous Gentiles, excluding them from hope of eternal lise, by the blood of
Christ; and showers of Divine grace, till they repent and forsake their
Idolatrous worship, and being mindful of their baptismal Covenan, return to
the pure worship of God, by one mediator Jesus Christ, and so put an end to the
mournful Prophecy of these witnesses. Of this power of the Witnesses we have an
example, Chap. 14.9. where it is said, the third Angel, whereby is meant
(according to Interpreters) Luther and his Successors, denounces most woeful
torments to all the followers and worshippers of the Beast. If any shull
worship the beast and his Image, or receive his mark, etc. he shall drink of
the Wine of the wrath of God, etc.

It is added, Annotations upon the Bible.
In the days of their Prophecy] three years and six months in Elijahs time,
answerable to the number of months here, verse 2.

Verse. 6. Lastly, These witnesses have power over matters to turn them into
blood. And to smite the Earth with plagnes as often as they will.
Here the Witnesses are resembled to Moses and Aaron, deliverers of Israel out
of Egyptian bondage, and restorers of Gods true worship in the Wilderness. The
two witnesses shall exercise the power of Moses and Aaron, whence Learned Mede
collects the power of the Witnesses figured in this type, not to belong to all
the days of their sackcloth prophecy, but only to the end of their Prophecy;
viz. the pouring out of the Vials. As Moses and Aaron immediately before, and
at their bringing of Israel out of Egypt, turned those waters into blood, and
smote them with ten sore plagues: So toward the Period of these two Witnesses
Prophecy, when the Christian Church (under their conduct, as it were of Moses
and Aaron) shall now begin to be rescued from the Antichristian bondage, and
Tyranny of the Beast, the Vials of Gods wrath like Egyptian plaguen, shall come
upon the beast and his Gentilith worshipers, the plague of the first Vial being
a noisome grievous sore, the second and third blood the plagues of the rest
greater and more grievous to he inflicted upon the beast and his party, or the
Gentiles treading down the outward Court and holy City, the interpretation
whereof I refer till I come to Cimp. (...) It is enough here to note this last
power of the Witnesses to belong to the pouring out of the Vials.

Verse. 7. And when they shall finish their Testimony the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit, shall make War against them, And shall overcome and
kill them.
Hitherto of the gift and power of the Witnesses.

It follows now that I speak of the sat or the various consequents and
events of their prophesying expressed in this verse; wherein these Witnesses
become singularly conform to Jesus Christ, who preached about forty two
months, i. e. three years and a half, was then slain by the Roman Governor,
lay dead three days,, three days after rose again with a great earthquake, and
forty days after ascending into Heaven, a cloud receiving him. But to give some
light into the Text,

Then they shall finish their testimony.] Translators and Interpreters have
been mistaken in rendering these words, thus, When they have or shall have
finished their testimony, (...)
to think that this killing should not begin till the 1200 and 60 days should
be expired; because by this means the Witnesses should remain in Sackcloth, and
the woman in the wilderness, beyond the time appointed, and also the fourth
beast should continue to blaspheme longer then 42. months, to all which not
only the plain text, but also the swearing of the Angel, Dan. 12.17. and the
great Oath of the Son of God, Rev. 10.6. are contradictory.

Therefore the words must not be rendered in the Perfect-tence, when they have
finished, or in the Future Perfect tence, when they shall have finished, but
in, Future simplici, cum Finituri sunt; When they shall finish their testimony.
So Claverius in his first Apotalyptical dawning, page 124. and (Mede) in his
Commentary upon the Revelation reads the words, When they shall finish, i. e.
when the 1200 and 60 days shall draw toward an end. And when now part of the
Christian world shall repent of their Gentilish Idolatries, and reform, and
the Witnesses for joy shall begin to lay aside their mourning weeds (though yet
they were not past the danger that was prophesied should come) That
seven-headed beast of Rome in the course of his last head (of which see before
Chap. 13.) disdaining and scorning the prevalency of these mourning Witnesses
by their Prophesying, shall make war against them, overcome and kill them.

First then to speak of the Witnesses finishing their Testimony, I agree herein
with Mr. Mede, that the mourning Witnesses began to finish the Testimony of all
the former Witnesses; from the beginning of the reformation of the Reformed
Churches, and so on to the beginning of the beasts war against them, preceding
the killing of them. His words are these (speaking of the Witnesses finishing
their Testimony, and of the War and slaughter of them) quorum primum (inquit)
de testium planctu finiri caepto ab initio Ecclesiae reformatae, huc usque
continue factitatum est, etc.

In the beginning then of the reformation of the Reformed Churches, this
finishing began; Now this reformation began in Germany, in the reign of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, by Luther and his Associates. Luther began the
finishing of this Testimony by Sermons, writings, disputations, whereby he
discovered and detected the lies and frauds of Antithrist, as Moses did the
Cheats and falsehoods of Jannes and Jambres, the Egyptian Sorcerers, which
Doctrine of Luther, Charles the fifth labored by all means to suppress by
conventions, decrees, and edicts; but Luther and his Associates being backed
and assisted, by the Duke of Saxony, the Lantgrave of Hesse, and other Princes
in Germany, the Magistrates of Fellow Witnesses withstood these Edicts and
decrees, and answered to them in every point.

Entered into a Protestation against them; Protestation.
And of this Protestation the Princes and all that adhered to them were called
Protestants, which name is now given to all them that in their Doctrine swerve
from the Church of Rome. League and Covenant.
Afterward (being sorely for this threatened by the Emperor) the Protestants
entered into a League and Covenant, to aid each other in the Quarrel of Religion.

And not long after the Protestans drew up a Confession of their faith,
Confession of faith.
and presented it to the Emperor, this is that Confession of faith, that is
called the Augustane Profession.

This finishing of the Testimony of the former witnesses thus begun, was
carried on by their example in other Cities and places abroad, whence sprung up
other reformed Churches, as of Helvetia, Sucvia, Geneva, France, Holland,
Scotland, and England, last of all reformed.

The finishing then of the Testimony (I conceive) must be by the Magistrates
and Ministers of some of these reformed Churches, who shall give in their
Testimony against the Churches Apostasy, toward the latter end of the 1200 and
60 days. For the finishing must be meant of the last Witnesses, before the last
battle of the Beast against them, whereby he overcomes and kills them.

And it is likely the Witnesses of some of the reformed Churches, last
reformed, conclude, complete and make an end of finishing this Testimony, as
the Witnesses of the first reformed Churches begun it. Yea, not only by,
Witnessing against the Apostatical Church of Rome, as they did, but by giving
the cleerest, the fullest Testimony for truth and holiness against the errors
and unholiness of Antichrist, for Church purity, against Church-corruptions,
and the Apostasy of the Church of Rome, that ever was given this twelve hundred
years. So that these last Witnesses may be called the Finishing Witnesses, that
finish, complete and perfect the testimony of all the former Witnesses, do it
with so much light, and convincing evidence, and with so much heat in their
testimony (called fire in their mouths, verse. 5.) as does vex and torment their
enemies, and enrage them to a War again them. So much of finishing their
testimony. It follows,

The beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, etc.] That is Antichrist
or any of the Beastian party. He is compared to a beast not only because of
his inhumanity, but because of his irrationality, in seeking by killing the
Witnesses to hinder the course of the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2.

And he is said to come out of the bottomless pit or Abyss, The word in the
Greek signifies all these. By this Beast here is meant the Popish
Ecclesiastical Government, who use the temporal sword. Clavis Apo^.
which may be understood, out of hell, as chap. 9. 2. or out of the sea, as the
ten-horned beast did, Rev. 13.1. or out of the body of the earth, or a deep pit
in the earth, and so may signify the two-horned beast, chap. 13. 11. Now it is
this beast and his party that makes War against, overcomes and kills the
Witnesses, his party is described, chap. 13. 15, 16. Such as either receive his
mark, or his name, or the number of his name. The explication of which see
before upon chap. 13.

Shall make war against them.] i. e. against the Witnesses. We read chap. 13.
7. of the Beasts war against the Saints. And it was given to him to make war
with the Saints and to overcome them, i. e. says Mr. Mede, the remnant of the
woman's seed in the Wilderness, chap. 12. 17. which the same, Author conceives
to be executed when such a numerous company of the Waldenses and Albigenses,
and other true Christians were destroyed seventy years together.

First intended against the Saracens, after turned against the Christians that
would not worship and submit to the beast. Here in this 11. chap. verse. 7. is
set down by the holy Ghost, the beasts war against the Witnesses, Note here
into (...) precedes the killing of the Witnesses; a War properly to caned, and
a War against the Witnesses, ^^ the Magistrates and, Ministers of some of the
Reformed Churches; for so it did the killing of the Witnesses to the German
Churches; the War betwixt the Emperor and the German Princes, especally the
Sweeds lasted many years, at last ended in a Pacification, out (...) were left,
and deprived of the liberty of the Consiliences, whereby the Preachers and
Professors of (...) Gospel in the He (...) Provinces were, ^ivilly slain, Apug.
1650.
which differs from the others regard of the time of its it being at the latter
end. of Antichrists reign, when the Witnesses finish their testimony, not then
they begin to finish, but when they shall finish, It commonwealth from the time.

They were persecuted and fought against by Antichrist often before; but this
is the last hattel before their death, and rising again to the ruin of
Antichrists Kingdom. Which War (as Par^^s notes) is not only Ecclesiastical
but Civil; for the beast does stir up Princes of Kingdoms and Provinces to make
War against the Witnesses, that he may overcome and kill them.

And shall overcome them.] i. e. not by power and armed force, as in the war
against the Saints, chap 13. 7. which made way for, and effected a cruel bodily
killing of the Saints before mentioned; The enemies have now given over this
bodily killing of the Prophets and Saints almost this 100 years; few in this
space have been called before Tribunals and sentenced to death. Happily some
few examples may be found, like a few drops of rain after a great shower, but
not many. They have forborne this course, not out of any love or compassion to
the people of God, but merely because they durst not, or because they found by
proof that this course prejudiced their cause. Sanguis Martyr. Semen Eccles.
but he overcomes them by his Jesuitical, or rather bottomless pit policy,
bringing it so about, that the secular and ecclesiastical power, like Herod and
Pilat are united against the Witnesses; the latter making use of the former, as
a rider makes use of the power and strength of his horse, to ride over, tread
down, and kill the Witnesses, Rev. 13.3.

And kill them.] Now because these words are somewhat killing and discouraging,
because the same with those, chap. 13. 7. and import as if this slaughter,
because the last, were worse then the first. I will first therefore give you
the judgment and opinion of learned Mede, of this last killing by the Beast.
His words are these,

Neither can it certainly be concluded, that because this killing that the
Beast makes of the Witnesses is the last, therefore it is the greatest and the
worst of all that went before it. But it has and deserves a singular mention
and description amongst all the slaughters of the Beast, perhaps not so much
for the greatness of it (sure not because of the continuance of it) as because
it was to be a sign that the mourning of the witnesses should end soon after
it, and that the ruin of the City of Rome should instantly follow it.

Fo as the compassing about of Jerusalem with Armies, Luke 21.20. did foretell
and was a sign her destruction and desolation was at hand, and near at her
drors; the like here may be intimated (as we may conceive) concerning the
destruction of Babylon; when you shall see that triennial slaughter of the
Witnesses, then know the desolation of that great City of Rome it at hand.

Now this killing of the Witnesses by the Beast or his party, is to be
understood according to the forecited Author, and all late Interpreters,
metaphorically or analogically of a civil death. For he is said to dye in that
notion or sense, who in that station wherein he stood either Political or
Ecclesiastical, or any other, cease to be what he was; hence he is said to
kill, The slaying of the Witnesses is to be understood not of a corporal but
civil death: Caryl on Job cap. 21. 7.
that does punish any man with such a death. For in Scripture language to live,
is often to be, to die is not to be; in which sense we are said to dye to sin,
when we are no longer the servants to sin; and to live to Christ, when we begin
to be Christ's.

Furthermore, This killing is plainly meant a killing them as Witnesses, not as
men; a throwing them out of their places and stations, as if, naturally dead.
Whether this sad time be past, present, or to come, I leave others to judge.
it appears by the following Verses, it must be meant of a civil death, ver. 8.
Their dead bonies lying in the street of the great City three days and a half;
this shows it cannot be meant of a natural death; for how should their bodies
lie dead in that sense, for three years and a half, or say it were for shorter
time?

Again, it is clear from verse. 11. For look what the resurrection of the
Witnesses to life shall be after their killing and lying dead such a time, such
must needs be the killing; for no resurrection properly so called can come to
pass before Christ's coming under the seventh Trumpet. But this Resurrection
here in the Text is to be while yet under the sixth Trumpet. Corrente adhoc
tuba sexta.


Verse 8.
And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City which is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucissed.

Here we have the Witnesses unburied estate, and here is the place described
where they are killed; for where they lie dead, there they must be killed; Now
the Text says, their dead bodies lie in the street of the great City.

By the great City is meant the City of Rome, of which the Angel speaks, Rev.
17.18. and Chap. 14.8. Babylon the great City; Bellarm. l. 2. pontif. Romans c.
2. and l. 3 c. 5.
and that by Babylon is meant the City of Rome, is granted by Bellarmin himself.

It is added, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, i. e. mystically in
a mysterious sense and resemblance, another Sodom for its spiritual uncleaness,
and another Egypt for its Tyranny over Gods people. Here note by the way, when
ever we read of the plagues of Sodom or Egypt in this book, and the Visions of
it, we are to understand the same spiritually, that is, mystically. For when
the Roman state is subject to all these plagues, it is Sodom or Egypt
mystically; we shall meet with something concerning the plagues of Egypt, in
the pouring out of the Vials; as we did in the History of the witnesses, and of
the destruction of Sodo^^ in the judgment of the beast, Chap. 19, and 20, and
10. verse. the meaning of all which is to be opened with this key; hence also it
may be demonstrated, that the Roman Dition is the subject of the Trumpets,
because some of those plagues are Egyptian plagues; but to whom should Egyptian
plagues be brought but to Egypt? which the Holy Ghost here makes to be Rome.

So we see plainly what is meant by the great City, but what is (...), the
Street of this great City, is not so easy to unfold.

For certainly it cannot be meant of any Court, Street, or broad place within
the City, for these reasons.

1. Because our Savior Christ (who is said to be crucified in this street) was
not crucified in any Street, or market place, either of the City of Rom, or of
Jerusalem, but without the gate, Heb. 13.12. therefore the stree of the great
City, is not any street or broad place within the walls of either City, but a
place without the City.

2. The word (...) being put in the singular number, does note such a kind of
state or Republique, the City whereof has only one street, not many; but the
streets in any great and famous City are more then one; a City has many
streets.

3. We must suppose the bodies of the witnesses to lie there where they are
overcome; but there use to be no meetings for War within the Walls of one City,
but if they do not meet in the Enemies Country, yet they meet in the Countries
and Provinces subject to the City.

4. The dead bodies of the slain Witnesses lie three days and an half, where
they may be seen of people, nations and tongues; who will not suffer their
bodies to be buried; therefore they do not lie in the street or broad place of
any great City, but seem to be dispersed abroad through some of the Provinces,
to which for that reason the exposition of the word (...) ought to conform and
agree. If any shall say the Army of the beast, whereby the Witnesses are slain,
may be made up of the people of several nations and tongues, therefore they may
easily see the bodies of them whom they have killed; to this I answer, by
having recourse to the foregoing reason, viz. that so great Armies do not use
to meet within the Walls of a City; For the words are altogether so to be
interpreted, especially when no reason of the Allegory or resemblance can be
pretended, so as there might be no absurdity in the literal sense. What shall I
need to say more? by the word (...) then, is to be understod the Regions or
Territories subject to the Dominon of the great City, Annotations upon the
B^ble.
called a great City, because it has large Territories, or within the Dominion
of the Roman Empire, or in the outplaces thereof. The word in the Hebrew (...)
signifies, Q^icquid omnino extra sit. sive extra urbem. Job. 5.10.
Brightman makes the street here to be some part of the Roman Dition or
Jurisdiction, wherein this sad spectacle is exhibited to be seen; other-some of
the ten Kingdoms that have been in subjection to this great City, though they
are not at this present members of the Political state in the Roman Empire; and
yet it may be have some tie or dependence upon the Popish Roman Empire, for the
great whore sits upon many waters, and reigns over the Kings of the Earth,
Rev. 17.1.18. all which ad eund^m scopum proveniunt.

Now according to this Interpretation of the word (...), there will be no more
obscurity in the following words, (where our Lord was crucified,) Christ is
said to be crucified in the street of the City of Rome, Non in urbe Roma, sed
intra ditionem Romanam. Mede.
or where the bodies of the slain Witnesses are cast out, viz. not in the City
of Rome, but within the Roman Dition or Dominion, within which christ was
literally crucified; thus much of this Verse; now to proceed,

Verse. 9. And they of the People, kindreds and tongues, etc. -- shall not
suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.
Concerning which word, whether it may be taken for cruelty or kindness, seems
doubtful, and cannot certainly be determined but by fulfilling the Prophecy.
Most Writers do interpret the words of the Enemies of the Witnesses, who shall
in this last persecution be so cruel to them, as not to suffer their dead
bodies to be buried, fulfilling that Text, Psa. 79.2. Or rather the intention
of the enemies in this civil killing, is the more to expose them to contempt,
the bodies lie dead in the street, like despised broken Idols, in whom is no
pleasure
But I incline with Mede and others to think the words are to be understood of
the friends of the Witnesses. For their enemies are described verse. 10. by the
name of them that dwell upon the Earth, that rejoice at this slaughter, etc.

But of those that will not suffer their dead bodies to be put into their
Graves; it is said, they of the people, kindreds and tongues, by which they seem
to be plainly distinguished one from another. So then, by them that will not
suffer the bodies of the Witnesses to be buried, understand the friends of the
Witnesses, which may be so many and so great a number, Toward the end of
Antichrists reign, the everlasting Gospel going forth, Rev. 14.15. should bring
in a great Harvest to God, and mightily increase the number of the Witnesses.
Shall see their dead bodies; The word in the Greek does import, Rationem
habere, they shall have some cover over them.
as make their enemies afraid to proceed to great cruelties against them;
their enemies happily would starve them and their families, but their friends
will feed them; their Enemies would banish them, totally destroy them, bury
them under ground; but the friends of the Witnesses will not suffer their
persons nor names, to be so dealt withal. And their Enemies may see their
interest so great in the hearts and affections of the people, kindreds and
tongues, as may give some check to their violence; for the wound being yet
fresh, and affayrs not well settled, happily their Enemies would be loath to make
them desperate, or at least it may so come to pass, by the secret favor and
endeavor of some great person or persons, things shall not be so carried
against the Witnesses as there shall be no hope of a Resurrection.

Three days and an half] i. e. three years and a half; but here is to be noted,
the time here to be computed is not the killing, but the time they shall iye
dead, and without life after they are killed; but how long the war lasts, Quam
diu entem bellum ipsum durabit, quantu ^^que tempus dabitur prophetis
interficiendis, non nisi vaticinii complementum docebit, Mede.
and how long time shall be given for the killing of the witnesses, the
fulfilling of the Propehcy will best tell us.

Verse 10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice ever them, and make
merry, and send gifts one to another, etc.
Of the manner of sending gifts in great rejoycings, see Ester 9.19, 20.

They joy now they are rid of, and avenged of these Witnesses, who vexed and
troubled their consciences. As upon the news of the French massacre, which
begun on Bartholmew day, a Jubilee was proclaimed at Rome, the Cardinal of
Lorain gave a thousand crowns to the messenger, and the Pope caused the
massacre to be painted in his Palace: So no doubt such an eminent civil
slaughter in Protestant Churches, must needs fill all the Popish world with
rejoycings and longs of triumph; the Bestian party then accounting the day
theirs, and that they have obtained a complete victory.

Further note, the Beasts or Beastian parties triumph for three days and a
half, must necessarily be computed and estimated, not from the end of the
slaughter in all the Churches, but from the slaughter that shall be in that
Church wherein the Prophets shall be last slain. Neither can we imagine it to
be otherwise, unless we should furmise the slaughter of the Prophets to end in
all the Churches at once, which to be done in so many several States and
Nations at once, is hardly possible. But this joy of the Inhabitants of the
earth, i. e. the Antichristian world, is but short; for v. 14. there is a woe
Trumpet co Antichrist, and all his Creatures and Confederates, and all the
enemies of the Saints, threatening the last and worst of woeful destructions to
them. Woe, says Christ, to them that laugh; for they shall weep.

Thus much of the War against, killing, and the lying dead of the Witnesses;
Now of their Resurrection, Ascension, and the consequents thereof, in the 11th.
and following verses.

Verse 11. And after three days and a half the Spirit of life from God entered
into them, etc.
Here begins now the third Period, Period. 3.
where the enemies of the Gospel are quelled, and therewith does break forth
the true peace and tranquillity of the Church. When these three days, or three
years and a half come to an end, then also together therewith do expire the
forty two months of treading the holy City under foot. ver. 2. The 120 and 60
days of the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, verse. 3. The 1200 and 60 days
of the woman in the wilderness, chap. 12.6. the forty two months of the Beast
and his blasphemies, c. 13.5. The times, time and half a time; which is 1200
and 60 days of the Beast with ten horns, speaking great words against the most
High, and wearing out the Saints, mentioned in the book of Daniel, chap
7.21.12.6. But to come to the Text,

After three days and a half the spirit of life etc.] Such as the death of the
Witnesses was, such will be their resurrection from the dead, viz. a restoring
them to their former state, and that not so much by any endeavor of their own,
or by any humane help, as by the finger of God, who is wonderful in all his
works. So much is intimated in these words; The Spirit of life from God shall
enter into them. We have such an expression concerning the lews in the
Captivity of Babylon; I will put my Spirit within you, and ye shall live, and I
will place you in your own land. The same will befall he slain Witnesses; God
will lend them an unexpected help by such means as never entered into any man's
man's thoughts; God will revive them again.

And they stood upon their feet,] i.e. they appear again in the public
Congregations, not as hearers only, but as Masters of the Assemblies, and take
possession of their places, and publicly exercise their ministerial Office;
they are unbound and loosed from their grave-cloaths (as Luzarus was when he
came forth) and stood upon their feet; they are delivered from the bonds and
cords, and heavy yokes of humane laws and constitutions that killed them and
kept them dead, and hindered their resurrection.

And great fear fell upon them that saw them.] i.e. as there was great joy and
exultation among the Beastian party at then killing and lying dead, so there
will be great terror when they shall fee this resurrection of the Witnesses to
their former places and functions; then will there be a lively example set
before us of that which is written in the book of Wisdom, chap. 5.

Verse 12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, soying, Come up hither.
That is, The Witnesses are not only restored to their former place and
station; but they are raised up to some higher degree of honor: for so says
Mede, their being taken up by a cloud into heaven signifies. See Dan. 7.13.
Isa. 14.13. and 19. They shall be called up by the supreme Magistrate to higher
honor and esteem then before.

And they ascend up to heaven.] i.e. they enter into their public charges in
the Church heaven, and perform their ministry with great authority.

And their enemies beheld them.] i.e. they that did so before rejoice at their
sufferings: wherein is verified concerning them what is threatened, Jer. 50.11,
to 13.

Verse 13. And the same hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth part
of the City fell, and there were slain in the earthquake the names of men seven
thousand.
At what time the Witnesses or Prophets ary raised to life, As the natural
earthquake shakes the earth, so mystical earthquakes make Kingdoms quake with
wars and troubles. Annot. on Bible.
and ascend into heaven, there is a great earthquake, i.e. great commotion of
the Nations, a great resurrection and combustion in the Roman Empire, a great
mutation and change of Political affairs, a great turn of the times. Which
great commotion of the Nations, and strange turn of things makes way for the
resurrection of the Witnesses, and their restoring to life again, with so great
an increase of honor and esteem. The effect of which great earthquake is the
fall of the tenth part of the City, and the slaughter of 7000 names of men.

Now that we may come as near to the true sense and meaning of these words as
possibly we can, I will lay down and prove two things which will be good
grounds to go upon in the explication of the Text.

1. Because no judgment can befall the Beast but what is contained in some of
the Vials: This same ruin of Rome here described belongs to the fifth Vial;
the proof of which is, there is the same subject of the plague in both places,
viz. in this 11. chap. and in chap. 16. here it is the great City, there it is
the throne and seat of the Beast; for Rome, the great City, to be the seat of
the beast, is so well known that it needs no proof. It is further proved,
because the ruin that is here described, does so nearly precede the total
destruction of the Beast, at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, as nothing is
said to intervene or come between but the passing away of the second woe. But
now to the total abolition of the Beast is necessary the pouring out of the
seventh Vial; to the passing away of the second woe, or that plague from
Euphrates, is necessary the pouring out of the fixed Vial; therefore the
destruction of the great City which goes next before the passing away of the
second woe, does belong to the fifth Vial.

2. The second thing premised and proved in order to the interpretation of this
verse, is this, viz. The ^^ipe of the great City in verse. 13. is the very same
destruction of Babylon which is prophefied of c. 18. which I prove thus,
because it is certain from that Chapter, that that very same destruction of
Babylon, or of the City of Rome, does go before the full destruction of the
Beast, and the beginning of Christ's glorious Kingdom, at the founding of the
seventh Trumpet. But now the destruction of the City which is here declared,
does so nigh antecede that very Kingdom of Christ, that the Spirit of God
(making mention of no other destruction between) passes immediately to that
kingdom, and the description of the seventh Trumpet. Therefore one and the same
destruction of that City must of necessity be described in both; for who can
imagine or believe that the holy Ghost should altogether pass by the greatest
destruction of all, and make mention of some lesser slaughters between, no way
to be compared to it.

These things being so, it follows then, that the Interpretation of these words
be levelled to this rule, and as it were tried by this touchstone, and so to
seek such a sense and meaning of these words as does best agree with the
description of that destruction of Babylon; which with what reason may be, we
may now see. Besides, the word (...), fell, must needs note some effect of an
Earthquake, cannot agree to this Interpretation.


And the touth part of the City fell] By which (I conceive) is not meant the
tenth out of many Kingdoms given to the Pope, now taken from him; for then the
word should be rather (...), then (...). Nor yet the ten Kingdoms, or any of
them subject to the Dominion of the City of Rome. who in this commotion of the
Nations, fall off from the Papal State, and will be subject to it no longer.

But by this DEKATON, this tenth part of the City, I agree with Mede, is meant
the fall and destruction of whole Rome, the City that now is, which is but the
tenth part of that which it was, when it was in its glory. The City of Rome
that now is, in regard of the old City of Rome, when she was in her flourishing
condition, is but the tenth part, as the same is proved by Lipsius. The holy
Ghost in the words intimates as much. Admirand lib. 3.
So much of the great City as was remaining when the great earthquake came, at
that time was ruined, viz. the tenth part of the City; for nine parts many ages
before were fallen, partly by the desolations of war brought upon it so many
times by the barbarous nations, and partly decayed and worn away with time, and
partly destroyed with lightning and tempest; the tenth was reserved for the
fate of the Papal state, the mother of Harlots, which by this earthquake, at
the resurrection of the Witnesses shall be utterly destroyed.

It is added, And in the earthquake wire slain of men (Greek) names of men,
seven thousand.] Note here, the Text does not say 7000 are slain by the fall of
the City, but 7000 are slain in the earthquake, which earthquake is to shake
down the whole kingdom of the Beast throughout the world; therefore by the 7000
men must not be understood (I conceive) so many individual persons. For it is not
likely the pouring out of the Vial upon the throne of the Beast, will pass away
with so small a slaughter of men. Sure we are, shaking down of the whole
kingdom of the Beast, the total destruction of Babylon, Chap. 16.
which the holy Ghost intimates by this earthquake elsewhere in the Revelation,
will not be without the slaughter of a far greater number then 7000 men. To
satisfit this doubt therefore, we must consider what may be meant by the City
here, and what by the names of men.

First, The City or great City, has a double acceptance in these Prophesies,
Being taken either for

First, The Royal City of the Beast, viz. the City of Rome; called the throne
or seat of the Beast, upon which the fifth Vial is poured out; or,

Secondly, for the Citizens, or for the Romish City, constituted of the Pope
and his Cardinals, and the whole troop of the Romish clergy, who, Rome being
destroyed, burnt to ashes and levelled to the ground, not to be inhabited any
more, shall betake themselves to another habitation; and so shall be reserved
to the last Vial, at the pouring out of which it is said (besides the
destruction of others, of all lands, Nations and Cities, in this earthquake so
great as never was such since man was upon the face of the earth) great Babylon
came into remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath.

For that burning and destruction of Babylon (taken for the Royal City of the
beast) that is described, Chap. 18, and 19. does altogether precede the
destruction of the beast and the False Prophet, as is manifest in the Text. To
sum up all in a word, happily it may so come to pass, that, that first
destruction of Babylon, viz. of the City of Rome, may be without any very great
slaughter, at least, without the total destruction of the Citizens; for though
the City be utterly destroyed, yet a great part of the Citizens may fly from
the destruction of the City, timely consulting their own safety, or for some
other cause, which the event will make manifest; and thus the doubt or scruple
concerning the small number of the slain may be satisfied.

2. And will yet more fully, if we consider what number may be designed in the
words, names of Men.

Names of men] may be taken for eminent and renowned Men, high and great
persons, chief heads of Noble Families. Names of men, is as much as to say men
of name; An Hypallage frequent in Scripture, as silver Shekels for Shekels of
silver, Levit. 5. the Law of righteousness, for the righteousness of the Law,
Romans 9. Riches of grace for rich grace, Ephesians. 1. So names of men may here be
put for men of name, persons of great honor and dignity, in opposition to men
without name, base and ignoble Persons, Job 30. According to this
interpretation (which nothing can be said against) Names of Men signifing high
and great persons (suppose they be of the Popish Ecclesiastical Order, whom we
call Church men by great names and titles, distinguished from the inferior
Clergy) if 7000 of these be slain, how many of a lower rank and order, which
the Holy Ghost would not so much as count or reckon?

Besides this, there may another interpretation be given of (Names of Men) viz.
Companies and Societies of men, which are wont to be called by proper names, as
well as particular men, as Cities, Towns, Parishes, Villages, Monasteries, and
Nunneries; and what are these (if we consider the Matter) but names of men, as
the Roman name is put for the Romans themselves; the Thebane Polity, is called
the Thebane name; what is therefore the Names of those humane Societies,
whether they be either of Rome, or in that they call the Church State, be the
7000 in this great Earthquake to be slain, i. e. subdued by the adverse power,
which the Scripture uses to call death; but we must not rashly determine any
thing in a thing to come; the best commentary of a Prophecy, is the fulfilling
of it; but I bring these things to show, that of these words a larger sense may
be given then is commonly conceived. When the word (Name) in Scripture does not
use to be restrained to one single signification, neither are (Names of men)
joined together in any place of Scripture but in this, neither is the word
((...)) Names, taken simply for particular single persons, but only in two
places, Acts 1.15. Rev. 3.4. in other places it has several significations.

It follows, And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of
Heaven] i. e. the rest of the Bestian party, are amazed and terrified, and
thereby compelled to acknowledge the just judgments of God, which he has
poured out upon them, and to confess their sins, which to do, is to give glory
to God.

Verse. 14. The second we is past, and be bold the third we comes quickly.
The Second we is past] the meaning is, this great Earthquake continues to the
end of the second we, or of the sixth Trumpet; together with which is to be
finished the Prophesying of the mourning Witnesses; For after so great a
Victory over the beast, and their ascending up into the Church-Heaven with so
great honor, they put on their mourning weeds no more.

But now if this second woe, or plague of the sixth Trumpet, be the Turks from
Euphrates, flowing in upon, and overrunning the Roman Empire in times past, as
was interpreted Chap. 9. it cannot be but the passing away of this second woe
must be the overthrow of the Turkish Empire, the drying up of the waters of
Euphrates, at the end of the pouring out of the fifth Vial, whereby way is made
for the coming of the Kings of the east, cap. 16.12.

At which coming of the Kings of the East, (least there should be left too wide
a space betwixt both Trumpets) the seventh Trumpet seems to begin; Hiatus.
And so the wonderful preparation of the beast and false Prophet to the
Armageddon Battle ( Cap. 16.13.) together with the event thereof at the pouring
out of the last Vial, ( verse. 17.) must be made to begin at the sounding of the
seventh trumpet. And truly it seems very congruous, that the preparation to
the Battle, as well as the battle it self, should appertain to the same
Trumpet; but here an objection must be removed out of the way, viz.

Object. Whether the Beasts 42 months, and the Witnesses 1200 and 60 days, are
one and the same term? but now these days of the mourning Witnesses, ending at
the passing away of the sixth trumpet plague, or second we, It may very well be
asked why the months of the beasts may not be supposed to be longer, when after
this time, so great a part of the beast still remains, not to be quite
abolished till the beginning of the seventh Trumpet. It may be answered.

Answ. This may be either because at the calling of the Jews (there called the
Kings from the East) a new kingdom begins. Or because in the duration of the
beasts reign, there is an ey or respect chiefly to the Empire of the City of
Rome; but now this great Royal City of the Beast in this Earthquake is taken
and demolished; So that the Beast from thenceforth shall have changed his form;
when he is driven from his Metropolis, it can no longer be counted (which is
the signification of his other seven heads) a seven-mountained Kingdom.

Behold the third woe comes quickly.] This begins at the sound of the seventh
Trumpet. Wherefore these words immediately follow,

Verse 15. And the seventh Angel sounded.
And the seventh Angel sounds a Jubilee, and then there be great proclamations
and acclamations in heaven, Called by some Divines the wo-joy Trumpet.
that the kingdoms of the world are the kingdoms of Christ; and whereas before
the Devil, Dragon, and Beast and his horns reigned, now Christ takes to himself
his great power, and reigns, for which the whole Church under the type of 24.
Elders praise him, though the Nations be angry, as they ever are, when Christ
puts forth his just power.

Verse 15, 16, 17, 18.
He now gives reward unto his servants the Prophets, etc. and destroys them
that destroyed the earth; that is, he ruins the wicked and Idolatrous
generation of Antichrist, who wasted his Church before, ver. 18. His tabernacle
is now open in heaven, and the ark of his testimony seen, ver. 19. i.e. Christ
represented by the ark, is clearly manifested; before, that wicked generation
had forbidden men to read the Scriptures, had kept them in unknown tongues, and
involved the mysteries of Christ in Masses, and rude heaps of other
superstitious Ceremonies; but now he and all his excellencies shall be fully
manifested to the Nations.

Now I will not make Application of the explications of this Chapter, it being
beyond my scope; only from the time of Antichrists reign mentioned in this
Chapter, viz. 1200 and 60 years, and the time of the Witnesses lying dead,
which is three years and a half, we may infer for our comfort;

1. That no sorrows or afflictions can steal upon the Church, but all are
foreseen and determined by God. In all our sorrows and restraints, consider
they are foreseen of God, and we are not unseen in them. Let us with Hagar in
the Wilderness say, Then God see me; Have I also looked after him that sees
me? Genesis 16.13.

2. God has measured out all the afflictions of his Church; that though her
enemies may disturb and hinder pure Religion by force and violence, yet it is
but for an appointed time. Antiochus may interrupt Jewish Religion, and bring
in swines flesh into the Temple; but it is but for three years and ten days, a
time, times and a piece of time. Antichrist, that grand enemy of Gods Church,
may make havoc, and tread under foot the holy City; but it but forty two
months, a time, times, and half a time; 1200 and 60 days Jezabel wastes the
Church, and causes the Prophets to hide themselves in caves, but it was but
three years and a half in the letter; the Jews may bury Christ in the grave,
and roll a stone upon him, and seal and watch the Sepulcher; but they can keep
him down but only three days. Know whatever affliction thy self or any member
or the whole Church sustaineth, it is not endless; neither shall the whole nor
parts suffer one hour more then Gods wisdom has assigned: The proudest waves
cannot pass those bounds and banks which Gods power has set them.

3. In all the present sufferings and oppressions of the Church this comfort
abides by the Godly, that she is not lest of God, nor destitute of his
presence, nor without a promise of deliverance, nor without faith of the
^ccomlishpment, nor without a joyful hope that the time of this oppression and
suppression of the Church is not far from Expiration. Dr. More in his book of
the mystery of godliness, Book 5. cap. 17. of the usefulness of Apocalyptick
Visions, painted 1660.


To which I will only add for a Conclusion the words of a late learned Writer.

I am not ashamed to profess that I think it clear out of the Apocalypse that
the scene of things in Christendom, Dies vel annus certe statui non potest in
quem erunt exiqu^iae Rome: tam^^ (...), aliis Scripturis pe ^spic^^ (...) est,
arbitror, non differendas ad longiss^ (...) ^ltra Sexagi^^ (...). Brightman
Apocalyp. cap. 19. ve^. (...): The time when he wrote this Book, appears in his
Epistle, to be 1606 Feb. 25.
will in a short time be very much changed for the better; the time of the
Churches appearing that is purely Apostolical has in life and doctrine,
appears by the computation of Prophecy to be very near at hand, when the
Witnesses shall rise, and the woman come out of the wilderness, and the
kingdoms of the world shall be the kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he
shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.11. And he further says.

There is no stability to be expected in Christian kingdoms (but vengeance will
ever and ap^n flow in upon them) till that City be resed, whose not only
foundation is laid in Twelve, but whose Gates, Tribes, Angels, the by^adth and
height of the wall, and the l^llid content of the whole City, are nothing else
but the replication still of Twelve throughout; that is to say, till that
Church appear that is purely Apostolical in Doctrine, Worship, etc.

Which time being so very near at hand as appears by compute of prophecy, it
should be a great encouragement for every one to look thitherwn^d, Besides, the
characters set upon the 1200 and 60 days, as the treading down of the holy
City, cap. 11.2. the division of the Roman Empire into two parts, cap. 12.14.
and the rising of the Beast out of the Sea, cap. 13.2. Historians agree to be
soon after or about the beginning of the fourth Century.
and to shake off that dullness and lethargicalness that has possessed the
world so long, as if it would never be better. Wherefore let every Chr^stian
believe, repent, pray, reform himself, exhort and encourage his neighbor,
conquer his corruptions, resist unto blood, striving against sin. For these
times come not by rapine and violence, but by increase of righteousness upon
the earth.

Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. Rev. 22.7.

To him which is, and which was and is to come, the Almighty, be glory and
dominion for ever and ever, Amen, Rev. 16.8.

FINIS.

