TWO SPEECHES Made in the House of PEERS, On Monday the 19th. of December,
For, and Against Accommodation.

The one by the Earl of PEMBROKE, the other by the Lord BROOK.

The latter Printed by the desire of the House of COMMONS.

Printed in the Year M.CD.XLII.

THE EARL OF PEMBROKE'S SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT on Monday the 19th of December
concerning ACCOMMODATION.
My Lords,
I Have not used to trouble you with long Speeches, I know I am an ill Speaker,
but though I am no Scholar, I am an honest man, and have a good heart to my
King and Country.

I have more to loose then many of these who so hotly oppose an Accommodation: I
will not forfeit mine estate to satisfy their humors or ambitions. My Lords,
it is time to look about us, and not to suffer our selves to be fooled out of
our Lives, our Honors, and our fortunes, to help those men, who when their
turns are served, will despise us; and begin to laugh at us already.

A fellow here of the Town, an ordinary, skurvie fellow, told me the other
day to my face, that he cared not if I left them to morrow: nay, if all the
Lords (except three or four that he named, and said, he was sure would not
leave: them) went to the King, they should do their business the better: yet
my Lords, I think we have helped them: I am sure they could never have
brought it to this without us. If we had not joined with them: I think the
People would not have followed the House of Commons, now they can do their
business without us: 'twill be worse shortly if we do not look about us.

My Lords, we were told this time twelve month, if we would put out the
Bishops out of the Lords House, no further attempt should be made upon the
Church: I am sure I was promised so, by some who would be thought honest men,
and when I told them, it was reported that they meant to take away Episcopacie,
and the Book of Common Prayer, they protested to me, that in the first they
intended nothing but to appoint some godly Ministers to assist the Bishops in
Ordination, and some other things that I do not understand: and for the Book
of Common Prayer, they who were strictest against it, and would never be
present at it, assured me that if it were once confirmed by Act of Parliament
(for they said many things were put into it by the Bishops, without Authority)
they would be content, and on my conscience so they would, if they had had the
places they then looked for.

Now nothing will content them, but no Bishop, no Book of Common Prayer, and
shortly it will be no Lords, no Gentlemen, and no books at all, for we have
Preachers already, that can neither write nor read.

My Lords, I wonder what we shall get by this war, we venture more then other
men. I am sure I venture more then five hundred of them, and the most I can
look for is to escape undoing; what between being a Traitor, and being a
Malignant, we have but a narrow way to walk in: We hear every base fellow
say in the street as we pass by in our Coaches, that they hope to see us a
foot shortly, and to be as good men as the Lords, and I think they will be as
good as their words, if we take this course.

They say they will have no Peace without Truth: 'Death, have we no truth? Have
we lived all this while in ignorance: I think our Fathers were as wise men as
they. Had we no truth in Q. Elizabeth's time? Have not all our famous, Learned
Divines been able to teach us truth, but must we learn it only out of Tubs.

My Lords, I am no Scholar, But I understand men, and I had rather continue
ignorant still then enjoy the truth these men would have; I have served the
Kings Father, and himself, and though I have been so unhappy to fall into his
displeasure, no body shall persuade me to turn Traitor, I have too much to
loose.

I am a true Protestant, and I love the King and Kingdom, and I am sure war
is good for neither of them. I would every bodies faults were forgiven them,
and I think we should all then take heed how we committed new.

Good my Lords, let us have Peace, and if these men will not consent to it, let
us think of some other way to get it.

The Lord BROOKE'S Speech, in Answer to the former.
My Lords,
SOmewhat that fell from the Lord who spoke last calls me up, he tells you what
he was promised by some, that this and that Reformation would content them, and
they would press no further; besides the conversation that we all know has
been between them, he invited you by his eye to think a Noble Lord on the
Viscounts Bench concerned: it is true, several discourses have often passed
between them in my hearing of this business, and it is very like he did not
usually acquaint him with all his thoughts. If he found he was not like to hold
out to the end of the journey, he was not to be blamed for desiring his company
as far as he was willing to go; the other part would be the easier performed
by those to whom the Lord has revealed his will. If he has been made an
Instrument of more service to God and his Country then he intended, he should
rather thank the means that cozened him to so much good, then because his
faith fails in the race, reproach them who first encouraged him to run. If
he has done nothing but what his conscience persuaded him was just and fit,
he has no cause to complain; if otherwise, I am sure nothing that my friend
said to him, or promised him, can be his excuse. He tells you much of what he
has to loose, and into what great contempt the Nobility will grow if there be
not a speedy Accommodation; and I fear these vile Considerations has hung
Plummets on some of our wings, which by this time would have mounted us higher;
but these are the baytes the enemy of godliness and true holiness flings in
the way to discourage worldly minds from fighting the good fight of the Lord.
We do not find that among all the Acts of the Creation, the Almighty ever
made an Earl, or a Lord; I will not deny but that sometimes (not always) the
hearts of Princes have been moved by providence to advance some persons to
those degrees; and surely if we shall be contented for the setting forward a
good cause, to mingle our selves with the meanest of the people, for the
procuring a parity in the Church, to consent to a parity in the State; and for
the subduing the pride of Kings, for a time to part with the power of Noblemen,
I doubt not but when the good work in hand shall be finished, we shall be
again advanced above our brethren, according to our several talents, and
govern them according to that rule which shall most advantage Gods cause.

My Lords, that Lord shall not find fault with me for concealing my
intentions, I will deal freely with him, I am with all my heart against this
Accommodation, against any whisper or thought of Accommodation, till His
Majesty shall submit to our 19 Propositions, and to all the Propositions we
have since made; and delivered up all those wicked evil Counselors, who have
saucily told him, it is lawful for him to deny us any thing: I know we have
many difficulties to wrestle with, and that many fall from us daily; they who
have much to lose (as that Lord said) will be quickly weary of us, and yet some
men of good fortunes will not leave us; they who have a sense of gratitude, of
passed obligations, or future hopes from His Majesty, will be startled at our
Resolution: yet I see many here the most notoriously obliged, indeed as much as
servants can be to a master, in this good cause have mastered those vulgar
considerations, and had the courage almost to despise him to his face; besides,
the wisest men will not think themselves incapable of future favors, if they
use their utmost power to reduce him to a necessity of granting: they who are
transported with natural affection to their Fathers and Brothers, Kindred,
Friends, will not keep us company; yet this troubles me the less, whilst I
see those noble Lords in my eye, (upon whom I can never look enough) who
banishing those womanish and effeminate fancies, cheerfully undertook to serve
against that Army, wherein they knew their own Fathers were; and on my
conscience (I speak it to their honor) had they met them alone, would piously
have sacrifized them to the commands of both Houses. They who think that
humane Laws can bind the conscience, and will examine the oaths they have
taken, according to the Interpretation of men, will in time fall from us: But
such who religiously consider that such moral Precepts are fitter for Heathens
then for Christians, and that we ought to lead our lives according to the rule
of Gods Word; and that the Laws of the Land (being but man's invention) must
not check Gods children in doing the work of their heavenly Father, will not
faint in their duty.

My Lords, it is a singular instance of Gods blessing upon this Parliament,
that these truths which the pride and superstition of the Bishops, used all
possible means to smother, is now taught in Pulpits, that the poor peoples
zeal to God may not be corrupted by their duty to the King. By the Christian
labor of these painful Preachers, we shall not want hands to bring all our
wishes to pass; and let not us out of any worldly respects, of Estate, Wives,
Children, Honor, good Nature, Justice, Compassion, care of Trade, of Laws,
grow slack and lazy in our undertakings, upon the success of which the eyes of
Christendom are fixed; but let us proceed to shed the blood of the ungodly.

And so my Lords, hoping that what that Lord has said, has moved nothing with
you, or the most of you; and that what he can do will prevail as little in
other places: I have expressed the thoughts of my heart to you, and if the
House shall incline that way, shall desire leave to enter my Protestation
against any Accommodation.

Wednesday the 21th of December.

Resolved upon the Question, That Mr Boswell be desired to wait upon the Lord
Brook, and in the name of this House to give his Lordship thanks for the
excellent Speech he lately made in the House of Peers, against an
Accommodation, and to desire his Lordship (since this House is informed that
the Earl of Pembroke has given many Copies of his Speech, which occasioned
the other) that he will cause that Speech to be printed and published.

Henry Elsinge, Cl. Dom. Com.

FINIS.

