AN ANSWER To that common OBJECTION against the QUAKERS, That they condemn all
but Themselves; With a Loving and Faithful Advertisement to the Nation and
Powers thereof.
OBJECTION.
IT is commonly Objected against us, That we condemn all but our selves, all
the Protestant Churches, Martyrs, and Worthies formerly (many of whom were
valiant Champions against Rome, and diverse of them sealed their Testimony with
their blood) and all sorts of Christians and Professors at present, who are not
just of our stamp and way, though otherwise never so zealous and
upright-hearted toward God.

ANSWER.
The Protestant Churches (as they are called in way of distinction from the
Church of Rome) the blessed Martyrs, who suffered for the Testimony of a pure
Conscience toward God, and all the Worthies of the Lord in their several
Generations, who fought against that Scarlet Whore, were accepted of God in
their Testimony against Her, and are not disowned by us, but dearly owned and
honored therein: And for agreeing with them in their testimony in several
things, as against deriving of a Ministry from Rome (which Luther wrote
against, and John Hus prophesied of another Ministry to arise) and against
maintaining the Gospel Ministry by Tithes, or any other way of forced
Maintenance, which (till Popery grew very strong and powerful) was known to
have been free, and against swearing, etc. (Walter Brute said, the perfection
of Christian men is not to swear at all, because they are so commanded of
Christ, whose commandment must in no case be broken, although that the City of
Rome is contrary to this Doctrine of Christ, Fox his Acts and Monuments, Page
460, 461. And see also Page 495. Thorp's testimony both about Tithes and
Swearing.) For these very things and such like (as for following of Christ, in
not receiving or giving that honor which is out of the faith, and for
testifying against the hypocrisies and corruptions of our age) do we suffer in
this our day, even as they did in their day, from the same Spirit that
persecuted them; which though it has much changed its form and way of
appearance, yet still retains the same nature.

But all things were not discovered at once. The times were then dark, and the
light small: yet they being faithful according to what was discovered, were
precious in the Lords eyes: and what through ignorance they erred in, the Lord
winked at and overlooked, being pleased with that sincerity and simplicity of
heart, which he had stirred up in them toward himself. But if they were now
alive in these our days, and should depart from the sincerity which was then
in them, and oppose the Light of this age; they would not then be accepted of
the Lord, but their former sincerity would be forgotten. For the Light shines
more and more toward the perfect day: and it is not the owning of the Light as
it shone in the foregoing ages, which will now commend any man to God, but the
knowing and subjecting to the Light of the present age. Even as in these our
days, there was (some years ago) an honest zeal and true simplicity stirring
in the Puritans (especially among the Non-conformists of them) which was of the
Lord, and was very dear to him: And had the generations of this age abode
there, they would have been able to have followed the Lord in every further
step and leading of his Spirit. But departing from that into some form or
other, the true simplicity withered, and another thing began to live in them;
and so they settled upon their lees, magnifying the form they had chose to
themselves, till at length their hearts became hardened from the pure fear, even
to the contracting of a spirit of profaneness, insomuch as they could mock at
the next remove and discovery of the Spirit as some new Light: and so by
degrees have grown persecutors of that Spirit in its outgoings in the people
of the Lord, which they themselves had once some taste of, while they were
reproached for Puritans. And the God of this world, who at first tempted them
aside into the form, has at length prevailed so far to blind them therewith,
that they can neither see what spirit they themselves are of, nor what spirit
it is they persecute.

Let therefore people consider the truth of the thing, as it is before the
Lord: We do not cast dirt upon any, in whom the truth of God has stirred and
appeared in any measure in former ages, or in this our age: but this we
testify against, to wit, the setting up of any form without the life and
power: for it is the erring spirit which still cries up the form, to keep down
the power by the form, and so by the help of it to bewitch from the Spirit,
wherein is the life, and not in the form. This was the painted Jezabel of the
Apostles age, false teachers finely dressed up themselves with the form of
godliness, and then under this cover they could deny the power, and make head
against it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. how easy is it for them who appear in the form of the
doctrines of the Gospel, in the form of zeal, in the form of holiness, to pass
in a Nation for the true Church, and then to asperse them for Heretics, who
(appearing in the power) cannot but deny that form which is without the power.
This is the great Witch of this age (even that spirit of zeal and devotion,
which is best clothed and decked with the form without the power) which though
men (who judge of the things of God after the flesh) justify, admire, and much
contend for in her several shapes and dresses (some being for one, some for
another) yet the Lord is searching after her, and will find her out with his
eternal flames, which will make her manifest, and all her lovers shall dread
her burning and bed of torment. Now as all along the Apostasy, this bewitching
spirit (this spirit which bewitcheth from the power) has crept up under a form
of Church worship and holiness: so the other Spirit (the pure Spirit of life,
the Spirit of true zeal, and fear of the Lord) has still appeared more and
more out of the forms. Who were the best Preachers, and most eminent Christians
in the Puritan days? Were they not those who least minded the form then, nay
indeed, who were most against the form, and persecuted for their conscientious
stumbling at it? and who were the greatest persecutors then, but they who were
most zealous for the form, both of the government and worship of the Church of
England? And where is the persecuting spirit next to be looked for, but in the
forms which should next appear? And where likewise is the appearance of the
true spirit next to be looked for, but in those whom the Lord should raise up
to testify against those forms, and to be the succeeding sufferers for their
testimony, as the Puritans had been foregoing sufferers for their testimony?

Yet if there be any persons left, among any of the forms which have appeared
(whether former or later) that have not lost their sincerity and true zeal
toward God, them we own and have unity with, so far as they keep, or rather
are kept thereto. If there be any among the Episcopal sort, that in truth of
heart desire to fear the Lord, and look upon the Common Prayer Book as an
acceptable way of worshipping him; we pity their blindness, yet are tender
toward them, and would not have the simplicity persecuted in them because of
this, but rather cherished. If there be any among the Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers, or any other sort, that in truth of heart
wait upon the Lord in those ways, and do not find a deadness overgrown them,
but a pure, fresh, lively zeal toward God, with an unfeigned love to his
people, our hearts are one with this; and we cannot fight against this good
thing in any of them, though in love to them we testify, that their form and
way of worship is their present loss and hinderance yet we doubt not, but that
the Lord (in his time) will make manifest to such the Light of this age, which
is the very thing the People of God in many foregoing ages have been praying
for. But this is our lamentation, that forms and ways of worship abound, but
the Puritan-Principle, the Puritanspirit is lost and drowned in them all; and
that men are hardened against our testimony, not from the remainders of the
simplicity in them, but because they are erred from the simplicity, and fallen
in league with another spirit, which has lain lurking in forms of knowledge
and worship (to tempt aside from the simplicity, and to hide the sight of the
life and power from the panting soul) all this night of the Apostasy.

Now mark how easy and natural it is to that spirit to enter into a form, to
cry up a form, to set up a form in a Nation, City, or Country, (doubtless it
had been done in this Nation long ago, had not the mighty hand of the Lord
withstood it.) When the evil and unclean spirit is detected and driven out of
one form, if it does not get another suddenly to appear in and tempt with, it
must needs lose many of its Subjects. The strumpet or false Church is forced
(as God discovers her nakedness and lewdness) to change her dresses and
appearances, to new-trick and adorn her bed: and then, as if she also were
changed, and were now no longer the same, she comes forth again with boldness,
and tempts the young man again to come in unto her, Prove. 7. 16. And thus she
casts down many wounded, yea many strong men have been slain by her, verse.
26. who otherwise would have pondered the path of life, chap. 5. 6. had they
not been ensnared by her flatteries, who forsakes the guide of her youth, and
forgets the Covenant of her God, Chap. 2. 17. There is no more certain and
ready way to suppress truth, and to betray the honesty which is singly
searching after it, than to present a form of godliness or worship, as the
proper way of meeting with it: for hereby the soul is lulled asleep with a
false hope, until the freshness of its desire begins to die, and its life to
wither; and then the fleshly part easily grows into unity with, and zeal for
that form which indeed is of the flesh, though it appeared and tempted as if it
had been otherwise. And how many have gone a great way toward Hell, and have
bin deeply entangled and distressed in the Chambers of death, by entering into
this strumpets Church or house which they then (through the subtilty of her
deceit) took for the house or Church of God? Pro. 7. 27. Consider the thing a
little seriously: When the evil spirit is driven out of his strong hold of
gross Popery, whither should he run but into Episcopacy? When he is driven out
of Episcopacy, whither should he run but into Presbytery? When he is driven out
of Presbytery, whither should he run but into Independency? When he is driven
but of Independency, whither should he run but into Anabaptism? When he is
driven out of Anabaptism, whither should he run but into a way of Seeking? And
what is his end of running into Episcopacy, but to save alive that spirit which
was hunted out of Popery (and could abide no longer there) and so the better
(and the safer from being discerned) to reproach and persecute the other spirit
(where ever it appeared) under nicknames of Puritans, Separatists, Brownists,
Roundheads, etc. And what is his end afterward of running into Presbytery,
but to save that alive which was hunted out of Episcopacy, and to persecute the
former truly zealous Spirit (where it should further appear afterward) by
means of that form? Thus the forms and appearances of things change, but the
fight is still the same, the evil spirit still getting uppermost under a form
of godliness, and from thence shooting forth its arrows at those that seek
after purity of heart, and cannot but testify against those forms where the
impure one lodges.

This then is the sum of our answer in this respect: we are not against the
true life and power of godliness; wherever it has appeared, or yet appears
under the vail of any form whatsoever. Nay all persons who singly wait upon the
Lord, in the simplicity and sincerity of their hearts, whether under any form,
or out of forms (that matters little to us) are very dear unto us in the Lord.
But we are against all forms, Images, imitations, and appearances, which betray
the simplicity and sincerity of the heart, keep the life in bondage, and
endanger the loss of the soul. And too many such now there are, which hold the
immortal seed of life in captivity under death, over which we cannot but mourn,
and wait for its breaking off the chains, and its rising out of all its graves
into its own pure life, power, and fullness of liberty in the Lord.

A loving and faithful Advertisement to the Nation and Powers thereof.
O King, O Parliament, O Nation of England consider, before the Decree come
forth, before the ruin of the Nation (with the Powers thereof) be irrevocably
sealed: for the Lord has a controversy with this Nation, and he will plead
with thee O England, who desire not, nor can not bear a Government in
Righteousness, for the suppressing of the evil, and encouragement of the good,
but the good is still suppressed in thee, and cannot grow as it ought, because
of the lust of the Nation against the purity of the life of God, and because of
the corrupt wills, ends, and interests of those who still are in Power.

After King Henry the 8th. had renounced and shaken off in part, the Popes
Authority in this Nation, he did not let it fall to the ground as an evil
thing, but took upon himself the exercise of it, assuming to himself the
Headship and Government under Christ in all Ecclesiastical causes, and matters
in his Dominions. The same course his Successors followed, keeping the very
Title which the Pope gave to him of Defender of the Faith. And so Parliaments
in their days (as if the Government of the Church were a right and privilege
of the Nation, and not peculiar to Christ) have taken upon them to make laws
and orders, about the Government of the Church and people of God in spiritual
things, as well as about matters of State.

Now it would fairly and honestly (with the spirit of meekness and in the fear
of the Lord) be enquired into, whether the Popes Power and Authority in this
Nation, was a true Church Power and Authority? that is, whether it was such a
Church Power and Authority as Christ had instituted, or of another nature, even
of a nature contrary to Christ, and to his inward Government in the spirits of
his people? For if the Popes power and Authority was a true Church power and
Authority, then it may be lawful in another hand, though not in the Popes: but
if it was an usurped kind of Authority and Government in it self, then it
cannot be lawful in it self, nor serviceable to Christ in any other hand, but
will prove an instrument of War against him, in whose hands soever it be put.
And let it be singly considered, whether the Church Power in this Nation, has
not been a curb to the rising of the purity of Religion, even a sharp check
upon the tender conscience, but such as the loose (yea profane spirit) would
take pleasure in and contend for?

The true Church Power is only the power of the spirit of Christ. That
converts men to God, and that alone is able to govern them (in the affairs of
his kingdom; being converted. Man meddling with Religion and Church Government
in his wisdom, is but a beast: and must govern like a beast; namely, with force
and cruelty over the spirit and conscience which is tender toward God. As the
Lord God of heaven and earth, never gave the converting power to any, so
neither did he ever give this governing power to any, further than as they were
endued with his spirit: for that is the Scepter of his Church and Kingdom,
which is a Scepter of Righteousness, which leads on in the love and gentleness
of the Spirit that which is to be dealt gently with, and spiritually cuts off
by its severity and sharpness that which is to be cut off. And here are Christ's
limits of Government which that spirit and wisdom which exceeds, errs and does
hurt both to it self and others.

Now if in the mist of darkness, which has long overspread the earth, (for
though there brake out a little Light to discover the thick blackness of
Popery, and to cause some Reformation out of it, yet the mist was not expelled)
this Nation has erred, her Princes, her teachers, her Parliaments, and all
sorts of persons, in laying hold on and establishing a wrong Church Power,
which power has had a bad effect, namely, in suppressing the progress of the
reforming spirit, and raising up a formal spirit (if not a spirit of looseness
and profaneness) which ran backwards toward Popery, and not forwards from it:
yet let them not love error, and so strive against the light which shines
forth to discover the error to them. But let them humble themselves before
Christ the Lord of all, and restore unto him that which is his due, least they
provoke him to wrath, and cause him to take from them what they look upon as
their due: For is it not just with Christ to take that power from men, which
they (so long as they have it) will not forbear mannaging and making use of to
keep him from his power? Consider these things, O England, for they belong to
thy peace, and toward the mitigation of thy sorrow and misery in the day of thy
calamity.

This is from one who has mourned over thee, while thou have been rejoicing.
Isaac Penington the younger.
O that thou could know, at least in this last hour of thy day, how to make
thy peace with the Lord, and not begin that controversy a fresh with him,
which he has already so much shattered and broken thee about, that the dregs
of the cup (whereof thou have already so largly drunk) might pass from thee.



An Explanatory POSTSCRIPT.
WE read of the getting up of another Power than Christ's in the Church, after
the days of the Apostles. 1 These. 2. 4. Rev. 13. 2. which Power was to last
42. Months, even all the time of Antichrists Reign; by which Power the Beast
should make war with, and overcome the Saints in all Kindreds, Tongues, and
Nations, verse. 5, 6, 7. And all this wickedness and persecution of the Saints
should be committed, under a pretense of Righteousness, as if it were for
Christ and the well-government of his Church, from a true and rightly-derived,
and well-ballanced Power, 1 These. 2. 8. 9. Now this Power will last in one Form
or other, even till the very coming of Christ: and then shall that wicked
Spirit (in all his workings, in all his various appearings and transformings,
as if he still were for God, and for the right and orderly Government of his
Church and Temple) be discovered, by degrees consumed, and at last destroyed,
verse. 8. And then the Kings or Powers of the earth, which give their power and
strength to the Beast (helping him to cause men to worship, Rev. 13. 15, 16.)
making war with the Lamb and his suffering Saints by their Laws, whips,
prisons, fines, etc. shall be overcome by him, who fights against them with
the spirit of his mouth, and by his truth, meekness, and righteousness, which
shines in the hearts and conversations of his called, faithful and chosen, Rev.
17. 13, 14. Psalm. 45. 4, 5.

The power of Christ cannot hurt any of his Lambs, (it never forced the weak
ones, the tender conscienced, but he carries the Lambs in his bosom, and
gently leads those that are with young, Isa. 40. 11.) He had rather have many
Hypocrites spared, than one Ear of Wheat plucked up, Mat. 13. 29. That Power
therefore in the Church which spares the Hypocrites (who can easily comply with
an outward conformity in Worship, without feeling an inward life or virtue) but
lights heavy on that which is tender and shie in matters of Worship, (knowing
that it must give an account thereof to Christ) that is not the true
Church Power, but at best but a counterfeit of the true.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
of the Black-spread Eagle and Windmill in Martins Le Grand, 1660.


