AN APOSTATE EXPOSED: OR, George Keith Contradicting himself and his Brother
BRADFORD.

WHEREIN Their Testimony to the Christian Faith of the People called Quakers,
is opposed to G. K.'s late Pamphlet, Styled, Gross Error and Hypocrisy
detected.

By JOHN PENNINGTON.

For where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every evil work,
James 3.16.

What shall be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee thou false
Tongue, sharp Arrows of the Mighty, with Coals of Juniper, Psalm. 120.3, 4.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street, 1695

An APOSTATE Exposed: or George Keith contradicting himself, etc.
WHEN I first read G. K's last Sheets, miscalled Gross Error, etc. I did not
think to have taken public notice of it, and that for two Reasons. First, that
though the said Book smote hiddenly at the Yearly Meeting, and mored directly at
the People called Quakers in general, yet that the Title Page and much of the
Book reflects on Three Friends by Name, whom he would single out, as leading
Men in the said Meeting, and pretends, by their former Writings, to make good
his Charge, the least of whom, as they are far my Superiors in managing of
Controversy, so are they Elders in the Church of God, and whom it would have
more immediately have concerned to have returned an Answer, were that to do
now, both on behalf of themselves, and of the blessed Truth he has blasphemed.
But this leads me to my Second Reason, viZ. That most of the passages he finds
faults with, and would labor to pervert, have been already brought by himself
in two printed Papers, (the one called, A true Copy of a Paper, etc. The other,
The pretended Yearly Meeting of the Quakers, their Nameless Bull of
Excommunication, etc. and refuted by T. E's, in a Book Entitled, Truth
Defended, which he so far takes notice of in his Postscript, as bespeaks it was
come to his Hands; for he makes some idle Observations on a passage or two, and
so leaves it, which he had better have let quite alone, except he had done it
more fairly, and more to purpose, and withal makes a faint offer, that it is
probable a due Answer may be given in due time to it; and that other Book of
his, called a further Discovery. So that G. K. would he mind his business,
might have found work enough upon his hands, without writing one thing twice
over, who for all he once told us, when pressed to defend himself, that of
making many Books there is no end, yet seems to have an itch to be doing,
though it be but actum agere, rather then cope with what is ad rem, and
argumentative; for till better informed, I must assign his shifting, to a
diffidence of his cause, and an uneasiness to buckle close to the work, who
after all his vain flourishes, empty not of malice but matter, manifests
himself to be at a low ebb; his stock almost exhausted, if he be no more
fruitful of his instances against those Friends, and others of their Brethren,
that so sorry inferences, once before brought and found too light, are become
his last refuge, and for want of more, must be repeated, though the invalidity
of them has been sufficiently laid open.

Now that which drew me to be concerned with him, at present, is this; As I
have of late compared his former Books, with his later Pamphlets; so observing
in a Book, which by the difficulty of obtaining, I find to be but in few Hands,
that he, in the Year, 1692. (even since his work of Division began, as I gather
from a paper of his Parties, signed in 1691. Reasons and Causes, p. 19.) had
expressed a different sentiment of the Quakers Principles, then he has of
late; instead of enervating by argument (a work done by another Pen) his
fallacy and groundless deductions, I chose to confront him by his own handy
works, and detect his self-tinconsistency, with what he himself wrote, about
three Years since.

The Title Page of this last, runs thus.

Gross Error and Hypocrisy Detected in George Whitehead and some of his
Brethren, as does appear from the disingenuous and Hypocritical answer he and
some others has given to some Queries, sent to the last Yearly Meeting of the
People called Quakers, in the third Month, 1695. by comparing the said answer
with the printed Books of the said George Whitehead, Willam Penn and John
Whitehead, leading Men in the said Meeting; wherein the great inconsistency and
contradiction of their present late Answers to the express Words and Sentences
of their printed Books, is discovered, with a further account of their vile and
pernicious Errors.

The Queries he here mentions, seven in number, Indeed not transcribe, but
refer to the Book it self. They are said to have been proposed by the Bishop of
London his Chaplain (but probably were composed by G. Keith himself, or some
such others Apostate) the substance was to demand our Faith relating to
Christ's being in Heaven, in the Body in which he suffered, his coming therein
to Judge at the last Day, the Resurrection of the Dead, and his Blood
propitiating for the Sins of the World. Now here what G. K. and some others in
Rhode Island, say on behalf of the Quakers, in a Book of theirs, printed by
William Bradford at Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, Anno 1692. The Title is thus.

The Christian Faith of the People of God called in scorn Quakers, in Rhode
Island (who are in Unity with all Faithful Brethren, of the same Profession, in
all parts of the World) Vindicated, etc. To which is added, some Testimonies of
our Ancient Friends to the true Christ of God, Note, These Collected
Testimonies were left out, in a later Impression at London, by R. Baldwin: So
the Reader will not find them there.
Collected out of their printed Books, for the further convincing of our
Opposers, that it is (and has been) our constant and firm belief, to expect
Salvation by the MAN Christ Jesus, that was outwardly Crucified without the
Gates of Jerusalem.

From whence I observe, that in the Year 1692. and before, the Quakers were
found in the Faith; then G. K. with others, labor to convince our Opposers,
that our belief and expectation of Salvation by the Man Christ Jesus, that was
outwardly Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, IS and HAS BEEN constant
and firm, whereas now he insinuates, the leading Men (as he terms them) viz. G.
W. W. P. and J. W. are inconsistent, in their present late Answers to the
express words and sentiments of their printed Books. So that, with him, one
while Friends former Printed Books are Authentic, their belief constant and
firm; other while they must lie under the imputation of vile and pernicious
Errors. This will be made further appear by his Epistle prefatory to the Book
called, Gross Error, etc. Which begins thus.

The method I propose in this following Treatise, is, first, to set down the
said Queries mentioned in the Title Page, next the Answers given by G.
Whitehead, and Some of his Brethren, and signed by them; thirdly, the answers I
have faithfully and sincerely Collected out of the printed Books of George
Whitehead, William Penn and John Whitehead, that show the great inconsistency
and contradiction of their present late answer to the express words and
sentiments of their printed Books. The which answers will also give a further
account of their vile and pernicious Errors, opposite to some Fundamental
Articles of the Christian Faith. And here I would have the Reader to
understand, That if these men had, by their late answers, contradicted their
former sayings and sentiments, from any sincere conviction, and professed
acknowledgement of the vile and gross Errors, boldly asserted by them, in their
printed Books, I should have been so far from charging them with Hipocrisy, for
their so doing, that I should have commended their Ingenuity. But they are so
far from any such acknowledgment, that in their late answer, they refer to the
answer given by them in public, to the objections made against them in
public. Now it is plain by their answer made in public, they mean their
Answer and Doctrine, Sayings and Sentiments contained in their printed Books;
so far are they from professing or owning any real conviction they are under,
of their former vile Errors. Though it is not improbable, that some of them,
and particularly George Whitehead, has some contrary Apprehensions and
Sentiments, in diverse of these weighty matters, to what he has formerly, with
great confidence, asserted in Print, as not only being his own Principles, but
the Quakers Principles. (Though I thank God, those vile Errors, etc. which he
calls the Quakers Principles, were never my Principles, and in Charity I am to
believe, nor the Principles of diverse others, that have with me gone under that
Designation) -- They are not so sincere as to own and retract in public their
Errors exposed in public, even lest such Retraction or Correction should
lessen and abate their honor and esteem among their too credulous Followers
and Admirers, who without have all doubt have suffered themselves to be too
much influenced and led by them into the same Errors. And in the next page,
"And however in some things of weight, it is possible that G. Whitehead and
some others have changed their Sentiments; yet I have no ground or reason to
think otherwise, but as touching diverse weighty Matters of the Christian
Doctrine and Faith, he and they are still under great Blindness, Darkness and
Error.

This is the basis of the Work, and gives us Light into the design, of his
undertaking. The vile Errors he ascribes to Friends former Sayings, Sentiments
and printed Books; their Hypocrisy to their not acknowledging them; but
referring to their Answers made public, and yet allows some Reformation of
Judgment, but not total, but that they are still under great Blindness,
Darkness and Error. This Charge is extensive enough, reaching the public
Laborers, who have been Conversant in Print, without any exception; and how
wide he will stretch it to fetch in the rest, under the notion of credulous
Followers and Admirers, himself best knows, if any. That these were not his
Sentiments formerly, or at least that he has declared otherwise, is what now
lies before me to evince, and that out of the Book, even now mentioned, called
The Christian Faith, etc. for further notice I design not to take at present,
of him and his mischievous Work (he being Debtor to T. E. for not offering
himself from the incongrous and absurd Inferences, he has already drawn from
those Friends Books) than to turn his own and his Friends Weapons upon himself.
Suo se jugulet gladio.

In Page 3. G. K. and others (in order to vindicate the people called Quakers,
from the Calumnies of Christian Lodowick) say, Whereas diverse of us, challenged
by him, declared sincerely their sincere Faith, as concerning the Lord Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, and what the Holy Scriptures testify of him, yet he did
continue to accuse them still, as denying the true Christ, alleging, they had
another Sense than the Scripture-Words did bear, and that his Sense was true,
but their Sense was false, G.K. has done the same since.
appealing to their Consciences, whether it was not so: thus making himself
Judge over our Secret Thoughts, as having a secret Sense in our thoughts of
Scripture-words, page 4.
contrary to the true sense of them, though we have not given him or any other
occasion to judge so rashly, and uncharitably of us, and our Consciences bear
us witness in the sight of God, that we do sincerely believe, and think as we
speak, when we say according to the Holy Scripture, that Jesus of Nazareth is
the true Christ of God, and the only true Savior, and there is no other Name
given under Heaven, whereby Men must be saved, and that this same Jesus was in
fullness of Time, born of the Virgin called Mary, being conceived of the Holy
Ghost, who dyed for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification -- who is
exalted at the Right Hand of God, and ever lives to make Intercession for us,
and that Christ has his Body in Heaven, a most glorious Body, not changed in
Being or Substance, but in condition and manner of being; and that Christ is
true and perfect God, and true and perfect Man, the Son of God, begotten of God
from everlasting, glorified with the Father before the World began -- and that
Christ as Man, has both Soul and Body, and his Manhood is most excellently and
wonderfully united with his Godhead; yet his Manhood is not his Godhead, nor is
his Body that he had of the Virgin, and now has in Heaven, his Godhead, but
the Temple of it, as Christ called his Body the Temple, and is the GARMENT or
Clothing,
wherewith the Eternal Word did cloth himself, who is that New and Living way,
that he has consecrated for us, through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh.

And we believe, that God the Father has appointed the Man Christ Jesus to be
the judge of the quick and the dead, page 5.
and that he is to come to judge all Mankind with the great and last Judgment
at the end of the World, the which end of the World we do believe is Not come,
either within us, or without us -- Therefore has this Accuser joined with Tho.
Hicks a Baptist Teacher at London, and John Faldo an Independent Teacher, and
diverse others, to accuse us as denying the true Christ, because we believe and
confess to Christ's inward and outward appearance, This Charge was groundless
then, how comes it to be true now?
as if to believe and confess to Christ's inward Coming and Appearance, were
certainly to deny his outward,
or to hold forth two Christ's, which is but their great ignorance and
unbelief, and no just Consequence of our Principle, for the true Christ of God
is one, and the true Christian's Faith receives and embraces him whole and
undivided, and owneth his inward and outward Coming, who, as he did come
without us in a state of Humiliation to suffer, and is risen and ascended into
Heaven, so he will come again without us to judge the Quick and the Dead -- And
there shall be a Resurrection of the Body, both of the Just and Unjust, page 6.
that is not attained already or immediately after Death, but it is to be
attained unto in the time appointed of God, called the Day of Judgment. And
seeing our Friends in England have FVLLY answered to all these FALSE
ACCVSATIONS of Tho. Hicks and J. Faldo, with whom Chr. Lodowick has joined, we
refer to their Answers, for further Satisfaction.

Thus much on behalf, not only of himself and his Rhode Island Friends, but of
Friends in England, and every where else. Then Hicks and Faldo were false
Accusers, their Consequences indeducible, Chr. Lodowick (who had, it seems, got
the start of Keith both in Apostasy and Reflections) to blame for joining with
them, and the Reader referred to Friends Books here, for further Satisfaction.
It was then rash and uncharitable to make ones self Judge over another secret
thoughts, to say Friends had another sense than Scripture words did bear, etc.
but the Quakers are justified, even by G. Keith in their Faith concerning
Christ, his Conception, Birth, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession and Coming
again to raise the Dead, and to Judge both Quick and Dead at the last Day;
whereas since his coming over, Hicks and Faldo are vindicated, and Friends
rendered Heterodox, even in those very Books, among the rest, out of which they
are here by him defended as Orthodox. Quae te Dementia cepit! But not to dwell
upon this, I now pass to that other part of their Book, which contains a
Collection of Testimonies out of our Friends Books, as a further Corroboration
of their evidence, for which it was added by his Printer and Brother in Schism,
William Bradford, and as he says, faithfully Collected, which let him look to.

His first citation is out of the Principles of Truth, by John Crook, whom, in
his Page 10. he thus cites Through this Gift we believe, that Christ Jesus, the
Son of God, was manifest in the Flesh, in the fullness of time -- and that there
is not another Name, whereby any can be saved, then this Name of Jesus Christ,
nor is remission of Sins to be preached by any other Name. We believe, that
this Jesus Dyed for or because of Sin, and rose again for the Justification of
those that believe in him, and that he thereby spoiled Principalities and
Powers, and Triumphed over them openly, and led Captivity captive in his own
Person -- By this Gift of God in our Hearts, we further believe that Christ
Jesus rose again from the Dead, and sits at Gods right Hand in a Glorious Body.
And we believe, that our low Estates and humble Bodies shall be made like unto
his glorious Body -- and that this mortal shall put on Immortality -- As the
Man is not without the Woman, neither is the Woman without the man in the Lord:
even so is not the death and sufferings of Christ without at Jerusalem, to be
made void and of none effect,
by any thing within; neither does the Light shine and make that of none effect
without, but both in the Lord answers his will -- And we also believe the
Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, according -- to the Judgment of the great
Day, and then shall every Seed have its own Body -- But because we dare not be
so foolishly inquisitive, as to say, with what Bodies do they arise, therefore
do some say, We deny both the Resurrection of the Body of Christ, and of all
that are or shall be dead. But this ALSO IS FALSE, for every man shall be
raised in his own order, but Christ the first fruits, 1 Cor. 15.23. And we
believe they shall be raised with the same Bodies, so far as Natural and
Spiritual, Corruptible and Incorruptible,
Terrestrial and Celestial can be the same.

The next Citation I shall bring, leaving those of William Penn and George
Whitehead for a close, is out of a Book called, Malice of the Independent Agent
again rebuked, p. 17. p. 13.
The terms Natural and Earthly, as given to the Glorious Body of Christ, were
and are offensive to us. It must needs be a very Glorious, Heavenly Body, and
we believing such a change in the Glorious Body of Christ, we do not thereby
(nor ever did) believe that the Body of Christ, which suffered, was
annihilated, and that his Flesh saw Corruption: NO SVCH MATTER: May there not
be then a very Wonderful change in the Body, and yet the Substance not
Annihilated nor destroyed? Now does it follow, from our not believing nor
owning his Characters (of Natural and Earthly) on Christ's Glorious Body, that
therefore nothing of that Body Remains, or is in Being. page 19. As if we
allowed nothing of the Man Christ, either of Spirit or Body, to have a being
(after his Resurrection) to ascend, which is a HORRID FALSEHOOD -- Though Christ
be God and Man, in a most Glorious Union and Power, yet the Manhood is not the
Deity, nor the Deity the Manhood, yet inseparable in the Heavenly Man, Christ,
who is Lord from Heaven.

I come now to what he quotes out of my Father, whom he represents as sounder
in the Faith, than a late litigious Agent in G. K's cause ( Thomas Crisp, I
mean) has sought to Characterize him. It is in these Words, Flesh and Blood of
Christ, by J. Penington (Preface) I have often hard them, page 15.
the Quakers) own Christ both inwardly and outwardly; yea, I heard one of the
Ancients of them thus Testify in a public Meeting, many Years since, That if
Christ had not come in the Flesh, in the fullness of time, to bear our Sins in
his own Body on the Tree, and to offer himself up a Sacrifice for Mankind, all
Mankind had utterly Perished. page 16. Glorious was that Appearance and
Manifestion of his Son in the Flesh, precious his subjection and Holy Obedience
to the Father: his giving himself up to death for Sinners, was of great esteem
in his Eye. It was a spotlses Sacrifice, of great value, and effectual for the
Remission of Sins, and I do humbly acknowledge unto the Lord,
the Remission of my Sins thereby.

Robert Barclay, comes next, who is brought in saying, Apology, page 94, 95,
96. p. 16.
As we believe he [Christ] was a true and real Man, so we also believe, that he
continues SO to be Glorified in the Heavens in Soul and Body, by whom God shall
judge the World in the great and general Day of Judgment. We believe all those
things to have been certainly transacted, which are recorded in the Holy
Scriptures, concerning the Birth, Life, Miracles, Sufferings, Resurrection and
Ascension of Christ, and we also believe; that it is the Duty of every one to
believe it, to whom it pleases God to reveal it; yea, we believe it were
Damnable Unbelief not to believe, when SO declared. And we believe that the
Remission of Sins,
which any partake of, is ONLY in and by virtue of that most Satisfactory
Sacrifice, and no otherwise; Vindication of Apology; page 89. I do believe that
the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was Crucified at Jerusalem, was again
raised by the Power of God, in which Glorious Body the Lord Jesus Christ
DWELLS, page 189. We are falsely charged with denying the outward appearanee
of Christ, the real Existance, of Heaven and Hell, as a place without us, the
last and general Judgment, the Resurrection of the Body; for we REALLY believe
these things.

The following citation with others comprehends William Penn, one of them G. K.
has traduced by name, Testimony for the Man Christ Jesus, page 11. 12.
page 4 (says W. B.) and cites William Penn, where he speaks in the name and
person of the Quakers, thus, We do believe the Man Christ Jesus to be Glorified
in Heaven: We do believe that holy Manhood to be Glorified in Heavenly Glory.
See now how far the Quakers are from denying the true and real Manhood of
Christ in Heaven, or disowning Jesus of Nazareth to be the Missiah. And we
further add and confess, that the same Man Christ Jesus, that Suffered and was
put to Death in the Flesh -- ascended both as to a change of place and state of
Glory, -- and that the same Body, that was put to Death, was raised by the
Power of God, and was a REAL Body, really seen both before and after his
Resurrection, and at his Ascension also. So we confess the same Man Christ, not
only to be still in being, but also Glorified, and his Body to be a Glorious,
Heavenly and Spiritual Body. And as to his being MAN, We have one Mediator
between God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. And God will judge
the World in Righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained, whom he has
raised from the Dead,
Act. 17.31. So that this Man Christ did neither vanish nor perrish in any
thing essential to him, either as to his SPIRIT, SOUL or BODY, but is highly
exalted and Glorified, Page 12. But if we shall bechanged, as to our low Body,
and fashioned into a Glorious Spiritual state; then is Christ, as to his Body,
changed or translated into a far more Glorious State than what it had, when on
Earth.

I have reserved his Quotations out of George Whitehead, to the last. They are
these Postscript by G. W. (to a Book entitled Malice of the Independent Agent
again rebuked) in answer to W. H's Queries, page 23. page 13.
That Flesh saw no Corruption, but was raised from the Dead. Christ did rise in
that Body wherein he Suffered, and in the same ascended into the Heavens, where
the Patriarch David did not, as to his Body, which is in the Sepulcher, Acts
2.29. And that VERY BODY of Christ, which was raised from the Dead, how should
it but be in being, seeing he dyed not again, according to Romans 6.9. Knowing
Christ being raised from the Dead, dies no more, Death has no more dominion
over him: his dying was only as to the Body, he was put to death as concerning
the Flesh, therefore the Flesh was raised from the dead. And it is, so far
circumscribed or encompassed in the Heavens, as its capable of; and as is
proper to it: and though it be Spiritual and Glorious, yet a Body, and therefore
not in every place, where God is. To be Omnipresent is only proper to God, and
not to Bodies. And in the next page, he adds: page 14.
He is entered into Heaven it self, to appear in the Face of God for us. And a
little lower, out of The real Quakers, a real Protestant by G. W. page 105,
106. 'I deny it to be the Quakers mind that Christ's Body did vanish, (so as to
become annihilated) at his Ascension: 'twas changed, and more Glorified, but
not vanished. I am sensible that none in their right understanding or sense,
would give him any such mistaken answer or account concerning the Body of
Christ, that it so vanished, as to become annihilated. Christ has a Glorious
Body, most near and proper to himself, above and more excellent than all our
earthly Bodies, like unto which he will change our low and humble Bodies. And
out of page 108. of the same Book, that, 'We believe that Christ as Mediator;
has obtained eternal redemption for us, and that by his OWN BLOOD, that we
might be sanctified and redeemed from all Iniquity, for which end he gave
himself for us. Again, Christ and his Light within are not to be divided in
matter of Faith or Salvation. page 15.

We never opposed Christ who dyed for Sinners, or Faith in his Name; by
believing or obeying the Light within. Out of another Book of G. W's, called
Judgment fixed, in Answer to Jeffry Bullock, he brings a quotation thus, The
true Christ of God is but one, though he has appeared in diverse manners; both in
the Flesh and in the Spirit -- he is the one Mediator between God and Man, even
the MAN Christ Jesus the heavenly glorious Man, the MAN that was promised to be
for a hiding place -- that MAN by whom God will judge the World in
Righteousness. See also, Plea of the Innocent, by G. K. and T. B. page 10.
accusation out of G. W. in Answer to Jeffry Bullock, thus, Thou who can not
see the consistency of Salvation by the Light within, and the Man Christ Jesus,
all gone from the Light into Imaginations.

Thus much out of G. W. as gathered by W. B. and made part of that Book,
called, The Christian Faith of the People of God, called Quaker in Rhode
Island, etc. And enough to show wh^^ G. W. and his Brethren, their former
Sentiments were, in those weighty Points there controverted, and that G. K. is
a false Accuser. Now hear W. B. sums up the matter, page 16.
at the close, Much more might have been cited out of the Writings of our
Ancient Friends, but this may suffice, at this time, to convince our Opposers,
that it has been, and is, the firm Belief of the People called Quakers, to
expect Salvation by the Man Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary, was
crucified for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, ascended into
Heaven, and ever lives to make Intercession for us. So that it seems, if we
will believe these Men, or they dare believe themselves, the Quakers were then
Orthodox ( viz. Anno 1692.) and what they had formerly delivered as their
Faith, was sound; they did sincerely believe and think as they spoke; a taste
ye have here, and MUCH MORE might be given, but this may suffice to Convince
our Opposers, if W. B. be to be credited. But how much worse than those our
Opposers, must that Man then be, who, all this notwithstanding, represents them
otherwise then they are, or he has defended them to be even a Traducer, a
Defamer, yea, a Judas!

This shaking the Foundation, upon which G. K's whole superstructure is built,
(in his late envious piece, styled Gross Error etc.) as is Manifest from so
much of the Preface, as I have cited, I shall leave G. K. to reconcile himself
to himself and his Friends, and refer the Reader, for answer to the particular
charges there exhibited, to that Book of T. E's, called, Truth Defended,
wherein, I doubt not, but the judicious and impartial will receive
Satisfaction, in finding most of the Citations, Inferences and Cavils, brought
in this last of G. K's, already fully cleared and answered there.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the above was committed to the Press, another Book of G. K's is come to
my Hands, called, A Serious Appeal, etc. in Answer to Cotton Mather of
New England, whom in the Title Page he represents as greatly possessed with a
Spirit of Perversion, Errors and Envious Zeal against the People called
Quakers, and together with an Appeal against him to all the more Sober,
Impartial, etc. he Subjoins a Vindication of our Christian Faith, especially
respecting the Fundamental Doctrines and Principles of Christian Religion. This
also was Printed by W. Bradford, Anno 1692. but after the other Paper already
cited, as appears by the References to it, in this Book. Some few Passages out
of it, and that the rather for that G. K. is Sole Author here, not in
conjunction with others, as before, I shall add by way of Corollary.

In page 6. I find G. K. deservedly reflecting on his Opponent, for his
Citations out of the Quakers Printed Books and Treatises, as having borrowed
and taken them, not from our own Books, but from our professed Adversaries,
whom he terms Men known well enough to be possessed with prejudice against us,
such as Thomas Hick's and John Faldo, and others, But how comes G. K. of late
to abet these very Adversaries, defended their cause, and pick matter of
quarrel against Friends, even out of these very Books (among others) he here
recommends?
whom our Friends in Old England, and particularly G. W. and W. P. have largly
answered, and goes on, I do here solemnly charge C. M. to give us but ONE
single instance of any one Fundamental Article of Christian Faith denied by us
as a People, or by any one of our Writers or Preachers generally owned and
approved by us. And in the next page, 'According to the best knowledge I have
of the People called Quakers, and those most generally owned by them, Is G. W.
W. P. and J. W. none of this number? Did not he, then repute them such, and
recommend G. W. and W. P their Books, as such?
as Preachers and Publishers of their Faith, of unquestioned esteem among them,
and worthy of double Honor, as many such there are I know NONE that are guilty
of any ONE of such Heresies and Blasphemies, as he accuses them.

In page 11. Speaking on behalf of the Quakers, he says, We zealously believe,
that the Man Christ is in Heaven without us, in his Glorified Body of Man, the
same for being he had on Earth, but wonderfully changed in manner and
condition, as is clearly and fully expressed in that late Treatise given forth
by our Friends in Rhode Island, called, The Christian Faith, etc. Vindicated,
etc.

Now hear him in page 52, thus he has it, But that he [Cotton Mather] charge
it upon us, as if we did not believe Christ's coming again and appearance
without us, in his Glorified Body, to judge the Quick and the Dead, is that he
cannot prove ANY OF US Guilty, that is generally owned and received to be of
our Faith; only we have denied the gross and carnal Imaginations, that some
have vented as concerning Christ's Body; calling it Natural and Earthly, which
we believe is Spiritual and Heavenly -- And a little lower, 'He [C. M.] does
most grossly prevaricate, abusing and perverting our words, This abuse and
perversion himself of late has been guilty of, in a high degree, and that from
the same to picks.
as if because we owned an inward quicking and being raised with Christ, in our
Souls and inward Man, that therefore we deny any future Resurrection of the
Body after Death, which WE DENY NOT, but affirm against Ranters and vain
Notionists; and we believe, that the Resurrection of the Body is not attained
Immediately after Death -- but at Christ's coming and appearing to judge the
Quick and the Dead: and the same Body that dies, is raised, in a true sense,
being freed and refined from all Dross of Corruption, etc.

His Citations out of my Father, page 25. 26, 28. These are but words of course
with him, for it is not long since, that it was Dear G.W. also.
(whom he terms, Dear Isaac Penington, and says he well knew to be a true
Believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, and a sincere Lover of the crucified Jesus,)
and those of G. F. page 60. Vindicating them, even in those very passages,
which his Friend Tho. Crisp renders them as heretical in, I lightly pass over,
deeming it no wonder that T. C. and G. K. should clash, when G. K. and G. K.
cannot agree. And perhaps a more suitable occasion may happen for some body
else to be more particular therein.

Now Reader, what should induce such a Man, of so great abilities as he would
be thought to be, and no question has more then he makes a good use of, who,
to Gods praise (as he tells C. M. page 29. but I rather think to his own
applause) has the Gifts, both of sound Knowledge and Expression, with his
MANIFOLD other Mercies bestowed on him, thus to interfere, say and unsay, were
it not, that Envy and Prejudice has exceedingly blinded him! For supposing,
not granting that those three Friends, he levels his stroke so hard against,
had not so safely guarded some Expressions, as they might have done? must
therefore they and their Brethren be reflected on, as Blind, Dark and
Erroneous, touching diverse weighty Matters of the Christian Doctrine and Faith,
even after he had given a contrary character of two of them ( viz. G. W. and W.
P.) and referred to their writings as sound and true, as well as declared that
he knew not one single instance of any one Fundamental Article of Christian
Faith denied by us, as a People, or by any one of our Writers and Preachers,
generally owned and approved by us. Let us hear him therefore once more pass
Judgment against himself, even in this particular, and that after 28 Years
experience and converse, both private and public, and therewith close these.

All but prejudiced Persons (says he, Serious Appeal, page 7.) will say, if it
can be found by comparing their Words one with another, that their Sense or
Meaning is sound, though not so altogether safely and cautiously worded in
every respect, Charity is to be allowed, and the best construction ought to be
given to their words, or they themselves or their Friends for them, in respect
of their absence or decease, who did best know them, ought to be allowed to
give their sense of them, as I have done in the sincerity of my Heart,
according to my best understanding and knowledge of them: and I think I should
know and do know these called Quakers, The greater is his condemnation then,
falsely to accuse them now.
and their Principles, far better than Cotton Mather, or any or all his
Brethren, having been conversant with them in public Meetings, as well as in
private Discourses, with the most noted and esteemed among them for about 28
Years past, and that in many places of the World in Europe, and for these
diverse Years in America.

THE END.

