SOME Observations, Upon that Portion of Scripture, ROMANS 14. 20.

For the service of such in this present Age, whose eyes, and hearts the Lord
shall please to open to see and consider the weight of the Truth thereof.

With some few weighty words of Advice to several sorts of People, according to
their different States.

By ISAAC PENINGTON.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1662.

Some Observations, upon that Portion of Scripture, Romans 14. 20. For the
service of such in this present Age, whose eyes and hearts the Lord shall
please to open, to see and consider the weight of the Truth thereof.

Romans 14. 20. For Meat destroy not the Work of God.
Observe. 1. GOd has a Work in some men's hearts. The mighty God, who made
Heaven and Earth, and whose eyes run to and fro through both, he by the finger
of his pure Power touches some of the hearts of the Children of men, and in
the pure Demonstration of his living Spirit is found working there. Religion,
true Religion is not a matter of opinion (as men, who have not tasted of the
Power, are apt to imagine) but a New Creation and Work of God in the heart of
the creature, sowing the Light and Life of his Spirit there, and by it working
man out of the darkness and Death of Sin (which is the destruction and misery
of the Soul) into his Life and Blessedness.

Observe. 2. That this Work of God in man, is liable to be destroyed. God could
so have made man, as that he could not have fell: he could so have comprehended
man's spirit in the pure Power of his Life, as that man could not have broke out
of it. But it pleased him to make him under a Law: wherein, waiting upon and
watching to the Power of Life, he might be preserved and remain happy; but
departing from it, he should lose his state and sink into misery. God could
also so redeem man, as that no Power should stop or interrupt his Work: but it
pleases him also to hold forth a Law of Redemption; according to which, his
Work of Redemption may either go forward or backward. As man is drawn by the
Spirit of God, and follows his leadings out of the corruption, out of the
vanity, out of the earthly Nature, out of the wisdom, reasonings and spirit of
this world, so the work goes forward: As man is tempted, hearkeneth unto, and
is drawn back from the leadings of Gods Spirit by any of these; so the work
goes backward, and degrees of destruction overtake and come upon the Work of
God in that heart.

Observe. 3. A little thing will destroy the Work of God in the heart. A matter
of meat, eating but a little meat doubtingly, out of the Faith, (wherein is the
preservation from the destruction) this leads into the Sin, where death and
destruction is still met with. For in the Path of Life, in the Faith, in the
Obedience to Gods Spirit, there alone is the preservation of the Work of God:
but in the unbelief, in the disobedience, in the doubting (though about never
so small a matter) there is death and destruction met with, if the Person
venture upon that, which it doubts of. Those who have traveled in the path
of Life, I know can witness this. O how small a thing brings a vail over the
Life! What a little giving way to the reasonings of the earthly spirit, about a
small matter, drives back the Work of God in the heart, and brings anguish and
misery upon the Soul, causing the hiding of the Light of God's Countenance,
which is the Life and Joy of the renewed Spirit. God is a great King, and all
his Leadings and Teachings are weighty: and he that rebelleth, or neglects in
the least thing, must bear his burden, unless he feel the Humiliation of his
Soul, and the Remission from the Spirit of the Lord, the Grace of God pitying
him, and the blood of his Son washing him.

Observe. 4. No man should do that, which tends to destroy the Work of God in
himself, or the Work of God in another. There is no such thing allowable by God
for any man to do (whether in Public Government, or in any kind of Commerce or
Conversation amongst men, or in ones private course of walking) which tends
to destroy the Work of God. The intent of Government, either in Church or
State, was never to destroy the Work of God in any man. Government is of God,
both in Church and State: but that way of Government, which destroys his work
in any, is not of him, but contrary to him and against him. O that men could
consider, and had the balance of Truth to weigh things in, that they might bow
before the God of Truth, and not strive with their Maker, about his Work in the
World.

My Soul has mourned, I may say, almost from my Cradle, about the estate of
this Creation. To behold man fallen from his Glory, departed from his God,
living without the sense of him, and sowing the Seeds of Eternal Misery for his
poor Soul (which he must as certainly reap, as he has sown, unless he travel
the path of Redemption in the powerful leadings and guidance of God's Holy
Spirit) This has so broken my Heart (together with the close exercises, which
have continually attended this poor wearied Spirit) that I have often wondered,
how the natural Life could be contained in the natural vessel.

I am a lover of mankind in general, and have been a deep sufferer with, and
traveller for all the miserable. None knows the path of my Sorrows, or the
extent of my Bowels, but he that made me. It is not natural or kindly to me to
upbraid any man with any kind of wickedness, or never so justly deserved
misery, but my Bowels work concerning him toward the Spring of Eternal Power
and Compassions, even as I would be pitied and represented to the Father of
Mercies in the like Condition. Indeed I have been emptied from Vessel to
Vessel, and tossed with multitudes of storms and tempests, yet the savor of my
life remains with me to this day, and the Spirit of my God breaths on my
heart, Blessed be his Holy Name for ever. And though I walk with one sort of
People, because my heart says (yea the Spirit of the Eternal God has
witnessed unto me, and shown me in that Light which cannot deceive, and to that
eye which cannot be deceived) that they are the People whom he has chosen, out
of all the gatherings (throughout the Earth) from the Apostasy, to manifest his
Power in, and his presence among: I say, though I have been guided and led by
the Spirit of the Lord to walk among these, yet am I not bounded there, either
in the love or in the unity of my heart; But I have unity with the Integrity
and Zeal for God which is in others, of what sort or gathering soever, and I
have tender Bowels for all, even for those which hate and Persecute that, which
is my life, and has the love of my heart for ever.

O how have I prayed for the lost World! For all the Souls of mankind, how
has my Soul bowed in unutterable breathings of Spirit before my God, and could
not be silenced, until he quieted my spirit in the Righteousness and Excellency
of his Will, and bid me leave it to him. And as touching this Nation and the
several sorts in it, even those who seem most cast off and without all sense,
yet the preciousness of their Souls have I spread before the Lord my God with
tears.

And now, I have somewhat to say, in the love of my heart, and in the shinings
of the Light of my God, to several sorts of People, which nearly concerns them,
as those whose hearts are weighty and serious (and who are not drunk up in the
earthliness of the sensual Nature, or mis-byassed by pre-assumed Principles
from the wrong ground) may easily perceive.

First.
To such as never knew what belonged to tenderness of Conscience toward God,
but have spent all their days either in licentiousness of spirit, or in a dead
formality, To such my Soul says.
On Friends, wait to feel the Power of God upon your hearts (which is present
with that, which sometimes lets you see the evils thereof) that they may be
melted and made tender by him, fit to receive the impressions of his Life. Why
should ye go down to the pit in a Dream, and center in the Land of Misery? Ye
have immortal Souls in these earthen vessels, which must either be Redeemed to
God by the Power of his Life, or be shut up from his Glorious Presence in the
Chambers of Death. It is a dreadful thing to appear before God after Death, and
receive the sentence of Condemnation for the things done in the body. O that
the eye of your Souls were awakened, that ye might see the hazard and danger ye
are incurring daily, and might know the hope of escape set before mankind, by
the appearance of the Grace in you, and learn of the living God to fly thereto
for succor, that ye might be sheltered in the evil hour, which hasteneth apace
upon all Flesh.

Secondly.
To such as formerly have been tender and sensible, but are now grown hard, and
deaf to the voice of God's Spirit in their hearts and Consciences, This is the
Language of my Soul in the Love and Life of my God.
Oh that ye could wait to feel the hammer and stroke of God upon that which is
hard, that it might be broken by him, and that that which is high and lifted up
above his pure fear (where the Law of his Life is learned, and the Souls of his
Saints preserved) might be brought down and abased before him. Great is your
danger, exceeding difficult is your recovery: yet there is strength in the Arm
of the Lord God to strike through your deadness, and to quicken the immortal
Principle of his Life in you. Why should ye, who have once tasted of the
goodness of God, become more miserable then the rest of the Sons of men? Why
have you departed from that, which once gave you a true taste of Life, and of
the sweetness of Redemption by it, into that Spirit which is sealed up in the
Death, in the midst of its greatest wisdom and surest footing? O return, return
to that which leads to the living God, that ye may travel (in the exercises
of his Spirit) out of the Wisdom and Spirit of this World, unto the Land of the
Souls peace and rest.

Thirdly.
To such as are still tender, and d^re not but exercise a Conscience toward
God, even in these searching and trying times.
Friends, Keep your standing in the Life of God. What God has begotten in you,
let it depend upon him. Let him do what he will with his own in you, and let
the creature be subject to that living Principle, which God has sown and
raised in your hearts. Sell not your peace with God for any ease or advantage
in this World. Let the tenderness of your Consciences, which is of value with
God, be precious also in your eyes. The Times and Seasons are in the Fathers
hand, and he sees good to let this Day of Trial come upon you. His Grace is
able to carry you all through. It will be for his honor, to let all the World
see how dear your God is to you, and how able ye are (in the meekness and
strength of the Lamb's Spirit) to suffer for his Names sake. Thy will, O God,
be done. The cup which our Father gives us, shall we not drink it? The Lord
preserve you in uprightness of heart toward him, in meekness of spirit toward
those that afflict you, and in true love and good will toward all; that his
Light which has gathered you may shine over all the darkness which opposes
it, and his Life which has quickened and preserved you, may be famous over all
the Territories and Dominions of Death.

Fourthly.
To such as are hard-hearted, and of a persecuting spirit toward the
tender-conscienced.
O that ye knew what ye did. Ye are enemies to the most precious thing, that is
to be found among the Sons of men. Ye strike at what God loves, and cherishes,
and takes great pains to bring the creature to. Ye strive to keep that down
upon which the happiness of mankind depends: yea, ye consult and take much
pains to remove that out of the way, which stands between you and the
Judgments of God. O that your eyes were opened: for surely then ye could not
proceed in this course.

Well; The Lord will open the eyes of many, and mercy toward mankind is
issuing from his Throne, and he will smite that through and through, which
makes the Earth miserable and desolate of his Life. But, O that man could hear
in the day of his prosperity, that adversity might not come upon him.

Wait to read these things in the Life from which they sprang, and then tell
me, whether there is not a cause for what I write.

A POSTSCRIPT.
THere has been a great Apostasy (since the days of the Apostles) from the
living Power, into dead forms of Worship and Devotion, where likenesses of
truth have been set up, in stead of the Truth it self. Now the Lord is
gathering his true seed (even Israel his beloved offspring) out of all dead
forms of all kinds, into his living Truth, and into the true Spiritual Worship:
and who is he, that shall be able to stop him herein? Let him consider his
strength, who girds himself to the Battle against him: for not by might, nor by
the Power of man, but by the Spirit of Life in his Called, Faithful, Chosen and
Innocent Lambs, will the Lord of Glory carry on his Work in the World.

THE END.

