THE HOLY Truth and Peo^^^ DEFENDED AND Some of the Weapons and Strength of
tho^^ (...) of Darkness Broken and Scattered, by (...) Light and Power of TRUTH

In an ANSWER to the Chief Passages (...) LETTER, Written to me, and Replied to
by me, (...) Imprisonment in this Place, where I have been a Prisoner a Year
and a half, without any Law broken, or Cause (...) part; who only came
Innocently and Peaceably to visi^ (...) in Prison.

By me ISAAC PENNINGTON, Pri^^^er for the Testimony of Truth, (For could I have
denied (...) might have avoided the Snare) at Reading Goal.

The Bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that (...) with Strength, 1 Samuel 2.4. Printed in the Year, 16^^

The Preface.
A Letter was sent me from a Dear Friend of mine, (bearing date the fifth of
the eleventh Month, 71.) who had long been greatly distressed, and could not
find relief in the way of her former profession and Church fellowship: For whom
I greatly traveled with the Lord, and toward whom my spirit was made very
tender by him. I still felt the Seal of Gods Love and Mercy toward her, even
in her lowest condition, deepest despair, and sorest captivity, through her
great and manifold Temptations: And my Testimony to her at times, from the Lord
on this behalf, was sometimes of use to her, to bear up her spirit, till the
day of Gods visiting and Redeeming her, with the virtue and healing power of
his Salvation; which blessed be his name she has since had sweet experience
of, and true Peace and Joy in knowing the true Head, holding him in the Faith,
and being held by him. Now this Letter of an ancient acquaintance of mine,
which I had answered long ago, one that belongs to Sr. Henry Vane (as she
signified in her Letter to me) desired she should see, which is said to be an
answer to a Letter of mine. If my answer had gone along with it, I should have
took no further notice of it: But it going without my answer, least it should
do hurt to those to whom the Lord has done, or is doing good, I am engaged in
spirit to reply somewhat to it, and to give forth to others what the Lord gives
in to me upon this new occasion. How greatly, truly, and purely I have loved
the man, I will not boast (the Lord knows, with whose knowledge herein I am
content) but O that this his paper might not be laid to his charge at the great
day! which I am afraid it will unless he repent of it: For indeed it is not a
fruit of Life from Gods holy Spirit; but of the growth of Egypt, and Babylon.
It was sent me in the form of a Book, as if it had been sent abroad for special
service. There was no name at it, as if it were an arrow to fly in the dark and
wound secretly: But no weapon formed against the Israel of God shall prosper,
either from this hand or any other, and every tongue that rises up against
them in judgment will God condemn. This is the heritage of the despised People
and servants of the living God in this our day, whose Righteousness is the
Righteousness of his Son bestowed upon them, wherewith he himself has clothed
them, as the Anointed eye now sees, and all eyes shall one day see and
tongues confess to the glory of God the Father.

THE Holy TRUTH and PEOPLE DEFENDED, etc. In an ANSWER, etc.
HE excepteth against those words of mine to him, in a former Letter (of Jun.
24. which I have not here by me) that when his eyes are opened by the Lord he
shall then acknowledge, that we oppose no Truths of the Lord, but hold forth
what we have received from him.

To which he thus replyeth, Is Redemption by Christ's blood no Truth of the
Lords? Which he charge one of us in particular, and many others in general,
with denying.

Answ. We are gathered into that, and abide in that, in which no Truth can be
denied: And are in him that leads into all Truth, and teaches to deny no
Truth that ever was held forth by the Spirit of the Lord. Some of us may not
yet be grown up in understanding into the mysteries of the Kingdom, which God
has revealed and made manifest to others: But yet we do not deny, but own one
another in our several measures of knowledge, and sense of things, and in our
several growths. And we own and acknowledge in Gods sight, the several
Dispensations he has brought forth, both before the Law, and under the Law and
Prophets, and in the time of Ch^ists appearance in the flesh, and after when he
sent his Spirit, and all the time the Church was in the Wilderness, and now she
is coming forth again in the brightness and glory of the Father, looking forth
as the Morning, fair as the Morning clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with
Banners. Nor do we disowne any thing that is of God in the Professors of this
Age: But only that which we know and are required by him to testify against,
as being not of him. O that they could weigh our words and Testimony in a right
Spirit! For they would not then be so offended at, and speak so against us as
now they do; And the Lord knows, we would do any thing that lies in us to
remove the stumbling blocks that lie before them: But it cannot be done to that
Spirit in them, before which God Almighty has laid the stumbling block, that
it might stumble, and fall, and be snared, and broken, and taken. But if they
could come into another Spirit, and feel unity with, and the birth of another
Spirit, the birth of that pure Wisdom should find no stumbling block or offense
in this precious dispensation of Truth, wherewith God from on high has visited
us.

And as for denying Redemption by the blood of Christ, O how will he answer
this charge to God, when none upon the earth (as the Lord God knows) are so
taught, and do so truly, rightly and fully own Redemption by the blood of
Christ, as the Lord has taught us to do! For we own the blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ both outwardly and inwardly, both as it was shed on the Cross, and
as it is sprinkled in our Consciences, and know the cleansing virtue thereof in
the everlasting Covenant, and in the Light which is eternal: Out of which Light
men have but a notion thereof, but do not truly know nor own it. And let him
consider, b fore the time of Antichr st, it was a great matter to know and own
Christ outwardly, as he appeared in that body: But since the Antichristian
Spirit has got that, the distinguishing knowledge and owning of Christ, is to
know and own him inwardly. The outward knowledge and confession now (as it is
generally separated from and held forth in way of distinction from the inward)
is but the knowledge and confession of Babylon, and not the true living
knowledge and confession of Christ in and by the Spirit of the Father, which is
the knowledge and confession of all the Children of the true and heavenly
Mother, which is the Mother of all that are born of the Spirit.

He repeateth those words of mine, That we do not make any finite thing our
Righteousness, but Christ of God is made into us Righteousness. This he says,
Is well spoken, and wishes we may always abide on this confession.

Answ. These words arose in me from an inward feeling of him who gives
Righteousness, and of the Righteousness given, and the Lord preserving me in
that Life, I shall feel so for ever, and confess so for ever. And truly I can
testify of no other Righteousness: For blessed be the name of my God, I feel
the Righteousness of his Son revealed in me daily from Faith to Faith. In his
name I have been gathered, in his name I live, and in him I feel Righteousness,
and indeed there is nothing but Righteousness, Holiness, Truth, Life and
Salvation (and the like) in him.

And he that is truly in him, is Righteous, and Holy in him; there being in him
a new creating of all that are there, and a renewing into the holy and heavenly
Image, which consists in the Righteousness and Holiness of Truth.

He desires me to give a plain answer to this Question.

Is Christ of God made our Righteousness by faith in his blood, or in his
Spirit?

Answ. A pretended Faith in Christ's blood, without Faith in his Spirit, is but
dead and notional. Except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood, says Christ, ye
have no Life in you. It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh, says he,
profits nothing. Now the Faith must be in that which quickens: And the
Faith in that which quickens, is Holy and Righteous; and the man who is found
in it, is Justified, through that Faith in the quickening Power, in the sight
of God. Thus Abraham was Justified in the sight of God, and thus are the
Children of Abraham to be Justified, even through believing in that holy Power
and Spirit which requires obedience, and Justifies the obedient, and
condemns the disobedient for ever, Romans 4.24.

He says, He fears a Snake in this green grass, when I say from his Life,
Virtue and Power, revealed in us, is our conformity to him.

Answ. It were better and safer for him to fear at home: For the Snake is in
his own grass, and many notional high soaring expressions without true
knowledge. But can there be any conformity to Christ without his Life, Vitrtue,
and Power, inwardly revealed? what else can conform unto, and bring forth in
the Image and likeness of Christ?

He says, He fears lest I make this Life and Virtue our Righteousness, which
is indeed the fruits of it..

Answ. Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge, and
runs out from the Truth into his own imaginations? What was Christ's
Righteousness? Was it not the Life, the Virtue, the Spirit of the Father in
him, he being one with it in the Faith of it, and in the obedience to it; And
is not the Righteousness of the head and the body the same, communicated from
the head to the body? Are they not all of one, and the Righteousness one and
the same in both? So much of Christ's Spirit, so much of his Righteousness: And
out of his Spirit out of his Righteousness for evermore. For the Righteousness
of the Son is revealed and communicated from Faith to Faith in his Spirit: And
so Christ is indeed made Righteousness to them that are found in his Spirit;
and they are covered with the garment of Righteousness and Salvation, who are
covered with his Spirit.

He says, Our Righteousness is before this.

Answ. What is our Righteousness before any of the Life, Virtue, and Power of
Christ revealed in us. Is God a respecter of Persons? Does he Justify any out
of the holy Covenant, before he has made a change in him? How does this man
with his vain imaginations turn the whole way and council of God upside down?

He brings a Scripture to prove this, The Spirit is life for righteousness sake.

Answ. That Scripture (which is, Romans 8.10.) speaks of those in whom Christ is
and dwells: And there indeed, The Body is dead because of sin, and the Spiritis
Life because of Righteousness. This is plainly spoken, and plainly felt, and
known as it is spoken. O that he had the true sense and understanding of it, as
it is in Jesus.

He says, Righteousness is in order of nature before Sanctification.

Answ. That which is holy is Righteous. There is nothing Righteous in the eyes
of the pure God, but that which is holy. The Head was really holy and
Righteous; and they that are in him p^rtakes of his Holiness and Righteousness,
and are really Holy and Righteous in him: And Faith which purifies the heart,
and through which Sanctification is, must needs be in order of nature before
the Justification which is by it; for God Justifies no unbelievers, but
believers only. Yea the wicked must forsake his way and the unrighteous man his
thoughts and turn unto the Lord, which cannot possibly be without some degree
of Sanctification, before the Lord will have mercy and pardon the Soul its
sins. Isa. 55.7. and chap. 1.16, 17, 18.

He says Justification is an act of Grace passed upon us by God freely,
without respect to us as Godly, nay properly reflecting on us in that moment as
ungodly.

Answ. I charge this in the sight of God, for absolutely false Doctrine and
contrary to the Gospel. For God Justifies no man as ungodly, but calls upon
men to repent and turn from their ungodlyness, and he will have mercy upon
them, Justify and save them. Now m^n are not ungodly in turning from their
ungodlyness, but changed: And so their state is in some measure changed, before
Justified. If Abraham was ungodly when God called him, Yet in forsaking his own
Country, and following the Lord, and offering up his Son, he was obedient, and
not ungodly, and in that obedience he was Justified. A man may have notions of
Justification in his mind, and accordingly take himself to be Justified, when
he is not: But there is no man Justified by the Lord till he be changed,
translated into him in whom God Justifies, out of the place of condemnation,
into the place of Justification. For till men are changed by the Spirit and
Power of the Lord, they are but darkness and in the darkness, where no
Justification is. It is the Believing, the Obedient, the Children of Light,
that are Justified by the Lord.

He says, Were we godly before or at that time, it were no act of Grace to
pronounce us Righteous.

Answ. He that witnesses Salvation in Christ Jesus, witnesses it to be a
continued act of Grace. Grace appears to the Soul, Grace teaches, Grace
enableth, Grace makes a change from the ungratiousness of the heart and state,
and then Grace (or God by his Grace in and through Christ Jesus) forgiveth the
sins that were committed before. For though the Lord visit me with Life,
quicken me thereby, make a change in my heart and state, yet it is his Mercy to
acccept me, and to pass by for his name sake my former debts and trespasses
against him. Alas the new Covenant is wholly a Covenant of Grace and Mercy; and
the giving of Christ drawing the mind to him, accepting and Justifying in him,
are works of Grace and Mercy toward this: So the Spiritual Israel may well
sing this Song in the Land of Holiness and Redemption, O praise the Lord for he
is good, for his mercy endures for ever. I can truly set my Seal to this
thing, that the more Holy and Righteous the Lord makes me in his Son, the more
sensible am I of his Love, Grace and Mercy in Justifying of me: And it is
precious to me to witness Justification and acceptance with him in and through
his Son.

He says further, But this is the Bounty, the Freeness, the Munificence, the
Richness of the Grace of God, to call things that are not as though they were.

Answ. Take heed of abusing that Scripture. God sent Christ to Renew, to
Redeem, to Change, to make Holy and Righteous, to make people such as the
Father might be pleased with, accept and Justify: And as Christ makes them
so, the Father receives and accepts them as such. But God does distinguish
and call things as they are. He does not call an ungodly man, an holy man, a
justified man. But when he has changed him, new created him in Christ Jesus,
took him out of his old stock and planted him into the new, then he accounts
and calls him so, and not before. It were better for men to wait upon God, to
understand what his Spirit meant in what he spoke, then to put formed meanings
of their own upon his words.

He wrests my words, charging and reproving me, as if I said, The Love of God
was a bare thing.

Answ. Those were not my words, nor did my words so signify; but my words
were, that it is not by bare Loving (or mere Loving, or only Loving) that God
makes a man Righteous, which is very true and manifest: For there is besides
his Love (in and through that Love) the sending of his Son, and revealing of
his Son, drawing to and Transplanting into his Son, to make Holy and Righteous
in him. For Holiness though it may be distinguished, yet it cannot be divided
from Righteousness; nor can a man posibly be Righteous in Gods sight, unless he
be also Holy in some measure. His reflecting words hereupon I pass by, though
very unjustly and unchristianly cast upon me (without any just occasion given
him by my words) which I desire the Lord may make him sensible of, that he may
be forgiven it.

He blames me for saying, we make no finite thing our Righteousness, and yet
he says, We make the measure of the Spirit (which each member of Christ
receives) our Righteousness.

Answ. A measure has the same nature with the fullness: A measure of the Spirit
and Life, of the Grace and Truth which comes from Jesus Christ, has the same
nature that the fullness ha^h. All the Life, all the new Creation that comes
from him and dwells in him is Righteous and found Righteous where ever it is
found. Yet I do not remember that we have thus expressed it, that that measure
is our Righteousness, but it is he who is the fullness, who is revealed in that
measure, and it is he, who is our Righteousness, our Wisdom, our
Sanctification, our Redemption: But it is in the holy pure measure of the
heavenly gift that he is made thus of God to us, not out of it.

He says, The Lord our Righteousness Redeems us, not properly by the Life and
Spirit of his Godhead, though that was in the work supporting, enabling him and
carrying him up, in that great undertakeing, but by the death and sufferings of
his manhood.

Answ. This is strange Doctrine, to make the manhood the main Redeemer, and the
Life and Spirit of the Godhead, but the supporter, and the carrier up of the
man in the work of Redemption: Whereas it was the Word which Created all, which
also Redeemed, he that left his Glory and made himself of no reputation, but
came in the form of a servant to do the will. It was the Spirit and Life of the
Father (even the Eternal Son) which took up that body, appeared in that body,
offered it up a pure and acceptable Sacrifice to the Father, finishing the work
therein, which the Father gave him to do, Joh. 17.4, 5.

He says, Shall we think to answer the Law by our obedience?

Answ. We do not look upon the Law of Moses, which was given to the Jew
outward, to be the dispensation of the new Covenant, or to be the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus. But those who are in the new Covenant, and have
Gods Law writ in their hearts, and his fear put there, which preserves from
departing from him, and his Spirit put within them, to cause them to walk in
his ways and to keep his Statutes and Judgments and do them, and who live in
the Spirit and walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, the
Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in these. Yet they do not magnify and
cry up their own obedience (nor call it their Righteousness) but him from whom
their obedience comes. For in the measure of his Grace and living Truth, the
Soul is one with him; and all that he is and all that he has done is theirs,
and it is he himself that is the Righteousness of all that are in him: And they
that abide in him par^ake of his Righteousness from day to day, which flows
in like a stream upon them.

I wish he could consider in what Spirit it is, that he calls the white Stone a
Ticket for the Righteousness. Does he know the white Stone with the new name?
It is no less then the Foundation Stone, then the Righteousness it self: And
what does he talk of bringing that as a Ticket for the Righteousness?

He seems to pass by some things (which I spoke in tender love and
weightiness of Spirit to him) as the Judgment of man in his day: but let him
take heed, least when be comes to appear before God, he then find it was the
Judgment of Gods Spirit, in the Light of his day: Which day is inward and
Spiritual, which believers are to hasten to, and which approaches in every
heart, as the night spends and passes away. And all true Christians and
Believers ought to wait for the passing away of the night, and the dawning of
this day, and the arising of the day Star in their hearts.

He says, Christ is now ready to be revealed.

Answ. I believe he is to be revealed fu^ther and in fuller glory: But he is
truly already revealed as the Savior, Shepherd, and Bishop of the Soul, and
many are gathered home to their resting place in him, which while they were
scattered up and down upon the barren Mountains (before the Shepherd appeared
and made himself manifest) they could not find.

He seems to strike at the peace and joy which is of God, and to give it a
dash, Because minds estranged from the Enlightenings and Convictions of God,
have much peace in their ways, and such are under delusions.

Answ. We do not tell men of the peace and joy we have in our God boastingly,
but in a faithful way of Testimony concerning, and invitation to, what we once
wanted, but now have found under the leadings of the true Shepherd. And the
peace and joy which he gives, is an evidence and assurance in the hearts of
those to whom it is given by him. And they that have been greatly distressed
for want of the Lord and his powerful Arm of Salvation, having met with it, it
rises up from Life in them to testify and say to others, Lo this is our God
we have waited for him, and we will be glad and rejoice in his Salvation. And O
that ^e also were stripped of this dead, notional, comprehensive knowledge
concerning the Savior; that ye might meet with the Savior himself, and
receive that knowledge from him which is Life Eternal. And this, with the true
peace and joy thereof from him, ye would find no delusion.

He speaks, Of suffering loss and of phrases and expressions, better (says
he) to suffer loss in these then themselves to be destroyed.

Answ. Let him apply this home. O that he saw how those phrases and
expressions, and imaginary knowledge, which he has brought forth in this
Letter, stands in his way to hinder the true knowledge, and that he cannot
possibly receive the true knowledge, without being emptyed of these, and
parting wi^h them, for the excellency of the knowledge of the Truth as it is in
Jesus: And without the true knowledge of Jesus, men cannot but perish and be
overtaken with destruction.

Then for being helpful to establish Persons in Grace.

Answ. Such kind of Doctrines as these do not tend thereto.

They may establish men in such a notion of Grace as he has formed: But they
neither tend to lead to, nor establish in the Grace it self, but keep men from
it. Nay I can truly say it, from him that is true, that he himself cannot
receive the Grace, the thing it self, till he part with these notions. And O
that he might know the Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, to dash
his Image, that the living one (who gives Life) might be received by him, in
that measure of Grace and Truth, which he inwardly dispences to all that travel
out of the darkness of their own imaginations and conceivings upon the
Scriptures, into his pure Light.

The maine reason he gives why he is not satisfied with that which I sent him,
concerning the sum and substance of the true Religion is, because it fights
with his notions, even a stating of our Righteousness with God, according to
his imagination, which is absolutely a mere dream, which he has dreamt of in
the night, and not seen in the Light of the day. For the cry of the Spirit of
the Lord is in the Gospel day, Open ye the gates that the Righteous nation
which keeps the Truth may enter in. This is the Truth, as God ha^h revealed
by his own Spirit, in this our day: But to say, this speaks of our state in
him, without witnessing it in our selves, is but a mere dream: And men cannot
bring forth fruit to God, nor be lovely and pleasing in his eyes, but as their
fallow Ground is ploughed up, the Thorns, Thist^es, Briars, and that which is
unclean and unholy removed.

Christ, he says, Is the heavenly man and mansion in whom we are thus blessed,
and in whom we sit down in a state of Rest and Riconcilliation, Heavenly and
Divine, before and without the consideration of any works of Righteousness
which we have wrought, etc.

Answ. If he means this concerning the full sitting down in Rest; it is
directly contrary to Scripture. For none sit down in that full Rest, before and
without consideration of Works of Righteousness wrought by them. For that great
Judgment, is a time of rendering to every man according to his works. Rest is
the Reward of the Traveller: And his Travels are not despised, but considered
in his Reward. Mark, every one that improved the Talent, had a reward from his
Lord. And come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you:
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. Math. 25. And the Apostle is of
the same mind with Christ, when he says, It is a Righteous thing with God, to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you rest, etc. 2 These.
1.6, 7. So that Persons do not sit down in eternal blessedness in Christ,
before or without consideration of any works wrought by them.

And then for sitting down in an heavenly divine state of Righteousness, Rest
and Peace in him here; It is a glorious State to be traveled to. The^e must be
a translating out of the Kingdom of darkness, into the Kingdom of the dear Son
first. The Kingdom must first be come, and the Soul prepared to enter into it,
at the Gate which the Spirit opens to him in the way of the Gospel. For it is
one thing to know somewhat of Christ, and to begin to become a Disciple; and
another thing to learn of him so to deny a mars own Wisdom, and will, as to
come to receive and be born of that which is true and living of him, and to
learn to wait aright for the opening of the gate, and entering into the Kingdom
and Land of Life, and to be prepared to sit down with him.

For their is a state of Discipleship, wherein a man hardly knows a
settlement, so much as how to watch with Christ rightly and constantly: But it
is a great matter to be able to dwell and abide with him. None can do this; But
he that can dwell with devo^ering fire and everlasting burnings: For the pure
Word of Life is a fire, and he that sits down in the heavenly place in him,
must sit down in that fire.

This he Reckons the firm stable state which indeed is no state at all. There
is not a state in Christ without being in Christ: And then the state is
according to the Souls being in Christ: For then the Work of Regeneration, the
Work of Sanctification, the Work of Justifying, etc. goes on and a man is with
God, according as he is framed and new created in Christ, and not otherwise. So
that the Life and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, is found Judging and
Condemning whatever is not of God; and Justifying only what is of God in him.
For the Soul then comes into the new Covenant which requires and Justifies
that which is new, all that is wrought in God; and condemns all that is
wrought out of him. And so here is the true sense and knowledge of sin, by the
new, and pure Law of the new Covenant, and the Advocate known and Repentance
given by him upon all occasions, to those that wait upon him, and the
Sprinkling of the Blood, and Remission upon Repentance. This is the new and
Living Way of the Lord Jesus Christ, which he has consecrated for all his
(made known in the d^monstration of his Spirit) which will stand for ever:
Whereas men's aprehensions about those things which they have gathered and
comprehended of themselves out of the Scriptures (in the supposed Light of
their natural Reason and Understanding) are but Dreams and will vanish even in
their own hearts, if ever the true Light arise the e.

He says, This state can never fall nor be finally fallen from.

Answ. There is a way of coming to Christ, and there is a way of preservation
in Christ. For there is a Power that Redeems; and men are preserved by that
Power in subjection to it. And so every one, That thinks he stands is to
fear, and take heed lest he fall: And not to boast and say, I am in a state of
Justifycation, which is firm and cannot be moved; and it cannot fall, nor be
finally fallen from, For ye are kept by the power of God, through Faith, unto
Salvation, Keep to the Power which preserves; Hold that fast which thou have,
let no man take thy Crown. Keep the faith, make not shipwreck of it, and of a
good Conscience. O that men knew the right Doctrine, and way of coming to
Christ! (which they cannot do, till they are taught of the Father, Joh. 6.45.)
and the right Doctrine and Way of standing and abiding in him. For truly men's
professed coming to Christ, believing and standing at this day, is generally
notional, outward, without; but not in the inward Life and Power it self,
without which no man can come to him, nor stand and abide in him.

He charge us, With setting up a Covenant of Works; always doing and never
done; a Covenant to be performed by us, for our selves, not by Christ for us.

Answ. I would he saw in the true Light how unjust and untrue this charge is.
For the Lord God of Life knows that he himself has taught us the new
Covenant, and thereby taught us to wait upon himself in his Son, to work all
our works in us and for us: And this we daily experience, that we can work
nothing, but as he works in us. Therefore our whole course is a waiting on him
in stilness, to witness him appearing and doing all in us: And blessed be his
Name, we do not wait in vain. But if he think all works are excluded out of the
new Covenant, he greatly erreth: For the Works of Gods Spirit are required and
have a place therein: And God and Christ (the King and Shepherd) is the Judge
of his People in the new Covenant, and justifies or condemns according to
the Law thereof. In the faith and obedience he justifies: In the unbelief and
disobedience he condemns, without respect of Persons.

And it is a precious thing in the Gosple Ministration to come to God the Judge
of all, and to witness true judgment set up by God in a man's own heart, that by
the ministration of the pure judgment there the Soul may come to learn
Righteousness, of the holy Teacher and Shepherd, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
who is just and faithful under his Father, in the impartial Ministration of the
new Covenant.

Hereupon several charges he brings against us, through his own mistakes and
misapprehensions of us.

As First, That our Doctrine imployes Free Will and power in the creature.

Answ. We have never experienced Free Will nor Power as of our selves, but as
we have bin turned to Gods Power and received it from him; nor did we ever
testify to others, that they could receive and embrace Truth in their own will
and by their own power. O that this Person had true discerning of, and were
severed from that Spirit which thus charge us! For whoever receives this
Testimony concerning the inward Light of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall never
find himself able to do any thing therein by his own will and power: But there
witnesses Gods begetting him out of his own will, by the Life and Power of
Truth.

Secondly, He charge it, That it makes the Election of God altoge^her
frustranious.

Answ. Election of the Seed, in the Seed, it does not at all make frustranious:
But men's wrong apprehensions concerning Election out of the Seed, the true
Doctrine of Election does not con^^^^ with. He has chosen us in him; so that
in him, to wit, in Christ the choice is; and he that will make his Election
sure, must make the Seed sure to him; growing in the nature thereof, wherein
the Election is to the truly obedient.

He says, Our Righteousness with God is the Foundation.

Answ. But is there not somewhat which is the Foundation of our Righteousness
with God? And can we be Righteous with God, til we come to that Foundation, and
be made Righteous by it? Must we not first believe in him? And is not faith a
gift, which comes from the holy Root, and makes a change in them in whom this
gift is found? Does not Faith make a difference between them that believe, and
them that believe not? So that so soon as ever there is true faith, and it thus
works, the State is changed: And there is no Justification before faith. For in
the unbelief is the condemnation for ever. He that believes not is condemned
already: And what, is he justified there too at the same time? Was Abraham our
Father, justified in the unbelief and disobedience? Or in believing and obeying
God? for what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God and it was counted to
him for Righteousness.

That which I spoke of, he says, Is but the fruit and superstructure.

Answ. When Christ directs men to the Seed of the Kingdom, does he direct unto
the fruit and superstructure? I spoke there of the Seed, of the Light, of the
holy Spirit, of the quickening Virtue; Is that the superstructure? Or is that
the fruit of men's being made Righteous? Nay must they not turn to that, receive
that, believe in that, even in the Light of Gods Spirit (for they are the true
and right believers) before a man can come to be made Righteous, or accounted
Righteous in the eyes of the Lord? For none are Righteous but in him: And all
are out of him, till they be gathered into him.

He instanceth in one passage of mine (in a Book entitled, The Sum or
substance of our Religion, who are called Quakers) the words are these. This is
the sum of all, even to know and experience what is to be brought down into
death, and kept in death; what to be brought up out of the grave, to live to
God, and Reign in his Dominion, and what to be kept in subjection and obedience
to him who is to Reign. Now to experience it thus done in the heart, the flesh
brought down, the Seed of Life raised, and the Soul subject to the pure
heavenly power, whose right it is to Reign in the heart, in and by the Seed,
this is a blessed state indeed. For here the work is done, etc. these were my
words. Now mind, God is the Teacher in the new Covenant. Now he that has
learned this of him, has he not learned the true Religion? And is not this a
full sum and substance of Religion? When the Apostle says, Pure Religion and
undefiled before God, is to visit the fatherless, etc. Alas, might this Spirit
have said against the blessed Apostle, that is not the pure Religion, (not the
sum or substance of pure and undefiled Religion) that is but a fruit or
superstructure. O that men had true sense and understanding! That they might
favor the words that come from Gods Spirit, and the words that come from their
own Spirit; and might not be offended at that which is true, pure and living of
him.

But having disliked this sum, he gives one of his own, in these words
following. I say the sum, and that which first and mainly imports us to know,
as the Lord has taught me; is that the old man is crucified with Christ, and
brought down into his grave, and that we are risen together with him, by the
faith of the opperation of God, and from this faith to be work ng with God, to
mortify our members that are on the earth.

Answ. Does not Christ send his Apostles to preach the Gospel, and give them
this m^ssage, that God is Light, and to turn their minds to the true Light,
that they might be enlightened by it? Does it not import men first to know
that, whereby they might be Crucified, before they can know themselves
Crucified th^reby? So that Christ did judge this as the first thing necessary
to be known in the preaching of the Gospel, and bid men p each the Light, and
turn men to the Light, and to the inward appearance and voice of Gods Word in
their hearts: And what are men risen together with him by the faith of the
opperation of God, while they are yet in their sins, in their ungodly state.
And how can any witn^ss the faith of the opperation of God in this state? Now
it had been better he had forborne affirming that the Lord taught him thus. For
truly the Lord never taught any thus. This is not truth from God, nor will it
be owned by the Lord as his Truth, when he comes to appear before him: And he
should have took it to himself, and not have put the Name of the Lord to it.

But against this his own Doctrine he raises an objection, in these words.
Shall we mortify that which is mortified already?

His Answer is, The old man which is crucified together with Christ, is the
state of the flesh and of enmity. This is past away, and in this is the Concern
of our Righteousness and Justification properly.

That which remains to be mortified, are our members upon earth, which are the
fruits of that evil state, and in the mortifying of these, is the concern of
our Sanctification. The will of God is done in heaven, etc.

Answ. Paul speaks of the Law of sin in his members; and he also speaks of the
body of death, and cries out against that, O wretched man that I am, says he,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? He felt somewhat that
nuorished and gave strength to the Law of sin in his members, and looked upon
himself as wretched, ti^l he could meet with deliverance therefrom. Now some
are of opinion that there is no being delivered from the body of sin, while in
this Life. Do thou look upon it to be done in Christ for us without us but
never to be don by Christ in us? Let me tell thee, if ever thou come to witness
the pure, eternal Light of the Lord Jesus Christ revealed in thee, that will
not find out some members on earth only, but the very body thereof and show
thee the necessity of the putting off that body from thee, and that circumcision
whereby it is to be done, which is the circumcision of Christ. Mark, the
promise of the new Covenant; I will circumcise thine heart and the heart of thy
seed to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart that thou may live. Is
not this the circumciosin of Christ? Does not this cut off the body of the sins
of the flesh in the particular, where this is witnessed? This is the Truth as
it is in Jesus, even To put off the old man with his deeds. It does not say,
the body is put off in Christ without us, and men must only put off the
members or deeds; but, they must put off the body, and come to witness in
themselves the very Nature, Spirit, Root and Principle, from whence they
proceed; cut down and destroyed in them. They must feel the Axe laid to the
root of the corrupt Tree; and it cut down in them (not think it enough to say
it is done in Christ for them) yea, they must also witness the Lord arising to
shake teribly the earth, in which the Tree grew, that so the place of Dragons,
and Serpents (where each lay in times past) may hence forward become the place
of holiness, where grass may grow, and the new plants and flowers of the
Paradise of God. And how is the will of God done in heaven? Is it done in
heaven after this manner? Have Mercy and Righteousness the Pre-eminence the
leading of the Van (they are his own words) and said to go before and look down
from heaven after this manner (the body of sin being put off in Christ there)
are there not those here on earth who dwell in heaven? Whose conversation is in
heaven, even the Witnesses to Gods holy Truth, who are ascended up above the
Spirit of this world, and dwell in Gods holy Spirit, and who walk in the Light,
as God is in the Light. Hell is not far from the wicked; nor is Heaven far from
them, who are renewed in the Spirits of their minds and who witness the passing
away of the old things, and the new Creation in Christ. O that he could look
back (in a true sense) and see how he has wrested those Scriptures! Psalm.
85.9, 10, 11. Isa. 4.2. and Ephesians. 2.6. afer his own imaginations: And indeed
in this Spirit men cannot but turn the precious Truth of God into a lie, that
is, as to themselves, as to their own knowledge of it. It is known, how the
Branch of the Lord is beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth
excellent and comely, and in what day it is so; which day is, When the Lord
shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Sion, and shall have
purged the blood, etc. by the Spirit of judgment and by the Spirit of burning,
Isa. 4.4. Then every one that is left shall be called holy, and the Branch of
the Lord shall be glorious in the midst of them, and the fruits of the earth
excellent and comely for them. And then they that are thus purged, shall sit
with Christ in the heavenly places, there being an abundant entrance
ministered to them into the everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11.

Thirdly, He charge it with making the obedience and suffering of Christ
superfluous, except only as a pattern.

Ans. Christ came to do the Fathers will, ^o obey, to suffer, Totast death for
every man; to fight with and overcome the devil, to offer an holy, spotless
Sacrifice for all mankind that through him they might witness atonement and
acceptance* And the Lord saw the use of this, and we witness the use of this,
and find every thing in its proper place and service in him, who is Gods
Covenant of Life and Peace in us and to us. But the work of this day, is not to
Preach up a notional knowledge of these things (the Christian World so called,
has been drowned and dead in them long enough) but to bring to that measure of
the Spirit, to that sense of Grace and Truth, which is by Jesus Christ, wherein
the benefit of these things is truly reaped and enjoyed: And indeed that is the
work committed unto us from the Lord, who gave us this Testimony to bear,
whatever men may think or speak of us.

And whereas he speaks of our laying hold of passages, in his Printed Sermons
to favor our Cause.

Answ. That is his mistake, as to me. It was for his sake I mentioned it. There
was indeed at that time somewhat stirring in him, which would have gathered
him, had he known and obeyed its voice, and not run out into lofty notions
concerning it. He had some sense then of a Glory aproaching, which he might
have from the true Prophet: Though even then he ran out in his imaginations
concerning it, and did not rightly apprehend, nor know how and when it appeared.

He has further charges against us, Of crying up Works against the workman,
man's grace and righteousness against Gods, Conformity to Christ, against
Christ; Yea to make a Christ of our righteousness, a Savior of our Conformity.

Answ. O what will this man do, when the Lord shall show unto him, that he has
charged not so much us, as the Spirit and Power, and precious appea^ance of the
Lord Jesus Christ with these things! We cry up works no otherwise then we are
taught of God, and as the Apostles and Prophets have cried them up. Faith is
necessary, and Works are necessary in their places: And the Justification of
each follow them. And he that receives the Spirit of the Son, and therein does
Righteousness, is therein est^emed of God Righteous, as the Son ^ righteous. 1 John 3.7. God Justifies us in his Son, and loves his holy Seed to therein,
and the Faith that comes from him, and all the Works that are wrought in him;
and out of this holy Root of Life and Power is no man, nor his Faith, nor his
Works Justified.

Then for man's Grace and Righteousness. Where does he hear us speak of man's
Grace? O what does he mean? Will he misrepresent the cause of his neighbor or
brother to make it bad? And for man's Righteousness, we do not cry it up or put
it on; but testify men must be uncloathed of it: And we our selves were fain
to part with it, and put it off before we could be clothed with Gods
Righteousness. But the Works of Life, the Works of Gods Spirit, the Works of
the new creature, the Works of the new Covenant; these are not man's Works, nor
unrighteous Works, condemned by God, but Justified in and through him that
works them. The Works wrought in us are truly acceptable, and we in him who
Works them, who is our Righteousness. And concerning this Peop e (these
Children of the new Covenant) which the Lord has Begotten and brought forth in
this our day, that Scripture is fulfilled in them and upon them Their
righteousness is of me says the Lord. Isa. 54.17. Well as long as the Lord
says so, we matter ^ot though others say that our Righteousness is of our
selves, and that it is our own Righteousness, being assured that Gods Testimony
in our hearts (as to this thing) will stand.

He aggravateth this charge thus. And this to be done by those that have been
so far enlightened, and that account all the Relig on and Profession in the
world below them as carnal.

Answ. Indeed we magnify Truth, Life, the Anointing, the Spiritual, the inward
appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, to which we have been turned, and in it
made Spiritual: And all other Knowledge, Faith, Profession, Religion (which
has not its rise here) we cannot but call carnal. For the enlightening Spirit
of the Lord has given us this Testimony to bear, against all the dead,
notional Professors of this Age, who build from the Letter (or rather their
apprehensions of the Letter) out of the Life, all which cry up names of the
Foundation and corner Stone, but refuse, reject, d^ny and turn from the corner
Stone himself, and have neither skill nor patience to try what he is, in this
his Pure, Precious, Living, Powerful and Glorious Appearance, in the Spiritual
Light of his inward day, after the long thick Darkness of the foregoing night.
And woe would be unto us, if we did not thus testify. For, for this cause we
were b^rn and brought into the world, to testify to the present appearance of
our God, and of his Christ in this our day; Glory to him who has called and
chosen us to, and (in a true and precious m^asure and degree of his own pure
Life) made us faithful therein.

This (says he) is so far from giving us a list nearer heaven, that I cannot
more properly resemble it, then to the coming forth of Amal^ck, who met Israel
by the way when they were come forth out of Egypt, and smot the hindmost of
them, etc.

Answ. Do not talk of having a list nearer heaven, O learn the Way, the holy
Way, the living Way wherein no dead, unclean thing can walk. Learn to know Gods
Spirit in your selves from that which opposes his Spirit. Ye have been long
learning, after your old conceivings and apprehensions of the Letter, O at
length come to learn the Truth as it is in Jesus, which discovers sin and
death, and the body of it, and crucifies and puts it off, and makes room in the
heart for him that is true and pure. And then for Amalecks smiting Israel, O
how greatly are ye mistaken; ye take your selves for Israel, and us for
Amaleck, whereas if your eyes were anointed, ye would see that we have been
begotten and born of Gods Spirit, through the Word of Life which was from the
beginning, wherein we have been Circumcised with the Circumcision made without
hands, that we might worship God in his own pure Spirit, and in his living
Truth; and that our God has inwardly appeared to us, and led us out of Egypts
Land, and out of Babylon also, and all the Lands whereinto we have been
scattered in the cloudy and da^k day: And that this is Amalecks spirit in you
several sorts of Professors (through your dark imagina^ions and conceivings
about the Letter) which rises up against us, and this Spirit in you fears
not that God who has appeared, and by his own holy Arm of Power has led, and
is leading us. So that we may take up the complaint of the Prophet in this day,
Who has believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord Revealed? For
though we speak what we have heard, seen, and felt of the Life which is
Eternal, and of the Word which was in the beginning, yet ye are so far from the
Witness of God in your own hearts, that ye cannot receive our Testimony, but
oppose it with your dead, dry, notional, conceited, imaginary knowledge, which
will stand you in no stead at all when ye come to appear before God.

Then he proceeds, complaining against us thus: Ah Sir! In stead of clapping
us on the back, and ministering to us in our journey, you clog our March, and
fall upon our Rear; In stead of serving the Kingdom of Christ, which the Church
is now in Travel of, you deny the first Principles of the Gospel and wholly
d^^own the hope of Christ's second Appearing and Kingdom, knowing or
acknowledging, as no other Savior, so no other Kingdom, but a Principle or a
Light in your selves.

Answ. God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all, And this is the message
of the Gospel, 1 John 1.5.

And Christ, who is one with the Father, he is one and the same Light with him,
and we confess we look not for another besides him, nor for another Kingdom
besides the Kingdom which is revealed in him; for the Kingdom which is revealed
and manifested in and by him, is the Spiritual, Eternal, Everlasting Kingdom,
and there is not another. We do not say the Fullness, or that the full Glory of
the Kingdom is now revealed or enjoyed, (nay, we confess we have but the
earnest, in comparison but a mea ure, a proportion) but this is the same in
nature and kind with the Fullness it self. And all that is of Christ, of his
Spirit, of his Nature is saving; the least measure of his Grace that appears
in any heart, brings Salvation with it, the least touch of his Finger has
pure Life and saving Virtue in it: Yet this is not distinct nor s^parate from
the Fullness, and so it is not another, though it be not the Fullness.

But whereas thou complainest of our not ministering to you in your Journey,
but clogging it: Oh that ye knew what your Journey is, and whither ye are
marching and traveling in that present spirit wherein ye act. We acknowledge it
Gods great Love and Mercy to us, to deliver us from that spirit, and from that
way of Knowledge, Religion, and Worship, wherein ye still abide. And what we
have seen and known from the Lord, that are we required of him to testify to
you; and if your eyes were opened, (by the Principle of Light from him) in the
holy Anointing, ye would bow to the Testimony: But judging of it in a contrary
wisdom and spirit, ye not only turn from it, but fight against it, and reproach
and slander us, for our faithfulness to the Lord and good will to you, which
the Lord make you sensible of, and forgive you, that at length ye may know and
receive him (who is the desire of all Nations) in his pure, living, inward and
spiritual appearance.

And as for denying the first Principles, that belongs to your selves: for do
ye not deny that Light which is the foundation of all, and wherein and whereby
all the mysteries of Gods Kingdom are seen: and instead thereof set up a
notional, comprehensive knowledge of your own conceiving, comprehending and
gathering from the letter: whereas no man can understand the letter, but as he
comes into the abid^s in the Light. This we have experienced in our selves
formerly: for we were but guessing at, and imagining concerning the Letter,
until and further then we were turned to, and our minds gathered into, and
comprehended in the Light of Gods Spirit. And as for disowning the hopes of
Christ's Kingdom, the Lord knows that is far from us: for we our selves bless
him for what of his Kingdom is already appeared; and wait and hope for the
further and fuller appearance thereof. But this we confess, another Spirit,
another Christ, another Light, another Life, another Power, another Kingdom,
besides him who has already appeared, we do not expect. For he is our King and
Kingdom both: and the least proportion of his Life and Spirit received, (bought
with the loss of all, and so purchased and possessed,) is no less then a Pearl
of great price, and an heavenly Kingdom to him that enjoys it.

He adds further, If Christ be but a Principle, then we are no other, and
only Principles shall be saved, and no Persons. Is this your Gospel?

Answ. Christ is the promised Seed, to which all the promises are, in which
Seed all the families of the Earth are Blessed, as they are gathered unto, and
grafted into Him. But he is not only the Seed, but the seeds-man also; who
sows of his Life, of his Nature, of his Spirit, of his heavenly Image in the
hearts of the Children of men. He gives a measure of the Grace and Truth unto
them, the fullness whereof he has received of his Father. Now this measure of
the Light Eternal is very precious, and is that wherein he appears and
manifests himself: Yea indeed glorious things are both spoken, and witnessed
of the Seed of Life, of the Seed of the Kingdom, of the Grace and Truth which
comes by Jesus Christ. But we never said that this Seed, or Measure of Life, is
the Fullness it self, but that which the Fullness imparts to us, and brings
Salvation home to our doors by. And if any man will receive Christ, he must
receive that from Christ wherein he manifests himself. There is a difference
between the Light which enlighteneth (the fullness of Light, which gives the
measure of Light, the measure of annoynting to us) and the measure or
proportion which is given: the one is Christ himself, the other is his gift:
yet his gift is of the same Nature with himself, and leavens those that
receive it and abide in it, into the same Nature so that not only the gift is
one with him, but we also are one with him in the gift. Come be not thus wise
after the flesh, nor do not strive so (in thy wisdom and knowledge out of the
Truth) to Triumph over the Truth, and Truths Testimony, in this the day of Gods
great Love, and glorious Arm of Salvation, revealed in the midst of his People,
which he has gathered out of Babylon, and the dark knowledge thereof, into the
Light and Kingdom of his own dear Son; where he gives them Eternal Life, and
of the fruits of the Good and Heavenly Land.

He adds; I firmly believe, and so have all the Saints that have gone before,
that Christ is a Person, and his Spirit is a living Principle in the hearts of
all the faithful, but it is not the Spirit or Principle in us that did redeem
us, but the man Christ Jesus.

Ans. If he mean by the man Christ Jesus, The second Adam, the quickening
Spirit, the heavenly Man, the Lord from heaven, he who is one with the Father,
the Word which was in the beginning, which created all things, I grant him to
be the Redeemer; for it was he who laid down his glory, wherewith he was
glorified before the World was, and made himself of no reputation, but took
upon him the form of a servant, and came as a servant, in the fashion of a man,
to do the will. But if he distinguish Christ from this Word and Spirit, and
make the Man's Nature, the Savior, and the Godhead only assistant to him (as
he seemed to word it before, and as these his words seems to imply) that I
utterly deny. For so testifies the Scripture, I am the Lord, and besides me
there is no Savior. I am a just God and a Savior, etc. So that Christ is the
Savior, as he is one with God. It was Gods Arm and Power (revealed in him)
that effects Salvation. Yea if I may so speak, his obedience was of vallue, as
it came from the Spirit, and it was the offering it up through the Eternal
Spirit, that made it so acceptable to God. So that we must not attribute
Redemption originally to him as a man, but as he came from God, and brings the
honor all back to the Spring and Fountain, from whence he had all, that God may
be all in all, and the very Kingdom of Christ may endure and abide for ever, in
the Root of Life from whence it came.

And so he is not a Foundation, or the Cornerstone distinct from God: He as
the Foundation, was and is the Rock of Ages: the Spiritual Rock, both before
and since he took upon him the body prepared for him. It is the Spirit, the
Life which was revealed in that Man (by which he did his Fathers will) which
was and is the Foundation whereupon all the living Stones are built. There is a
Foundation of Death; and that's the wicked Spirit. There is a Foundation of
Life, and that's the holy Spirit, by which Christ himself was led and guided
(in that his appearance in the flesh,) which descended upon him, and he was
anointed with, and all his are to be anointed with, and live in the same
Spirit. And he that knows Christ in this Spirit, he has the true and abiding
knowledge of him, and no otherwise: And though the names, Messiah, Jesus,
Christ, Savior, Anointed, etc. were given to him as in the flesh, or as man,
they most properly and originally belong to him with respect to the Divine Life
and Birth in him as the sent one, And only Begotten, Proceeding from the
Father, the Brightness of his Glory, etc. for he as the Eternal Son of God was
the Spiritual Rock, before he took upon him that Body which was prepared for
him, which expressly was called, the Body of Jesus, and which he called This
Temple, and distinctly he being called Jesus Christ come in the flesh, which
every Spirit that confesses not, is not of God, but is that Spirit of
Antichrist, 1. Joh. 4.3.

He speaks of sitting on the Throne of David.

Ans. It is a great matter to know that Throne, which David's Throne signified,
and Christ sitting thereon. His Kingdom, his Throne are not of this outward
worldly nature; but inward and spiritual: and his Throne is in his Kingdom and
Temple, where he reigns and is worshipped. He that knows Satan disthroned and
cast out, knows also Christ come in, and sitting on his Throne. O that men
did give over their dreaming about the heavenly Glory, and come thither in the
leadings of Gods Spirit where it is revealed.

Was that Scripture written in vain, concerning the glorious state of the
Gospel? But we all with open face beholding as in a Glass, the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.

He puts up a prayer for us, That the Lord would awaken us, and make us do
our first works, and return to our first Love.

Answ. Ah poor man how is he blinded, not discerning how the Lord has don this
for us and much more: but it is he himself that has lost his first love, and
does not do his first works, but is found short of that tenderness, quickness
and savor that once was in him. O that he might see it, and return to him
whose quickening virtue restores and heales.

He concludes with the words of the Prophet Jer. Chap. 13. ver. 15, 16, 17.
Hear ye and give ear, be not proud for the Lord has spoken. Give glory to the
Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the
dark Mountains, and while ye look for Light, he turn it into the shadow of
death, and make it gross darkness. But if ye will not hear it my Soul shall
weep in secret places for your pride, and mine Eyes shall weep sore, and run
down with Tears, because the Lords Flock is carried away Captive.

Answ. How does this man mistake in his sight and applycation of Scriptures?
Seeing, and applying in a wrong Spirit. It is true, the Lord has spoken, but
he himself and many such as he is have not given ear, And what is the reason,
but because they are exalted above the pure Principle of Life in their own
hearts? And are not such proud? Has not he brought forth these weapons, the e
false charges and reasonings in this paper against the heritage of God in the
pride of his heart? As for us the Lord God has humbled us, and taught us, who
have learned, and daily learn of him in the humility; and in humility and fear
do we give forth our testimony, though also in the Authority and Majesty of our
Masters Name, whose Name stands over, and is exalted above every Name, and his
Mountain and gathering is (in the pure Authority and Power of his Spirit) above
all other Mountains and gatherings whatsoever. And as for Gods causing
darkness, let him and such as he is look to it, for God does not, nor will
cause darkness to them whom he has gathered into the Light of his Spirit, but
says to them, Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee, O City and dwelling place of the living God. But those that
know not, or turn against his appearance, and cry up former dispensations of
the same Life and Power, but reproacheth and blasphemeth the present, on them
does he cause the gross darkness to fall, and cover them. And this which he
thretneth us with, is already fallen upon himself, for his feet are fallen
upon the dark mountains; and whilst he looks for Light he ha h lost that which
once he had, and his very Light, as (he esteems it) is become obscurity and
gross darkness, as this dark paper of his (from the dark Spirit and Principle)
makes manifest to all that shall read it in any measure of true sense or
discerning. And truly my oul does weep in secret for his pride, and height of
Spirit in opposing the Lord, his Truth and People. And for this cause shall
those, who have looked upon themselves as the Children of the Kingdom, and
flock of God, be laid wast, and know, that as it was a dreadful thing to oppose
Christ Jesus the Lord, in his appearance in flesh, so it is also dreadful to
oppose his appearance in his Spirit and Power: wherein he is arisen to set up
his Kingdom, and to throw down Babylon, which is built in the likness of Sion,
but by and in another Spirit. Those in whom there is any tenderness toward God
(and true breathings after him left) the Lord give them the sense and true
understanding of this inward spiritual appearance of his Son, and of what they
have been doing and are doing against it; that they may not continue to fight
against the the Lord, and kick against that which is able to wound and prick,
to their own hurt and eternal ruin. For there is not Salvation in any other
name, then in that which is now revealed: Blessed are all they that trust
therein; it being not another but the same that ever was.

To His POSTSCRIPT.
HE begins it with the justification of that passage of his, in a foregoing
letter of his to me, wherein he said, Christ is Heaven, and I am Hell.

Answ. When God visits man, he finds him in union with Hell, Death and
darkness, and the man is Dead, is Dark, is of an hellish Nature and Spirit in
that state. But when the Lord has converted him, cut him off from that root,
leavened him with the Spirit and Nature of his Son, is he Hell still? Ye were
Darkness (says the Apostle) but now are ye Light in the Lord. And such were
some of you: but ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. A man can be but Hell
before he is washed, before his filth be purged away by the Spirit of Judgment
and Burning, before the old leaven is purged out, and he sanctified and made a
new lump: but after the Lord has thus changed him, and new created him in
Christ, Is he still Hell?

He says, He does not call the new Creature Hell, but there is an Old Man, an
Outward Man, as well as the New Man and the Inward Man; Flesh as well as spirit
in the Regenerate.

Answ. What does he mean by the Outward Man, the Sinful Body; The Body of Flesh
is within. The outward Body that's not Hell, that's the Temple of God, where the
heart is Sanctified. And the pure Word of Life Sanctifies throughout, even in
Soul, in Body, in Spirit, those that are subject to it, Know ye not that your
Bodies are the Temples of the living God? and your Spirits much more: for God
is a Spirit and he dwells in a Spiritual Temple; and his Temple is holy.

He adds, And unless your attainment be beyond Paul's, he found that in him,
(that is in his flesh) dwelt no good thing: and the Flesh lusting against the
Spirit, so that he could not do the thing that he would.

Answ. Paul did once experience such a state, that he felt himself Carnal,
Sold under Sin; when he did not find how to perform that which was good, but
did what he hated, the Law of Sin being strong (in his members) against the Law
of Life in his mind; which state he calls, A state of captivity to the Law of
Sin in his members, and calls it a wretched state, Romans 7.23, 24. But did
Paul never experience another state? Did he never witness the virtue and power
of the new Covenant, even the Law of the Spirit of Life, and the Power thereof,
freeing him from the strength and captivity of the Law of Sin in his members?
There were young men, John speaks of, who were strong and had overcome the
wicked one. Did Paul himself never attain to that state? He bid others be
strong in the Lord and in the Power of his might, and showed them how to resist
in it, so as to overcome. Did he never experience and witness it himself? He
said, He had fought a good fight, and was more then a Conqueror. What was he
then a captive to the Law of Sin in his members, and did he then cry out, Who
shall deliver me from the body of this Death? He said, He could do all things
through Christ that strengthened him: was not that a state different from that
other wherein he found only to will? And could not do the good he desired, but
did the evil he allowed not, but hated? And blessed be the Lord, there are many
at this day, who witness a farther state of redemption and deliverance from
Sin, and the Law thereof in the members, then that state of captivity was,
which Paul there expresses his former groanings and complainings under. For he
was not in that state of captivity when he writ that Epistle, but knew the
Dominion of Grace over sin, and bid that Church be subject to the Grace, and
not give way to sin, but yield their members servants to Righteousness unto
Holiness, Chapter 6.

For that other place, Of the Flesh lusting against the Spirit and the Spirit
against the Flesh Gal. 5.17. He does not there speak of himself; but of the
Galatians, who were in a weak, low, and indeed fallen state, from the Spirit
and Power of the Gospel, having let in that which was contrary thereunto. And
so he strives to gather them into the Spirit again, and bids them, Live in the
Spirit (and walk in the Spirit) and so they should not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. For in the new Covenant man is taught of God, the holy lesson of ceasing
from evil, and doing good: and taught in the virtue and power of the Covenant,
so that he learns daily, and grows daily out of Deceit into Truth, until he
come to be a true Israelite in whom there is no Guile. And so in the spiritual
War, The house of Saul grows weaker and weaker, and the house of David stronger
and stronger, until Saul's Kingdom be at length overturned and wholly destroyed,
and the Kingdom of David established in Righteousness for ever and ever. Then
Jerusalem the holy building, the City of the living People, the City of
Righteousness, (the Habitation of Righteousness and Mountain of Holiness) is
known, and Jerusalem is witnessed a quiet habitation, there being peace in all
her borders. Then the mind is fully stayed upon the Lord in all conditions: and
he keeps it in perfect p^ace. Then the Soul is careful for nothing, but in
every thing makes its requests known to God, by prayer and supplycation with
thanksgiving; and the Peace of God which passes all understanding, keeps the
heart and mind through Christ Jesus. Surely the Apostle had learned himself,
(when he taught others this) in every state to be content. He knew how to be
abased, and how to abound, etc. O glorious state, O pure state of pure Life in
the heart! And what if I should add, O perfect state! The Apostle James says,
Let patience have its perfect work, that ye may be Perfect and Entire, wanting
nothing, or in nothing, Jam. 1.3. When Paul had so learned Christ, that
abundance could not lift him up, nor want deject him; or cause him to repine or
distrust, what did he want of this perfect state?

His next words are, If you have no sense of this, your state is never the
better to be liked.

Answ. Christ led Captivity Captive, and the same Power is revealed to lead
Captivity Captive in us. And truly when God leads our Souls out of Captivity,
putting his fear within us, writing his living powerful Law of Life in our
hearts, and putting his Spirit into us, leading us in the way of holiness, and
causing us to walk therein; we find this a better state, then when we were
groaning under deep Captivity.

Further he says, If your Peace and Joy stand in seeing no sin your self, (in
your self I suppose it should be) I shall more then suspect it, not to be the
Peace and Joy of Paul, and all the Saints, but a delusion.

Answ. Our Peace and Joy is in him who is without sin, and it abounds in us, in
his cleansing and delivering us from sin: and we have found him remove sin as
far from us as the East is from the West: and as he removes transgression from
us, and brings sin and the power of Satan to an end in us, he gives us of
his Peace and Joy. And truly we do not only witness him destroying sin and the
works of the Devil, but breaking the very head of the Serpent, casting him out,
And peirceing Leviathan, that crooked Serpent, and slaying the Dragon that is
in the Sea. And though such as he may suspect our peace and joy; yet while
Christ gives it us, and maintains it in us, it is very sweet and pleasant to
us: and the time may come, that he may wish from his heart, that he might
partake with us therein.

He concludes the matter thus; We are without sin in him, but in our selves
nothing but sin.

Answ. He spoke of delusion just before: a greater th^n this I do not know. For
Christ does make a real change, if any man be in Christ there is a new Creation,
there is a real Change. The man is not what he was before: but he puts off that
which is old, and puts on that which is n^w; and so is really changed in his
state, and in the sight of God, and is not what he was before. The heart when
it is really renewed and washed by the Water, Blood, and Spirit; it is not the
old, abominable, wicked, deceitful heart that it was before. If this be his
knowledge and experience let him keep it to himself: for my part I desire not
to partake with him therein; but to be like Christ my Lord and Master; even
sanctified throughout in Soul, Body and Spirit; that I may become wholly his
and the Enemy of my Soul have no part in me.

He says, Christ shall appear without sin to Salvation.

Answ. I grant it; But when and how? Does he not inwardly appear without sin to
salvation to those who have waited for, hastened and come to the inward day?
Does not Christ appear without sin to Salvation inwardly in the day of his own
Spirit? Is not Salvation then witnessed for Walls and Bulworks? Is not the
glorious Salvation of the Gospel brought forth in the Gospel-Day? And is there
not in the Life and Dominion of Grace, a pure Defense about all the Glory? Is
there any sin in the Grace and Spirit of the Gospel, which appears and shines
in the Day of the Lord? And does not this Grace bring Salvation to them that
wait for the revealing of it?

He seems to clear himself of watching for our haltings.

Answ. Had he not watched for our haltings, and received things into, and
considered them in the prejudiced part, he could not have writ such a Paper
against Truth and Us, so far from true Understanding and Judgment as this is.

But he says, He has watched for our Repentings.

Answ. If we should repent of having our eyes opened by the Lord, and turning
to his Truth, and receiving his holy Spirit, and of having the precious
Promises of the Scripture made good to us, and fulfilled in us, we might justly
loose our Portion and Inheritance of Life for ever. We have repented from dead
Works, but we cannot repent of Gods pure Truth, and the living Way, Spirit and
Power thereof. But this I can tell him, and that from the Lord, whose Name I
reverence and worship in, That the Lord watch^th for his Repentings, and
turnings from that spirit in him, which darkneth him concerning, and
prejudiceth him against the Truth.

He beseeches me in Love, etc. and requires me to clear my self of Free Will,
Falling from Grace, denying Election of Persons, and Imputed Righteousness.

Answ. What the Lord requires of me, that I must mind, and I have diverse times
expr^ssed my heart nakedly in these things.

The Principle of Life, which the Lord has raised in me, in that is the
freedom to good, and in that am I made free by Jesus Christ my Lord. And I had
rather witness him upholding me by his Power, than contend about a Notion of
Falling or not Falling away. And my care has been about making my Calling and
Election sure in him, who is sure to those that are of him for ever. And I have
witnessed the righteo^sness of the Lord Jesus Christ revealed in me, and
imputed to me, and my soul clothed therewith in his sight, blessed be his
Name. O that the Professors of this Age might come to the anointing, and see
those things in the anointing; Then would they know the Truth and harmony of
the Scriptures therein: But men by the Letter without the Spirit can never
discern or find out the mystery of Life, but only gather into their minds, and
retain a litteral knowledge that kills.

He bids me, Love the Truth better than a Party.

Answ. The Lord knows he has taught me so to do. For had it not been for the
evidence and demonstration of Gods Spirit in this People, I could never have
owned them. (For, O how low was the knowledge they held forth in my eye, before
the power of the Lord reached to my heart, raising up his own Seed in me,
wherein I knew them!) And the Lord also knows, that it is in him that I love,
and discern, and honor them to this very day; Yea I see his Name written on
their Foreheads, and them brought forth in the glorious Image, and heavenly
Life of his Son (though it be hid from the wise Eye of the Professors of this
Age) and in the true Light, with the true Eye (which God has opened in me)
have I seen it.

He speaks of Clinging together, and keeping up a Party against all right.

Answ. Nay, nay. This is the gathering of the Lord Jesus Christ, by his Spirit
and Power, after the long night of darkness, and we are kept up by the same
Spirit and Power, and Life of Truth which gathered us.

He says, It is not a calling for a Work within, which will give you Authority
to lay wast Christ and the Gospel in the most Fundamental and concerning Truths
thereof, and those above mentioned, etc. And above all the rest, denying the
person of our Lord Jesus Christ, and making him but a Light, or Notion, or
Principle in the heart of Man.

Answ. This is but his own mistake, not a true and just Charge against us, as
he will one day see. The Lord has not taught us to lay wast, nor do we lay
wast any Truth of the Gospel, but own every thing in its place. And though our
Religion do not lie in Notions concerning him, but in the Principle of Life it
self, ev^n in the Grace and Truth which is by Jesus Christ (which is a measure
of Light from him the full Light) yet we do not learn thereby to deny the full
Light, but the more to acknowledge it. And we own him to be the true and full
Light, and his outward appearance in that Body in the fullness of time, to
fulfill the Fathers will therein, and his appearance in Spirit and Power, in
the hearts of his People, in the Day of the Gospel, and his setting up his
Spiritual and glorious Kingdom there, where he reigns as King on the Throne of
David, over the Spiritual Israel of God. Come, consider seriously, do not ye
your selves fall short of not only the Principle and Power of Life, but also
the true knowledge of things according to the Letter?

He confesses, There is too little Power, and without it profession is little
worth.

Answ. O that the Professors of this age knew the Scriptures and the Power of
God, and had that knowledge which comes from and stands in the Power! For then
that evidence and demonstration of Truth would be witnessed, which puts an end
to the disputes and reasonings of the mind,: And then the great care would be
to live the life of that which God makes manifest and requires in the New
Covenant.

He says To pull down the Pillars and Principles of the Gospel is the work the
Devil imploys his Power in.

Answ. I grant what he says is true, (and wish he knew how rightly to apply
it:) but there is a great error and mistake in his judgment about it. For the
Lord is pulling down that which men have built up, (which they may in their
mistaken judgments call Principles and Fundamentals) and is building up that
which men have trampled on, even the Tabernacle of David, which has long been
fallen down, and the City of the living God, which has long been trodden under
foot of the false Christians: and the Power of the Devil is greatly at work to
oppose this appearance, and mighty work of the Lord in this day. Let him take
heed of blaspheming the Lords Power, calling it the Devils, and owning the
Devils Power for Gods.

He concludes thus, Come to the point, what singular thing do you more then
Moding and Wording it, save only that out of you have risen men, that have more
audatiously lifted up a Standard against the Sealed and Experienced Truths of
the Gospel, then ever I have heard or read of any before you. You talk of words
and boast of perfection. I tell you an humble sense of a man's nothingness,
driving him out of himself, to live and glory in Christ alone, is more then all
such boasted perfections a thousand times. Sir accept my zeal for your Soul.

Ans. We are a People (many of us) who have gone through great distress for want
of the Lord our God, and exceedingly waited and longed for his Living and
Powerful appearance. And for my own part, this I can say, that had not this
appearance been in Power, and in the evidence and demonstration of his Spirit
to my Soul, (reaching to and answering that which was of him in me) I could
never have own^d it, so deeply was I jealous of it, and prejud^ced against it.
And since my mind has been turned to the pure Word of Life, even the Word
which was in the beginning, (I speak as in the Lords presence) it has had
singular effects on my heart. The Light has so searched me as I never was
searched before, under all my former professions, and the Lord has given me a
true and pure discerning of the things of his Kingdom, in the Light which is
true and pure, and singular quickenings have I met with from his Spirit, and
the faith which stands in his heavenly Power, and gives victory and dominion
in him, blessed be his name. And the love which he has given me is not
notional, but arises from his circumcising my heart, and answers his Nature,
springing forth purely and naturally toward him and those of his Image, and
all his Creatures, yea toward those who are enemies to me, for his Names sake.
I might mention the patience also and faithfulness to his Truth with the
longsuffering Spirit, which cannot be worn out, which his Spirit testifies in
me to be of a singular nature, with many other things. Nor am I alone, or the
chiefest, but have many equals, yea there are such as far exceed me in the
Heavenly and Divine Image of my Father. And the fruits are according to the
Root of Life in us, and so acknowledged by all who look upon us with the true
Eye, with the Eye of Gods giving and opening. Now the same that has wrought
thus inwardly in us, the same has required some outward behavior and
expressions from us, which are foolish and weak to the eye of man's wisdom, but
chosen of God, to hide the Glory of his Life from that eye which di^cerns it
not, but dispiseth the day of small things. And though this be the least part
of our Religeon (yet subjected to because it is of God, who we dare not disobey
in the least) yet the Spirit which is contrary to God casts this upon us, as
if this were all, or at the least the main wherein we differ from others. Some
call the living words of Truth from us (when God according to his good promise
gives them us) but Canting, and thou call all that is singular in us, but
Moding and Wording of it. Alas! it is in the main we differ from you, we
holding our Religion as we receive it from God, in the Light and Life of his
Spirit; you as you apprehend it from the Letter. Christ is our Rock and
Foundation as inwardly revealed, yours but as outwardly conceived of. We
believe with the Faith which is of the natrue of him whom we b^lieve in, which
Faith is mighty through God, and works through all the Powers of Darkness,
giving victory over them all in Gods way and time: ye believe with a Faith
which esteems victory and a perfect and entire State (wanting nothing) as
impossible, while in this world. And as our Root differs, so all that grows up
in us differs from yours. So that indeed all is singular that is in us, and all
also is singular that is brought forth by us, as the Spirit of the Lord, who
knows the difference of things, witnesses. Have we so long walked in the
Name and Spirit of our God amongst you showing the singular virtues of his
Spirit, daily in our faithful Testimony, Sufferings, Patience and Conversation,
and do ye still cry, What singular thing do ye? Just like the Jews, who after
all Christ's mighty Works, and demonstrations of his Fathers Virtue and Power
outwardly, asked for a sign? O that your eyes and hearts were opened by the
Spirit and power of the Lord, for then ye would soon see otherwise in this
respect than now ye do.

And then as for that expression, Of audatiously lifting up a Standard against
the sealed and experienced Truths of the Gospel, that is but an over confident
expression, through prejudice and mistake of judgment at least; for I can truly
testify, I have never learned, since the pure heavenly Light of the Lord Jesus
Christ has shined on my Spirit, to deny any one Truth that ever was sealed to
me, or experienced by me in the days of my former profession: For whatsoever
was then of God has been restored to me, and that only which was of the flesh
pared off. And I have ground also to believe; that it is so wi^h others in this
respect, as it has been with me.

He speaks, As if our difference or talk were about words.

Nay, it is about things: For though we own the same Lord Jesus Christ to be
the foundation of Life; yet after a different manner, ye, as ye notionally
apprehend concerning him; we as we experience him to be the precious stone and
foundation of Life in us: And we testify of Justification and Sanctification,
as we witness him bestowing it upon us and working it in us. But for boasting
of Perfection, I wonder how he dares speak thus: What is their no fear of God
before his eyes or in his heart, that he dares charge us with that which is so
utterly false? Where is any of us, that did ever boast of Perfection? But that
Gods Power and Covenant is able to make Perfect; and that Gods will is our
perfect Sanctification, in Soul, Body, and Spirit: Even that we be wholly
leavened with the Salt of the Kingdom, and become a fit Temple for him; this
we humbly and reveren^ly testify of, and press toward in his holy name and
fear.

And as for that humble sense, Of a man's own nothingness d^iveing him out of
himself to live and glory in Christ alone: This we meet with and witness in
that Light, which this generation of Professors dispiseth: But others, though
they may talk of it, can never come truly to witness it, but in that Light
wherein God bestows and preserves it. Well the Professors of this Age, who
despise the Light, shall one day find, that what they take themselves to be,
they are not in Gods sight; nor are we before him, what we are reproachfully
represented by them: But we are his workmanship in Christ Jesus, created by him
unto good works; and that it is natural to us, to bring forth the fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness to our God, however men reproach us. As for his zeal
for my Soul, Which he desired me to except: It is strange zeal, and would tend
to my ut^er destruction, had it power over me. But blessed be my God, who has
called me into the Light of his Son, and I am satisfied that he will preserve
me therein, even in that holy Spirit of Life, which he has gathered me into,
from all deceiveable Spirits of darkness whatsoever, in that holy Covenant
wherein his strength appears to me and is revealed in me. And O! That he might
know what that Spirit is wherein he has thus appeard against the Lord, (though
under a pretense, as if it were for him) and bring forth no more the fruits of
it.

For a close, I shall add a few words on that Scripture, Phil. 3.3. For we are
the circumcission, which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. It is a precious thing to witness
this Scripture, fulllefid in the heart: To experience that there, which
inwardly circumciseth, which cutteth off the foreskin of the heart, which lies
over it and vaileth, till it be cut off by the inward appearance of the Life
and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ inwardly revealed. Then when this is done, I
can truly and sensibly say, I am a Jew inward: How so? How can that be proved?
Why I am inwardly Circumcised. I have felt that within which Circumciseth the
heart, and have born the inward pain and cutting thereof, and am Circumcised by
it. That which stood between me and the Lord is cut off, the vail is taken
away, the stiffeneckedness and unsubjection to God removed, the Wall of
separation is inwardly broken down; and now I am in true unity of Spirit and
comunion with my God, even with the Father and the Son, in that one holy Spirit
wherein they are one. Now I can bow before the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and worship him in his own Spirit; even in the new and fresh Life thereof day
by day. Now my rejoicing is in Christ Jesus, whom the Father has sent, both
outwardly in a body of flesh to fulfill the holy will, and do what therein the
Father had for him to do; and also inwardly in his Spirit and Power into my
heart, to destroy the works of the Devil there, and so to work me out of the
enmity and unreconciled state, into the love and reconciliation: And I cannot
but rejoice both in what he did in his body of flesh for me, and in what he
does by his Spirit and Power in me. And blessed be the Lord, I feel him near,
his Spirit near, his Life near, his Power near, his pure Virtue n^ar, his holy
Wisdom near, his Righteousness near, his Redemption near: For he is my Rock,
and my Strength, and my Salvation day by day: And I have no confidence in the
flesh, in what I am, in what I can do after the flesh, but my confidence is in
him, who has weakened me, who has stripped me, who has impoverished me, who
has brought me to nothing in my self, that I might be all in him, and that I
might find him all unto me. He is my Peace, he is my Life, he is my
Righteousness, he is my Holiness, he is the Image wherein I am renewed; in him
is my Acceptance with the Father, he is my Advocate, he is my Hope and Joy for
ever. He has destroyed that in me which was contrary to God, and keeps it
down for ever. He is my Shepherd, his Arm has gathered me, and his Arm
encompasseth me day by day. I rest under the shadow of his Wings, from whence
the healing virtue of his saving health droppeth upon my Spirit day by day. Oh
I cannot tell any man what he is unto me; But blessed be the Lord, I feel him
near, his Righteousness near, his Salvation daily revealed, before that eye
which he has opened in me, in that true living sense wherewith he has
quickened me. And now ye that have high Notions, and rich comprehensive
Knowledge concerning these things, but not the thing it self, the Life it self,
the Spirit it self, the new and living Covenant and Law of Life it self,
wherein alone Christ is livingly revealed; Ah how poor, miserable, blind and
naked are you, in the midst of all your Traditional Knowledge, and pretended
Experiences, concerning these things. Come be quiet a while, and cease from
bitterness of Spirit, and reviling the Work and People of the Lord: For the
Lord knows and will make manifest both who are his and who are not his. All
the living Stones are his, but the great Professors of the Words of Scripture,
without the Spirit and Life of the Scriptures, are not his, nor never were, nor
never will be owned by him. Come, learn to distinguish from God, by his Life,
by the Anointing, by the everlasting infallible Rule; and not by words without
Life, where the great error and mistake has been in all Ages and Generations.
The great Way of Deceit has long been (and still is) a by Form of Godliness
without Power. Be sure ye be not thus deceived; for if ye miss of the Power
which saves, ye cannot but p^rish for ever. And what if the Appearance of the
Spirit and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ Inwardly, which is that which saves,
be as strange to your Sense, Understanding and Judgment, as his Outward
appearance was unto the People of the Jews? Take heed of their Spirit, take
heed of their Judgment, who judged according to the appearance of things to
them, which they imagine and conceive from the Scriptures, but judged not the
true and righteous Judgment, which only the Children of the true Wisdom can

A Postscript.
THERE are four or five things very precious, which were generally witnessed in
the days of the Apostles, among the true Christians, which are all mentioned
together Heb. 6.4, 5.

First, They were truly enlightened.

The Ministers of the Gospel were sent by Christ, to turn men from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God, Act. 26.18. 1 John 1.5. and they
were faithful in their Ministry, and did turn men from the darkness and power
of Satan, to the Light of Gods holy Spirit, and they were enlightened by it, and
received power through it, and so came to be Children of the Light, and to walk
in the Light as God is in the Light.

Secondly, They tasted of the heavenly gift.

What is the heavenly gift, which Christ gives to those who come unto him, and
become his sheep? He gives them Life, Eternal Life, Joh. 10.27, 28. He brings
them out of death, and gives them a savor and taste of the Life which is
Eternal. This was it which the Apostles testified of, even of the Life which
was manifested in that body of flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, (1 John 1.2.)
and they that turn from the darkness to his Light, he gives them a taste of the
same Light.

Thirdly, They were made pertakers of the holy ghost.

The Gospel is a day of bringing forth the Spiritual Seed, and of pouring out
the holy Spirit upon them. The Law State is a State of Servants, the Gospel of
Sons: And because true believers in Christ are Sons, God sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into their hearts to cry Abba father. And God cannot deny his own
Spirit, to his Children that ask it of him, he knows how absolutely necessary
it is to the state of a Son. And whosoever truly receives Christ, Christ does
give him power to become a Son, which power is in and with, and cannot be
separated from his Spirit. Yea, the Spirit of Christ is so necessary and
inseparable from him that is Christ's, that the Apostle expressly affirms, That
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9.

Fourthly, They tasted of the good word of God.

Of that Word from which the gift comes, of that Word which was in the
beginning, of the Word which is ingrafted into the hearts of those that truly
believe, Which Word is able to save the Soul.

Fifthly, They tasted of the powers of the world to come.

Of the power of the endless Life, whereof Christ is the Minister, and
according to which he ministers Life, in that Holy, True, Living, Inward
Spiritual Temple, which he pitcheth and reareth up for an habitation to God, in
his own Spirit.

Now in the Apostasy and night of darkness, which has come over the Christian
state, these things have been greatly lost. For there has bin none that have
bin found able to turn people to that Light, which the Apostles directed to.
None could tell men where the Light is to shine; and where men were to expect
it, and wait for it. None were able to direct men to the Seed of the Kingdom
within; to the Word of Faith, the Word of the Kingdom, nigh in the heart and
mouth: Much less were they able to instruct men, how they might know and
distinguish it from all other Seeds, and the voice of the Sheepherd from all
other voices. Here it came to pass, that though at times God visited and opened
men's hearts, a little warming them by the breath which came from himself; yet
they not knowing how to turn to the Lord, and wait upon him for preservation in
the gift and measure of his own Grace; the good has soon been stolen away from
them, and the building which has been raised up in them, has not been a
building of Life according to the Spirit, but a building of Wisdom or
Knowledge concerning the things of God, according to the flesh: and so the
building, that has been raised up in men's Spirits, has been Babylon, in stead
of Sion.

But the Lord has had a remnant all along the Apostasy, who felt some
begettings of Life, and had in measure some sense and taste of the heavenly
things. These mourned after that state, which was once enjoyed, and felt their
want of it, traveling from Mountain to Hill, seeking their resting place,
which none could rightly inform them of. Now for the sakes of these, God has
at length appeared.

How appeared, may some say?

Why thus, He who is Light has appeared inwardly, causing his Light to shine
inwardly, causing his Life to spring inwardly: So that he who is Light, who is
Life, who is Truth, is felt and known in his own inward visits, breakings forth
and appearances. For God who is a Spirit, his appearance is Spiritual, his day
is Spiritual, his kingdom is Spiritual, his Light is Spiritual, his Life is
Spiritual, his day star is Spiritual, and his day dawneth and his day star
arises in the heart. Thus, The Dayspring from on high did visit us who satt
in darkness, and in the region of the shadow of death. And here we have met
with what the Apostles met with, the very same Light of Life, the very same
enlightening Spirit and Power, and have been enlightened by it, and tasted of the
same gift.

The very same grace that appeared to them and taught them, has appeared to us
and taught us; and of it have we learned the same lessons, in the same Covenant
of Life wherein they learned: and now can we seal to their Testimony in the
same Spirit wherein they gave it forth, and witness to the same eternal Life,
and the same holy oil and anointing, our eyes having been opened and being kept
open by it. And though their be great disputes about our Testimony in this our
day (and the present Professors rise up against us, as the former Professors
did against them) yet let but any man come rightly to distinguish in himself,
between that which God begets in the heart, and all other births, and let that
speak and judge in them, that will soon confess that our Testimony is of God,
and given forth in the authority and by the commission of his own Spirit. True
wisdom is justified by the Children that are born of her: It is the other
birth, that does not, nor can own her. The other birth can own former
dispensations: (according to the Letter of them) but not the Life and Power of
the present.

I have known the breaking down of much in me, by the powerful hand of the
Lord, and a parting with much (though not too much) for Christ's sake. The Lord
has brought the day of distress and inward judgment over my heart. He has
arisen to shake terribly the earthly part in me, (yea what if I should say,
that the powers of heaven have been shaken also?) That he might make me capable
to receive and bring me into that Kingdom which cannot be shaken. And now, that
which God has shaken and removed in me, I see others build upon, and they
think it shall never be shaken in them. But such know not the day of the Lord,
nor the terrible searching of his pure Light, nor the opperation of his Power,
which will not spare in one, what he has reproved, condemned, shaken and
overturned in another. He that knows the Living Stone within, and comes to him
as to a Living Stone, and as built upon the revelation of his Spirit, Life and
Power (revealed inwardly against the power of darkness) is not deceived, all
that otherwise build (I mean upon an outward knowledge concerning Christ, and
not upon his inward Life) their building will not be able to stand in the day
of the Lord. I wish they might have a sense of it in time, that they might not
perish for ever; but experience that Life and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which redeemeth and preserves out of the perishing state, for ever and ever.
Amen.

THE END.

