PENDRAGON; OR, THE Carpet Knight HIS CALENDAR.

-- Rubet Auditor cui frigida Men's est
Criminibus, tacita sudant praecordia
Culpa.
Juv. Sat. 1. Why, let the stricken Deer go weep,
The Heart ungall'd go play:
For some must watch, while some must sleep*
So runs the World away.
Hamlet. LONDON, Printed for John Newton at the Three Pigeons over against the
Inner Temple Gate in Fleet Street, School.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BEcause it looks too naked to fall immediately from Title Page to Page the
First, the Reader, in lieu of Fig Leaves, or a Screen to come betwixt, is
presented with a short Advertisement concerning the Nature, Powers, and
Privileges of Burlesque Verse.

The Remarks thereupon, which the late Learned and Ingenious Sir Thomas
Pope-Blount has collected from the Opinions of several Men, signify little
more than that it is not to be meddled with for fear of doing Mischief: And so
it is shamefully discouraged and Brow-beaten by the Critics, because indeed
they themselves are afraid of it.

Should we suppose the Chief of our dead English Poets holding a Sessions with
those who are now living, I cannot imagine where they would place the Author of
Hudibras: To set him at the Upper End of the Table, above the Princes of Epick
and Heroic, would be ridiculous; and no less so, to place him at the Bottom.
In my Opinion he ought to be set, like Apemantus in the Play, at a Side-board
by himself. Burlesque taking the Privileges of that surly Philosopher, no
wonder if it is treated like him, but scurvily. But for the same Reason, why do
not Men of the profoundest Literature and deepest Science fall foul on
Cornelius Agrippa, for his ridiculing and showing the Vanity of Arts and
Sciences; or on Solomon himself, for his Divine Book of the Ecclesiastes? But
not to go too far that way, I would rather here speak of the Laws of Burlesque,
(if I knew any it had:) It stands indeed upon Four Feet; but its Liberties and
Privileges are unbounded; and those Four Feet are, I think, by no means obliged
to be but Eight Syllables; for in place of the Last, it is a part of its
Excellency sometimes to have Two, Three, or Four Syllables (like so many Claws)
crowded into the Time of One Foot. The Duple and Triple Rhyme, in some other
Poetry much blamable, are Beauties in this: And Burlesque esteems it no Fault,
for Rymes sake, to borrow from any Language whatsoever.

Its Nature is to Ridicule, Flatter, Huff, and Banter, by turns; to Scratch and
Claw now, and anon to Grin and Bite like a Satyr.

I am ignorant of the true Reason why it is called Doggerel; but I know a witty
young Gentlewoman, who has a small Talent that way, and she calls her own
Burlesque, Bitcherel.

It is wonderful to traverse its Arbitrary Power, how it proceeds without
regard to Periods, Colons, or Comma's: How sometimes it will change Accents for
the sake of Rhyme, and, according to the most vulgar and careless
Pronunciation, leave out what Consonants it pleases. It will end the Verse with
a Preposition, and make Interjections at its own Libitum. It often uses Grammar
so ill, that it will baulk Orthography it self, rather than not assert its own
Prerogative. All the Tropes, Figures, and Flowers in Rhetoric bend beneath it.
The Synaelepha and Apostrophe, like two Executioners, are continually waiting
upon its Absolute Will and Pleasure. Refining and Polishing, which gives Beauty
to other Poetry, spoils this: As if the Printer should leave out the Flat Nose,
Goggle Eyes, Hump Back, and Distorted Limbs, and call it The Picture of Aesop.
It will break a Word in Two, and gather up the latter Part of it a good while
after, when one would think it was quite lost. Sometimes it goes on with a long
Bead-row of Monosyllables together, and esteems it no Blemish; at another time,
one single Word, or two at most, shall compose the whole Line. Endless it would
indeed be to recount its various Qualifications and wild Vagaries, or to say
how many different Things it is like.

As true Heroic may be compared to a Beautiful Well-dress'd Lady, who, when
she pays her Visit, lets down her Train at length, and advances with an even
and graceful Motion; so Burlesque may be likened to her wanton Chambermaid,
with her Petticoats tucked up, in her Masque and Pattens, who walks, runs,
stumbles, stops, looks about, and laughs, and perhaps all in less than a Minute.

Among many other Comparisons, (which are Odious) one of the worst Things
Burlesque may be likened to, is Mr. Bays's fierce Hero in the Rehearsal; who
frights his Mistress, snubbs up Kings, baffles Armies, and does what he will,
without regard to Numbers, Good Manners, or Justice: And yet after all, this
frightful Thing does no more harm, when set upon proper Subjects, than Dogs
that kill Vermin.

If the Author of Hudibras had a right or took liberty to ridicule particular
Factions and Persuasions, as he thought them faulty, sure another Man must
needs have the same Privilege to expose those who are apparently mischievous to
Society, and destructive to good Established Government. Though I doubt whether
ever any Man will arise with so transcendent a Genius and happy Talent for this
purpose, as Mr. Butler; and great Pity it was, as well as Shame, that in one
respect he was suffered to fall so low at the last.

If our Author be mistaken in his Conceits about Burlesque, he presumes his
Errors are of no dangerous Consequence; and for that Reason, is little
concerned about them. Therefore, without detaining the Reader any longer, he is
desired to fall to the following Pages, and make the best of them.

PENDRAGON; OR, THE Carpet Knight HIS CALENDAR.
January's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
After a decent Introduction,
Our Muse for better Satisfaction,
Craves Aid and begs Assistances
From the most valued Friend she has;
Then gives Pendragon's Character
While he sat writing in his Chair.
CANTO.
I Sing the Man of strange Renown,
For Letters, not for Warfare known;
Who did his Reputation raise
From Skill in Style and Languages;
From ranging Words in Order, and
Keeping o'r Alphabet's Command,
Which far and wide dispersed his Name,
And got him Dignity and Fame.
For Knighthood (the Reward of Fighting)
Was given him only for his writing.
Not but the Gown does often afford
As Noble Honors as the Sword;
The Gown distinguishes Degrees
Of Men, in different Faculties,
And tells us at a distance who
Is walking off, or coming to;
And Ermins, Scarlet Robes and Furs,
Are deemed as worshipful as Spurs:
Yet our famed Knight owed his Preferments
To none of these exalted Garments;
For his Advancement came alone,
From's Morning, Night, or Studying-Gown.
In former Days when Times were scurvy,
And Government turned Topsie-turvy:
When Rulers who should give Protection,
Sat to administer Destruction;
To change established Property
To Bigottry and Slavery:
When Pulpit Bout'feu's beat Alarms,
And Evidences rose in Swarms;
Whose Business was to cut the Weazon
Of others differing in Persuasion:
Though in declaring Overt Acts,
Like makers of our Almanacks,
In giving Judgment of the Weather,
No two of them Agreed together:
When greatest Virtues did but render
The Man the greater an Offender:
When Scribere in a Private Nature,
Was Agere to make a Traitor:
When Lord Chief Justices had Claws,
And Daggers lay wrapped up in Laws;
Then did Sir Knight, put Flame to Taper,
Elbow to Board, and Pen to Paper.
Now, though 'twas very Cold, he wrote
As if the Season had been Hot;
Though Sol through Capricorn was hying,
His Brains were still in Cancer frying;
He would maintain there could no Fault
Possess a Minister of State,
Who acting by his Prince's Will,
By that was safe from doing Ill;
Nor was he fit to be restrained
By any public Laws of the Land:
He taught all Subjects to obey,
Dispensing, Arbitrary Sway;
And who this Doctrine drust deny
He Would prove a Foe to Monarchy:
He chiefly bent the Nib of's Pen
To write against the Golden Mean;
To prove Men Wise and Moderate
Were Enemies to Church and State;
That to be still, and void of Action,
Sedition was and downright Faction;
And who in Speech was never so silent,
In Thought was represented Violent.
'Twas thus his Fingers sought to cripple,
And ham-string the King's best Leige-People,
By laying about him might and Main,
Daily with Paper, Ink and Pen.
Whence (though the Sound be somewhat Pagan)
Came his acquired Name Pendragon.
And who but he in that vile Age
In such Designs so fit to engage?
A plyant Tool, obliged with Knighthood
And large Rewards, he was excited
To serve the Times through all Excesses,
And on foul Deeds to put fair Faces,
Until he grew to be the great
Prevaricator of the State:
Thus all true Englishmen he found,
Pendragon with his Pen dragoon'd.
Success in Sham and Banter made him
Proceed wherever the Maggot led him;
That Maggot which does turn and wind
The greatest Part of Humane Kind.
All hail thou mighty Worm which reigns
Lord-Paramount in Mortals Brains,
Patron of Whimseys, and the Itches
Of Fancy, and the Mind's Capriches;
Who grave Philosophers and wise
Have made to write in Praise of Lice,
Fleas, Asses, Dogs, and Cats, and Owls,
Hermaphrodites, and Apes, and Fools:
Thou who inspir'st Disease and Phrensy,
Grief and old Age with Wit and Fancy,
Can teach Men tortured with the Pox,
To ease their Pain by breaking Jokes;
And make the Raging of the Gout
Into Poetic Rage break out:
Thou who giv'st Coronets of Bays
To Lords and to Apprentices;
And have thy Garlands ready made
And sized to every fashioned Head,
I beg the Assistance all along
To the Conclusion of my Song:
Teach me new Notes, and as I do sing,
To think well of my own Composing.
Let me be positive and bold,
As Bays of late, and Ben of old;
And whatsoever Self brings forth,
Applaud it as a thing of Worth:
And as with a Crane-neck the Chariot
Makes shorter Turns and quicker for it,
So give me the bein Tourn of Doggerel,
That Muse may drive on, and not clog her Wheel:
Send me one Rag of Butler's Mantle,
And I can never fail to Cant well:
Butler! the best of Buccaneers,
Who taught us Pyracy in Verse;
From whom the boldest Critics run,
And dare not stay to fire a Gun:
May they no less my Rhymes come near,
Or I their Patarero's fear.
But if our Sense obtains, and Measures
Contribute to a Prince's Pleasures;
If he esteem 'em worth Recital,
We hope he will think 'em worth Requital;
And not let ( Butler-like) the Founder
Neglected live, and run aground here.
So much by way of Invocation:
Now we'll proceed, without a Passion,
And suffer no warm Thoughts to hurry us,
While the Sun's tugging through Aquarius;
While nipping Frosts, and Snows, and Hail,
With Cold, and piercing Winds, prevail;
While the Nights yet continuing long,
Yield no good Subject for a Song.
Let there a rowsing Fire be made:
Suppose it done as soon as said:
Then draw the folding Table near,
And place by that an Elbow-Chair;
To which be Sir Pendragon put in,
With all his Magazines about him,
Of Paper, Wax, Wafers, and Sand,
A well-cut Pen in his Right Hand,
On his contracted Brows he wears
A goodly Cap of Sable Furs;
A Neckcloth round his Neck is tied
Of finest Muslin flying wide;
From Head to Foot he is covered down
With the said gaudy Studying Gown,
Made of a Flowered Silk, whose Kind is
Richest of Persia's or the East Indies;
Which, with his Slippers of the same,
To public view was all that came.
His Person's very tall and straight,
Exceeding much the common Height,
Could we but make him stand upright.
His Body, had it been exhibited
Naked, One might have told each Rib it had:
A Man so Lathy, long, and lean,
Is very rarely to be seen.
The Figure of his Face is Oval,
Not broad at bottom, like a Shovel;
Though on sinister part of Gullet
Appears a Poke, or fleshy Wallet,
A strongly radicated Tumor,
Caused by an old Malignant Humor,
Which he who skilled in Physics Trade is,
Does term the Scrophula, or Chaerades:
Yet if our Knight did ever show
In Lombards Vale at Bergamo
His Visage, with this Modish Swelling,
No Man would there advise its Healing:
For it is in Fashion so, the same is
Esteemed an Ornament, no Blemish;
And one would swear, he had so far gone
Being versed in their peculiar Jargon,
Which imitated very much is
By famed Buffoons and Scaramouches.
But not to suffer a Digression
To put us by our proper Lesson:
After the Color of his Hair,
We term him of Complexion Fair;
His Eyes were of the lively Hazel,
And Eyebrows large became his Face well;
His Nose well-shap'd, on Top of which
Was fixed the Ciceronian Fetch,
An Index of his Rhetoric,
That is of Eloquence and Trick.
His Visage wore an eager Air,
Keen as the Season of the Year;
His Forehead shone like Burnished Brass;
Bright and Case hardened was his Face,
Which nothing Foul could touch or take,
But worse it still reflected back:
Such was the Nature of the Mirror,
To render no Idea's fairer.
But the best Part about the Man
Many will have to be his Brain,
Always a working, never idle,
Even when he takes in hand the Fiddle.
In vain the Harmony's designed
To quell the Discords of his Mind;
The Faculties whereof were strong,
Though constantly directed wrong.
His Fancy too was most Luxurious,
And fertile of an Offspring spurious.
His Memory had Mansions many,
And some as fair and large as any;
But still the fairest and the best
Were took up by the foulest Guest.
For Slanders vile, and lying Stories
Lodged in its choice Repositories,
Whilst all their Doors were shut and barred
Against Worth and Merit very hard.
His Reason which of Right should Reign
The lawful Monarch of his Brain,
Was by his Will deposed, whose Rule
Despotick was as Great Mogul,
Would not be bound in any Case
By any Reasonable Laws,
Nor other Magna Charta own,
Than what I please, That shall be done.
Thus Qualified (while we take Breath)
Let him write Dagger out of Sheath:
Under Pretense of pulling down
The Enemies to Church and Crown,
He proves the worker of the Fall
Of Scepter, Diadem and Ball:
While those Regalia he would pitch
So high above all Humane Reach,
They are but lodged the less secure,
And cannot from Age to Age endure.
February's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
The Squire comes next as necessary,
To serve the Knight to fetch and carry:
His Name is told, with a Relation
Of Person, Birth, and Education.
All Things succeed to both their Wishes,
While the Sun flounders on through Pisces.
CANTO.
HE wants no Campany's Enjoyment,
Whose Mind affords him full Employment.
If then last Month our Knight was shown
By himself, yet was he not alone;
For he kept every Faculty
Within him busy as a Be;
Which would be glad of an Occasion,
To get a little Recreation:
Such constant Labor, and Turmoyling
Without Relief's enough to spoil one;
To fetch Materials, and employ 'em,
Are two Men's Work, who ever injoys 'em;
As Sir Pendragon best can tell,
Who by Experience sensible,
Performing both, found the Fatigue
Was even for himself too big;
When Fortune pitying his Condition,
Sent him Help meet without Petition.
For Fame did now the Labors bear,
Of Sir Pendragon far and near;
Whose writings took a larger Flight,
Than ever was reached by Paper-Kite:
Each Week produced an Observator,
Stuffed with variety of Matter;
Which raised much Dust, and made a Noise
Amongst Men of shallow Thoughts, and Boys:
'Twas a supply to Women's Prattle,
At Gossipings, and half their Tattle;
Besides the Capers, and the Fleurets,
It gave to little Priests and Curates;
It raised the Passions and the Spleen,
By various Means, in diverse Men;
Some wept, some laughed, and that which tickled
One Sort, by others was ridiculed;
Run down, and mocked, and much despised,
However by the adverse Party prized:
For no small Numbers were of those
Who fancied them of wondrous Use;
Amongst whom there was a certain Squire
Whose Elements were all of fire.
His Salt, and Sulphur, acted by
His sublimated Mercury,
Disposed him to Euthusiasticks,
Of different Kinds to Pryn's or Bastwick's:
Who would his Thoughts sometimes express
In stiff Bombast, affected Phrase;
And at another time he would talk
As blundringly as other Folk.
Reading the Doctrine of the Knight,
He strangely was affected by 't,
Broke out into Soliloquy's,
Of which, amongst others, one was this*
"Were Fortune in my Power, or would
"She condescend to what I sewed,
"O make (quoth he) it is all I ask her,
" Pendragon King of Madagascar,
"And let me be the (What d' ye call it?)
"His Viceroy there, the Athe'madoulet.
But upon second Thoughts he found
Such idle Wishes wanted Ground;
That the Conceit was vain and airy,
And a fantastical Chimaera:
Wherefore resolves on Application
To the Knight, and takes the first Occasion.
He all Impediments removes,
Calls for his Sword, and Hat, and Gloves,
And his best Wigg; then out he goes,
To find Pendragon at his House.
The Walk could not be very far
To Old-Bourn High, from Old-Bourn Bar.
How he was introduced, the Greeting,
And Complements at their first Meeting,
I choose to pass: Let it suffice,
That after two or three Replies,
The Squire declares the vast Deserts
Of Sir Pendragon, and those Parts
Which all the Kingdom so admires,
Brought him to pay him his Devoirs,
To tell him, none could truly blazon
His great Achievements, or do Reason
To such a Pillar of the Nation,
Unless the King of Arms, the Garter,
Would make his Hand and Pen Supporter.
Fie, (cried Pendragon) Sir, forbear
To talk of things I must not hear;
Your Goodness sets too great a Value
On my poor Labors; yet I Will tell you,
There are some think the things I write here
Do Service both to Crown and Mitre,
Because considerable Gains
Are sent me to reward my Pains,
Which are not little, (though I say it)
And sometimes press me with their Weight,
That I have very often wished,
I had a Friend, who could assist
Me with Intelligence, and give notice
Concerning some who live remotest.
Sir, quoth the Squire, (for it was that
He came on purpose to be at)
I Will undertake in all reality
Of Truth, Affection, and Fidelity,
If you dare let on me the Trust lie,
This Province to discharge most justly.
I thank you, Sir, with all my Heart,
( Pendragon said) then ever we part,
It Is needful we confer about
What Method's best to prosecute.
For, Two Heads better are than one,
And, Bow* long bent, will weaken soon.
The Squire then elevates his Poll,
And with the Knight lays Cheek by Jowl;
Mean while they are set so closely to it,
And wink, and nod, and scowl, and plot,
We'll leave 'em making scurvy Faces,
And tell you what the Squire's Case is.
Though Critic, with Objection smartest,
Cries out, This is not like an Artist,
Some other Person should be near
In call, to give the Character:
We'll grant, perhaps it is better so;
However, let Master Critic know,
The Thing lies properly before us;
For Muse and Author make a Chorus.
But if it be a weighty Matter,
It shall be otherwise hereafter:
For this Time we'll take special care
In managing the Squire's Affair.
Whose Name on Working-days was Hugh*
But, not to curtail what is his Due,
With loftier Tone, and better Phrase,
He Is Hugo called on Holy Days:
Which signifies to slash, and cut,
And to bring comfort every foot:
It double Mystery does reveal,
Of Power as well to wound as heal.
As for his Person, (not to flatter)
He was excessive low of Stature;
The true Reverse to's Knight in that,
Not only short, but thick and fat.
'Twas not his Fault, but his Mishap,
To be of Pun^henello's Shape.
But what in's outward Man Offense is,
His inward highly recompenses.
To give you therefore but a Glance,
Or Copy of his Countenance:
You never a Feature in it behold,
But what is masculine and Bold,
Much like the Sign of Saracin,
With formidable Laugh and Grin,
Which showed as fine a Set of Teeth
As Chaps were ever furnished with;
No Lady's, nor her Dog's, were seen
More even, elegant, and clean.
No better hung, or fashioned Ear,
Ever was, (allowing Wear and Tare:)
For one with Spanish Wool was stopped,
The other by Offenses cropped:
Both which his Perriwig does hide,
Unless in Puff behind it is tied.
For (though in Years) he wore his Clothes
After the Fashion of the Beaux.
His Birth was very Mean, his Father
By Trade, was one that dealt in Leather;
Of honest Calling, had his End
Been so, and without Reprimend:
But Discontents afforded String,
To give himself a mortal Swing.
Let no Man Hugh for this deride,
Who got the Proverb on his Side,
Which says, That happy Son shall live well,
Whose Father goes before to the Devil.
Latin he got (at School a Novice)
More than he needed in his Office:
Bred up he was at Inn called Thavy's,
(Which (some say) never without a Knave is)
Where Hugh got Skill enough in Law,
Both to find out, and make a Flaw:
Could raise a drooping Cause, 'twas known,
By Affidavits of his own;
And though he found it in the wrong,
His Client's Cause would still prolong;
And when at last he brought his Bill in,
Could change a Groat into a Shilling:
Defective Settlements could Fumpus,
And make Will valid of Non compos.
So qualified, he bent his Labors
To grind and terrify his Neighbors;
Which soon enriched him to that height,
To purchase Manor with Estate:
When out there comes a Tax on Poll,
Which asks Five Pounds from willing Fool;
Hugh paid it by his own desire,
And from that Hour commenced Esquire;
(Though paying Money on that Score,
Makes no Man that he wan't before.)
I Have heard of three Degrees of Squireship,
Which canvass'd, bear not equal Worship.
Hugo was Squire, Squiret, or Squirt;
But which, let Bluemantle concert,
Rouge Croix, Rouge Dragon, or Portcullis,
Or any else, in whom true Skill is.
Next, when the Hunt in every Quarter
Was up against Corporations Charter,
None made more loud and hideous Noise,
With open and extended Jaws;
None set them on, and cried Haloo,
More frightfully and fierce than Hugh:
If willingly you make Surrender,
'Twill be received with greatest Tendeur;
And for your old and moldy Charter,
You shall have new one, with new Fair to her:
But some of the Privileges you had,
You must acknowledge forfeited:
Which, if y' are stubborn, and will stand to
Defend; the dreadful Quo Warranto
Shall come, and make upon it a Seizure;
And then reduced to Will and Pleasure,
Ye Rebel Rogues, who merit none,
May even go whistle for 't, when gone.
Hard Words put many into Frights,
And Knaves and Fools gave up our Rights;
Who both of Sense and Conscience void,
The Birthrights of Unborn betrayed.
In Management of these Affairs
Hugh and Pendragon bore their Shares:
Hugh terrified them like a Beadle,
Pendragon did both threat and wheedle.
By this time the Politic Scheme
Was finished betwixt both of them:
Pendragon had his Part, and Hugh
Was taught as well to know his Cue:
When in there breaks a sweaty Fellow,
And cries, Sir, I Have good News to tell you;
I Have brought you Three and thirty Pound,
From Town where Tory Fools abound:
I wish 'twas double, for your sake;
The Parsons gave you half the Stake.
I thank you, Friend, (quoth Knight) and star'd;
Go out, and thou shall find Reward.
Applying then to trusty Hugo,
Sir, let me tell you, before you go,
We Will manage Matters well betwixt us,
And be revenged of all that vex't us.
You see a Sample here is sent me,
(Though I confess it is somewhat scanty)
Which does afford us fine Refreshings;
But greater Towns send greater Blessings.
The Universities have sent me
Of Guineas and Crown-pieces plenty.
The next Purse we together share.
Quoth Hugh, Your humble Servant, Sir:
And left (when he had took his leave)
Pendragon laughing in his Sleeve.
March's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
Sol having now bestrid the Ram,
The Lady next our Verse does claim;
Of whom to give Account at large,
Laurence the Curate takes in Charge:
Who quits himself so well in the Matter,
He sets Pendragon's Chaps a water.
CANTO.
NO longer can our Muse forbear
To sing the charming Lady fair:
The Lady fair would think it VVrong
To be neglected in our Song;
When such a Subject ought to raise
Our Measures, and our Roundelays.
Some sing in lamentable Strains,
Of Shepherdesses and their Swains,
Who cry to Echo for Relief,
And after Heart-stealer, Stop Thief.
Others sing merry drunken Catches,
Of beating Constables and Watches.
One in Heroic Numbers sings
Of Lovers, Battles, Hero's, Kings,
Of Sieges, Conquests, Fire, and Sword,
Of Storms, and Throwing over Board,
(The dreadful Ornaments of Story.)
Another sings plain Tory-Rory.
The first is of too mournful Nature,
And far too trivial is the latter,
To be the Subject of our Muse,
Who rather is disposed to choose
This happy late-successful Track,
Than a long painful Journey take,
In search of Chronicles and Legends
Of ancient Times, and distant Regions,
For One whose mighty Deeds are yet hid,
And in no Measures celebrated.
Here Is nothing tore from tattered Hist'rys;
But it is a Modern Knight and Mistress
We sing, whose powerful Charms and Wheadles
Increase Love's Mysteries and Riddles;
Whose airy Mein, and amorous Glances,
Outvie the Beauties of Romances;
Who with small Love-tricks makes more Conquests
Than they can when their Charms are strongest;
Which more agreeable may be
Than Hum-drum Love and Constancy.
For when the curious Calprenedy,
Or Scudery, has framed a Lady
Of finest Beauty, Shape, and Wit,
To captivate a Hero fit,
Yet then is this Celestial Creature
(Maugre the private Pulls of Nature)
Tied up by Gallantrys to move
In the Religious Laws of Love;
Not budge a Step from Honor's Post,
But to maintain't at any Cost.
A more severe and rigid Duty
Than ought to be imposed on Beauty;
Beauty, which should be free as Air,
And, as SELENA, void of Care.
For She does all Restraint abolish,
As a thing troublesome and foolish.
In spite of Love, she will have her Humor,
And Frolicks, in despite of Rumor.
She Is strangely various in her Actions,
As in her Will, and her Affections:
She Is merry, sullen, prays, or swears,
According as her Maggot steers:
For almost all she does perform,
Is under Conduct of the Worm.
Cease, cease, my Muse, to take upon ye
That which requires more Ceremony:
It Is fitting you proceed no further,
Without the Help of Man in Orders,
Who more of the Sisters can command,
And has the Graces too at hand.
And such there was in Gray's Inn Walk
At this time, busy held in talk
With Sir Pendragon, whom he clawed
With Flattery, and fulsom Laud.
Beside, the Clapper of his Tongue
On Twenty other Subjects rung.
But with the most delight, his Chimes
Were tuned to the Changes of the Times:
He told him, he was overjoyed
That Places were so well employed
In Church and State, and all Promotions
Given to the Followers of his Notions.
Pendragon exercised Forbearance,
While thus he was addressed by Laurence,
So was he called, a Curate, (yet
A Bishop in his own Conceit)
When happily a sudden Object
Diverts them from the present Subject.
Pray (quoth Pendragon) who was that
Whom you saluted with your Hat?
She seems as brisk as she is fine.
Sir, it is one Mistress Thomasine,
Laurence replied; she serves a Lady,
The fair Selena. Hah! what said ye?
Selena! She Is a Nonparielle,
I Am told, by those that know her well.
Quoth Laurence, Let me tell you, Sir,
She gives me leave to visit her:
She Is certainly the charming, prettiest,
The sweetest Creature, and the wittiest
Of all her Sex that ever was known.
Then, prithee, let us both sit down,
(Quoth Knight) and favor me to hear
Her true impartial Character,
That I may gratify a Friend.
Quoth Laurence, That you may command.
She Is very slender, clean, and straight,
Rather above the common Height,
And of as delicate a Shape,
Perhaps, as ever suffered Rape:
Somewhat short-wasted if she is,
She has't again in Legs and Thighs;
These round and large, those long and neat,
With very pretty little Feet.
How, (said Pendragon) Sir, do you know it?
Have you been beneath her Pettycoat?
Not so, Sir, neither, ( Laurence said)
I learnt it lately from her Maid,
And therefore give me leave to know:
But to her upper Parts I Will go,
Where nothing can be fansied faulty;
Her Forehead, as it should be, 's haughty;
Her Eyebrows cut, and gumm'd, and laid well,
According to the newest Model.
Her Eyes, those flattering Looking-glasses,
Make Bearded Men's, seem Baby's Faces;
Whatever Deformities inspect them,
All Prettiness they back reflect them;
And it is the easiest thing they do,
They can be kind, and cruel too
At the same time, and with a Twinkle
Give Life, and Death when she don't think ill.
Poetic Rapture now would swear,
The God of Love himself comes there,
To point his Darts, that in her Eyes
His Arms and Ammunition lies,
Ready to do on Lookers-on
All killing Execution.
But when sh' has no Design to slay,
They can send forth a gentler Ray,
And with short Looks, and languishing,
Revive the miserable Thing.
Her Air's agreeable, and each Feature
Extremely Beautiful, or better:
The length and largeness of her Nose,
Her strength of Constitution shows:
The Heat and Redness of her Lips
Gives balmy Kiss, when Lover sips;
The rising Plumpness of her Breast,
Argues its fitness to be pressed.
Sh' has not a Pimple, Mole, or Wart,
Without a Cause sufficient for it.
These are peculiar Charms, (quoth Knight)
Which you as pleasantly recite:
But I Will not break the well-spun Thread
Of your Discourse: Sir, pray proceed.
Her Hair is of a lovely Brown,
So too is her Complexion,
Which she can, with the greatest ease,
Correct, and alter, as she please,
By mixing Red and White, and look as
Fair as she list, by help of Fucus:
(Who, since she so does still appear,
She may be called the Lady Fair.)
Nor is she less acquainted with
The Arts of Patching, Cleansing Teeth,
Scenting, Perfuming, making sweet
Her Breath, and keeping clean her Feet;
All which, with nipping out of Worms,
She most judiciously performs.
She Is knowing in all sorts of Dresses,
Tippets, Commodes, and Points, and Laces,
And wearies out her poor Tire-woman
With Language understood by no Man.
For many times she does affect
A most peculiar Dialect,
Which is good English slic't and mash't,
With dry French Scraps together hash't,
Before it is modified enough
For fair Selena's pretty Mouth;
And then she lisps it out, and breaks
It 'twixt her Teeth the while she speaks.
After this manner of Preparing,
The Substance often is worth the Hearing.
She Will talk of Lovers Services,
How some with furious Address
Attack her; others fawn and creep,
Complain, and always whine and weep.
She Will tell sad Stories, how her cruel
Beauties have caused many a Duel;
What Huffing, Tilting, has been for her,
By this and that emag'd Adorer;
What witty Verses have been made
Upon her, and what fine things said;
How Beaux's in Songs have often owned her
Their Mistress, and how some Lampoon'd her:
Who, cause she is not to be caught
By them, do call her all to naught:
A Trick, which though so many have,
It Is ungenteel, and like a Knave.
She knows each wanton Artifice,
To wheedle, vex, delight, and teaze;
With Subtilty and gentle Art
To squeeze the Hand, and bruise the Heart;
To throw Pretender off with Scorn,
Then draw him on like Shooing-horn.
When Fingers, Countenance, and Speech
Act contradictory to each,
How can the cunning'st Lover know
Which of them to give Credit to?
Of all the Town-Accomplishments,
There Is none of any Worth she wants;
She dances rarely well, and plays at
The fashionable Game of Basset.
But wherein most she does exceed,
She sings extremely fine indeed:
Nor is 't so difficult a thing
In Company to make her sing;
She seldom pleads the want of Use,
A Cold, or Hiccough, for Excuse;
That she has lately lost her Voice,
And shall but fright you with the Noise:
Delays which very often the Pretty
Will practice when they love Entreaty;
'Cause that which hardest Labor cost
In getting, 's always valued most.
The gay Selena's never wont to
Strain for a Nicety or Punto;
But as her present Humor is,
Acts pleasantly, or otherwise:
For if she says, she will not do it,
The Devil's self cannot bring her to it.
She Is worth Five thousand Pounds for certain;
But it may be too long to entertain
You with the Means how she came by it.
I Will look upon my Watch (quoth Knight.)
Odds Bobbs! cries he, it is after Four,
I Have slipped my Time above an Hour.
I find she is of transcendent Worth,
And you, in setting of it forth.
Much thanks to you for this great Diversion:
Better Acquaintance with your Person
I covet; and good Luck be wi' you;
Pray be so kind to let me see you.
Quoth Laurence, I shall soon find Leisure
To give my self so great a Pleasure*
So they shook Hands, when at the Parting
Pendragon felt unusual Smarting
About his Heart; beside, he itch'd
All over, as if h' ad been bewitched.
Little (thought he) did I conjecture
To be affected with his Lecture
To such Degree; it fires my Blood:
I Will get Acquainted with the Toad;
And must (if possible) possess
The pretty charming Sorceress.
Love bears an universal Sway,
Whom Swains and Emperors obey:
The wise Philosopher, and Fool,
Bows to his Epidemick Rule.
April's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
The Knight takes little Ease and Pleasure
With Thoughts of Madam, till he sees her.
Cutbeard the Barber comes to shave him,
Who some Account of Laurence gave him:
And ( Cutbeard having told him where)
Knight finds the Lady out at Prayer.
CANTO.
NOthing completely proves a Boon
Without Alloy, beneath the Moon:
Either the Cook, or Meat, or Sauce,
Yields somewhat to disrelish us.
The Curate's Tale, which struck the Knight
At first with* Pleasure and Delight,
Afforded him Proportion equal
Of Grief and Trouble in the Sequel:
For Love, which entered like an Earwig,
Teased him on the inside of his Perr'wig,
And, like an Humble-Bee, it does
Occasion mighty Hum and Buz.
He takes quick Turns about the Room;
Then stopping short, to himself cries, Hum!
Am I a Man reputed Great
For Learning, Loyalty, and Wit?
Who Complements receive, and Pence,
From People, Parsons, Peers, and Prince;
Presents of Puddings, Pigs, and Pies,
From kind Inhabitants of the Skies,
Or more obliging mortal Dames,
Who all conceal from me their Names:
Variety of such Good Things
Still one or other Porter brings,
Though none of them will tell the Sign
So much as of the Carrier's Inn.
I say, I, who have been carest
So greatly, find my self distressed;
Amidst a Multitude of Friends,
I want to bring about my Ends;
I want to know how, where, and when a
Sight may be got of this Selena:
Then I shall want as much to chat,
And hold Discourse with the Prit-prat,
To get Acquaintance more familiar,
That I might play with her, and bill her,
And bite, and pinch, and pull, and towze.
But then reflecting, he cried Buz.
The thinking on these wanton Tricks
Puts me beside my Politics,
Makes Head to ache, and Heart to beat
Confoundedly, like Drums in the Street.
I cannot divert my self alone
I find, nor do as I have done.
My Beard's grown long, which makes me fretful,
Uneasy, peevish, and forgetful.
Sirrah, (cried he to's Boy) go, fly,
Fetch me the Barber presently.
A Body's filled with Discontents
By nourishing ones Excrements.
Our Grandsires sure were never in very
Good Humor, or extremely merry,
Who wore such Beards, the hairy Fardle
Were fit to tuck within their Girdle.
Yet for the same we have no Reason
To tax them of an Indiscretion,
If Beards then bore a Price, and the Hairs
Thereof were Merchantable Wares.
Don John de Castro sent and pawned
A few of his, which raised a Fund
Sufficient to re-build a Fortress;
The Certainty of which Report is
Confirmed, for that his Grandson hid
Them in a Crystal Pyramid,
Set in a Silver Foot, or Basis,
Engraved with Verse, which told the Praises
Of the famed Action, and set forth
No less that Noble Hero's Worth:
Which Relic his Posterity
Preserves in Pious Memory.
Such Thoughts to the Knight gave Recreation,
When enters Cutbeard with a Basin,
Who made low Bow, and having drawn
An Elbow-Chair, the Knight sat down.
While Barber gets all Things prepared
For Circumcision of his Beard,
And fitted Linen Cap to's Head,
Pendragon hawk'd, and spat, and said,
Do know by Hearsay, or by Sight,
A Clergyman, one Laurence, (hight?)
Yes, Sir, I knew him in this Town
Some Years before he wore a Gown,
When he appeared a tearing Blade,
And went most fashionably clad:
I Have sold him more than once or twice
Long Wiggs of Eight or Ten Pounds price.
How, Cutty! (quoth Pendragon) prithee
Go on; it seems h' as Dealings with thee.
Ay, (quoth the Barber, and he sobbs)
He Is in my Book for several Bobbs,
And tells me, I shall never be paid
Till he is preferred, married, or dead.
But, (quoth Sir Knight) let me request,
What made him turn from Spark to Priest?
That same which has no Law for what.
It does, and makes the Old Wife trot;
Necessity, and want of Bread,
Or rather want of Wine indeed:
For Custom is a Second Nature,
And he was never used to Water.
Oh! with your Wit (quoth Knight) and Razor
Together, you have cut my Face, Sir,
I know not which of them's the sharper.
I Am sorry for it, (quoth the Barber.)
Your Worship smiled, and so it were done
By a Touch; I beg your Worship's Pardon.
It scarcely bleeds, and cannot be seen;
I Will cure it straight with Benjamin.
Well, (quoth Sir Knight) if it don't bleed,
Sans Ceremony pray proceed.
Then Cutbeard: Sir, I know his Fortune
Was large, before he made it shorten,
Paid him in ready Cash, as soon
As he attained to Twenty one,
At least Three thousand Pounds of Sterling,
So much was he an Uncle's Darling,
Who raised a plentiful Estate
From Wrangling and eternal Prate,
And whileom had in's Lifetime been
A Bencher sage of Lincoln's Inn;
Who kept a memorable Reading,
For Nosegays, Pot Herbs, Law, and Feeding;
Descended from the ancient famous
Conveyancer, (hight) Ignoramus.
But to the Nephew, Mr. Laurence,
Although his Fortune was so fair once,
He learned at University
To make no little part on it fly;
Where when his Wit and Humor ripe was,
In's younger days, they made him Tripos;
Renowned for Bottle, and for Jest,
He was at every Treat a Guest.
Then taking leave of Alma Matter,
He came (to learn the Cinque and Quatre)
To Town, the Palm and Slurr to know,
Tatt's, Doctor, Fulham's High and Low:
Though all this Knowledge but increast
His Sorrow much the more at last.
Yet while he was the 'foresaid Blade,
No Man more Reputation had
For Wit, in all the Town, than he,
And the fine Turn in Poetry;
Whose Talent being less laborious,
Became the Envy of old Laurus;
Though many, with good Reasons, will
Have it, they both pist in a Quill.
But being a Man of various Fancies,
And in at all Extravagances,
In less than three Years Time, that I know,
He made a Hand of ready Rhino,
And brought himself to worse than Nothing.
At length, grown shabby in his Clothing,
When all the Attendants on his Folly
Were Want, and Rags, and Melancholy,
And all the Hopes he had were vain ones,
How to get rid of these Companions,
Unless it were by means of Halter,
Or flying to the Horns of the Altar;
Which Course he steered to cure moerores,
Et nunquam sera ad bonos mores.
You Have satisfied me, (quoth the Knight)
A Wit's a perfect Het'roclite.
None but sheer Wit could give Defeat
With such Dispatch to an Estate.
In thy Profession there was never
So expeditious a Shaver,
Who did's own Business quick and clear
As thou have mine, not left a Hair.
But, mark me; have thou ever seen a
Fair Lady, who is called Selena?
No, but I Have heard Discourses somewhere
Much of her Beauty and her Humor.
Could not you get me Information
Where it is she dwells, upon occasion?
That I can easily compass, Sir;
It is not far from Westminster.
Then (quoth Pendragon) two days hence
(Now the Spring-Season does advance,
And the Sun's got so far in Taurus,
Phlebotomy being needful for us)
Here let me see your Face again;
But come betimes, to spring a Vein.
Mean while, you, like a trusty Trojan,
Cannot forget the Lady's Lodging.
Cutbeard did every thing fulfill
In time, according to his Will.
And now Pendragon having learned
The Thing for which he was concerned,
And got thereby a Wrinkle more
About him than he had before;
Knowing that this same Lady fair
Went frequently to Morning-Pray'r,
A Coach was called without delay,
Which hurried him to Church away.
His Boy being sent that very Hour
To watch, and play about her Door,
And mark her Motions, found her Chair
And Men stood ready to convey her.
Away they trotted to St. Martin's,
Where tho she has no Place ascertained,
Yet can her Silver Key undo
In all the Church the fairest Pew.
Church Turn-keys make ungodly Wages,
Like their Great Grand-sire Simon M^gus.
A Shame, that every under Clerk yet
In Pray'r-time keeps his highest Market.
Noting the Seat in which she fixed,
Pendragon gets into the next,
Where he had full View of her Favor:
But overlooking her Behavior,
He spied occasion to arraign her
As guilty of a Misdemeanour.
For when the rest to appearance were
Standing, or on their Knees at Prayer,
Our Lady's Posture too does show,
She does the same that others do;
Devoutly turning up her Eyes,
Who at a distance could surmise
That her fair Hand held in the place
Of Pocket Pray'r-book, Pocket-Glass?
Or that she naughtily, instead
Of Collects, Dress and Visage read?
And sticking on her Cheek a Patch,
Made the Responsal, We beseech, etc.
And after Benediction,
She shook her Head, and sighed, Amen.
Moving her Limbs, to stand upright,
With Amber Scent she struck the Knight:
And turning round, her Skin or Clothes
Gave him a Whiff of Tuberose.
At her Go-off, she cast a Smile;
He quite confounded all the while,
Did like a Marble Statue stand,
Or like one Planet-struck remained,
Till every Body else was gone,
Except the Clerk and he alone:
Who coming to himself, did find
The Danger of being left behind,
Which he, by going out, declined.
Tho's Heart was wounded, yet his Head
Variety of Fancies fed.
Reflecting that her Thoughss were roving,
He deemed her the more fit for Loving:
And from the Mixture of the Sinner,
Conceived the greater Hopes to win her.
For though in Faith he was not weak,
Yet but for Hope his Heart must break.
If the famed Knight of the Mancha knew well
To feed his Flames with Fancy's Fuel,
And burn outrageously for one
Whose Visage was to him unknown,
What fiercer Flames, and greater Raging,
Must our Knight feel? (you may imagine)
Who took the Philters charming Dose
In at his Ears, and Eyes, and Nose?
Which strongly seizing on his Heart,
Diffused it self through every Part,
That in this manner, as he walked,
Disturb'dly to himself he talked.
On me the Powers above have laid
Enough to make another mad.
If I Am the Atlas and the Prop
OF the Government, why let it drop.
Let Whiggs and Trimmers take their ease,
And set at Liberty their Bees,
Go water their Ranunculus's,
And other Plants, in Pots and Cases:
Let them pursue their Sports, make Play-day
Until a good while after May day,
While I go in pursuit of Lady.
Each Man has Business of his own,
To be dispatched, or left undone.
May's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
Selena as she lies in Bed
Holds Conversation with her Maid:
A Visit puts her out of Order.
Taking the Air, who then should board her,
But Sir Pendragon, by the Way?
All in the merry Month of May.
CANTO.
It Is sit the Business of the State
On that of mightier Love's should wait;
While we are treating of Amors,
On Politics to shut the Doors,
And not to suffer them to enter
At Times when they impertinent are.
The glorious Lamp of Heaven, the Sun,
Bright in at Chamber* window shone,
Ever Madam does one Ray disclose,
But fast locked up in deep Repose
Senses and Beauties all lay hid,
In Blankets, Sheets, and Coverlid.
Mean while her Handmaid, who lay nigh,
In a small dark Apartment by,
From out her Bed in silence slips,
With Petty-coats about her Hips;
Softly she came, and draws the Curtain,
Finding her Mistress fast and snorting,
In a low Voice she Madam cries,
Good Madam, when d' you mean to rise?
Selena then stirred, and began
To stretch her self, and sigh, and yawn,
To scratch her Bosom, Arms, and Neck,
And opening of her Eyes, she spoke;
Curse on you for a silly Whore;
Speak, What a Devil d' wake me for?
Troth, Madam, then quoth Thomasine,
I Will take my Oath, it is after Nine;
But if you find your Eyelids heavy,
I Will go away again, and leave you.
No, Housewife, you can do no worse;
Judge if you don't deserve a Curse.
Ah Wench! but just before you waked me,
Methoughts a Warlike Man attacked me;
Fierce, like the famed St. George, when I
Did, like the Dragon at him fly,
Tearing and biting with my Teeth,
And grappling till I wanted Breath.
Quite tired, I by main Strength was thrown
Flat underneath the Champion:
And who knows what had been my Doom,
Had not you come into the Room?
'Twas in good time (quoth Thom'sine) then,
Or my poor Lady had been slain.
In stead of raising of your Anger,
Thank me, that you are out of danger.
But may I speak my Mind to you freely?
This Dreaming, Madam, 's very silly,
And only serves to make you talk,
Like one who feeds on Dirt and Chalk.
Was Beauty given you, and warm Blood,
Nor for your own nor others good?
In such a Frolic Age as this,
Who durst report, you do amiss?
As if the sooty Pottage-pot
Would mock the Kettle for its Smut.
Not, Madam, but one would abhor
The broad and common Name of Whore,
That Is seldom given, but to the Poor.
It Is thousand Pities you should cumber
Your self with your Virgin'ty's Lumber,
And carry every Night to Bed
An aching, irksom Maidenhead,
Which plagues its Keeper, but when gone
Nor troubles her, nor any one.
Are not you pleased with this Advice?
Softly, the Lady then replies,
By this Instruction one may guess well
The Frailty of thy Earthen Vessel;
And thy Advice most plainly speaks,
Thy Pitcher's cracked, and therefore leaks:
But, Thomasine, she foully does ill,
Who measures mine by her own Bushel.
Thou make Reflections on thy Mistress,
As if she was reduced to Distress.
Has any one more Liberty
Or Freedom in her Choice than I?
Whether my Fortune it is, or Favor,
Or something else which has the Savor
To draw so many Supplicants
Upon me, to relieve their Wants,
And daily bring me in Addresses,
Both from the smooth and withered Faces,
It Is not so easy to discover
The Cause that animates the Lover.
However, know, that it is decreed
By Fate, (with all convenient speed)
Naught shall resist my Vows to wed.
I Will see them all; to whom I find
My self most furiously inclined,
Him from among the Heard I Will choose, and
Even take him for my Wedded Husband:
Rather the Hazard run of Marriage,
Than of a Clap, or a Miscarriage.
If Matrimony, in conclusion,
Agrees not with my Constitution,
Then I Will turn Tail against its Force,
And take a clear contrary Course.
This Resolution's very sudden
(Quoth Thom'sine) and perhaps a good one:
For Wedlock is (tho so sought after)
The greatest Lottery in Nature.
Let Fools depend (Madam replies)
Upon their Luck in Lotteries:
If any thing occurs of ill,
By my Prerogative, my Will,
I Will either overcome it quite,
Or move my self out of its sight.
Since almost every Faculty
But Will, to Woman they deny,
Can they expect she will That surrender
To their imperious Masc'line Gender?
Or less than unto Death maintain
It, though fantastical and vain.
Quoth Thomasine, these strange Persuasions
Will plague you upon all Occasions;
Let them seem never so Great and Noble,
You Will find them bring prodigious Trouble.
For while without Control, Dispute,
Or Whartle, you rule Absolute,
What precious Qual'ties would you have
Endow your conjugated Slave?
I Would have him (quoth Selena) be
In his own Government as free;
Our Wills act in a different Sphere,
And one to the others never come near.
Then, to be sure, he must be rich:
Poverty's worse than Pox or Itch,
Palsy, Deformity, or Frenzy,
Folly, or Insufficiency.
Of ancient Family descended,
Or by his Money so befriended,
To buy himself Titles of Worth,
To hide the Obscurity of Birth.
Sir Grog'ram's such a piece of Stuff;
He Is rich, and passable enough;
And there is least Cause to be afraid
Of marrying one who drives a Trade;
When there is no danger of his Failure,
I shall not stand in awe of's Valor.
Young Parrot has a fair Estate;
But it is a Fop so full of Prate,
So disagreeable a Person,
He very much is my Aversion.
There Is no Man pays me such Devoirs
As Sergeant Wigeon, amongst the Lawyers;
But woe be to his wedded Wife,
Now he has laid aside his Coif,
And spends whole Nights in Broils and Roaring,
In Taverns, and in double Whoring.
Since Age (if not too much decayed)
You can dispense with, (quoth the Maid)
Pray, Madam, how d' you like Squire Hugh?
Fough! Nasty Fellow, I shall spue,
(Quoth she.) Nay, (answered Thomasine)
You wrong him; for he is very clean,
And neither Money wants, nor Wit.
No matter, do not make me spit,
(Said she.) And going on with more,
They hear a Rapping at the Door.
Up Thomasine starts, holds fast the Latch,
And cries, Who are you there? A Wretch,
(Quoth Voice without) an humble Slave,
The very'st. Vassal that you have.
(Which Voice betrayed, it being a hoarse one,
The Devil they did last discourse on.
Hah! Hugo! (then the Lady said)
Enter not here; I Am in my Bed:
Without another Word be gone,
And leap from Top to Bottom down.
This is no time a Day to visit,
Unless y' had Business to solicit.
And so I have (quoth he:) My Heart
Is wholly yours. (Quoth she) A Fart;
And swelled, as if she would burst with Choler,
For want of utt'rance of her Dolor.
While Hugh without doors says he will thank her
If she will assuage her cruel Rancour;
And promised, he would straightways leave her,
Provided she will grant the Favor
To condescend to bless his Eyes
With a View of her as she lies:
Engaging not to advance one Step.
Selena agrees to let him peep:
But tipped the VVink, and made a Sign
Well understood by Thomasine;
Who played her part, and pinched full sore
His Noddle 'twixt the Post and Door;
But let him draw it back, for fear
Of damaging the surdous Ear.
Now while the Maid secures the Lock,
The Lady leaps out in her Smock
With all speed possible, puts on
Her Shoes, and her loose-body'd Gown,
Advancing, threw the Door wide open,
And bid her Maid she should not stop him.
Enraged, she vents her fell Displeasure,
Thus rounding him beyond all Measure.
Can you conceive that I Will dispense
With this unequaled Impudence,
To me, of making your Pretense?
As well the Cobbler might address
Himself with Passion to Queen Bess,
And hope from her as good Success.
Thy Phiz, more tough than Parents Leather,
Is able to out-wear the Weather,
Outface the bright Meridian Sun,
When lowing Herds to Coverts run:
It Is such, no Scandal, Guilt, nor Shame,
Can pump up Blush into the same.
Hold, and contain your self, (quoth he)
You're out of Breath with Raillery:
Come, pretty Lady, you must lack it;
A Virgin may say Nay and take it.
(Quoth she) Be gone, thou filthy Monster
Fly from my sight; for if I once stir
My Foot, and on the Board stamp thrice,
Footmen with Cudgels shall arise,
To give the swinging Bastinado,
For which if thou art pleased to stay, do.
(Quoth he) Since you're so humoursom,
Farewell; I say no more but, Mum.
I know you will look, for all you're vexed,
More kindly when I see you next.
And Mistress Thomasine, with a P -- x,
I sha'n't forget your Christmas-Box.
And thus compelled the Field to quit,
He made inglorious Retreat.
So Tory, when he would prevail
For kind Caresses, waggs his Tail;
But when his Master chides, he flags,
And sneaking claps it 'twixt his Legs.
Selena too as much put out is
Of humor; first in the Hoititoities
She rants, and swears, and stares, and flings
About her Clothes, and tears her Things;
Breaks China, clatters Looking-glasses,
And calls him Twenty thousand Asses.
Thom'sine, to put her by this Chafing,
Set Thumbs to Sides, and fell a laughing.
At that, the Lady on a sudden
Changed her bad Humor for a good one;
Bursts out into a Fit of Laughter,
And eased her self by making Water.
Gets on her Clothes with little pains,
Dressed a-la-mode en negligence,
With a laced Scarf and Vizor-Masque on,
She gathers up her Galligascoins,
And in St. James's Park she walks,
Where, by the Ponds of Ducks and Drakes,
By lucky Chance, and help of Scout,
Bold Sir Pendragon finds her out;
Who bearing up unto her close,
Strikes Sail, and then attack's her thus:
Sweet Lady, whose Perfumes environ
Your Slaves, and draw like Grapling-iron,
When you have boarded us per Force,
Pray how d' you use your Prisoners?
Those who have Worth (quoth she) I rifle,
Others I value not a trifle.
Being yours (quoth he then) by Reprisal,
Tell me my Doom. (Quoth she) Go whistle
For I believe you have no Treasure
Of value, nor in Weight, nor Measure.
And so, perhaps, you will lose (quoth he)
A Prize, through Infidelity.
I may (said she) do so, perhaps;
But Taste is flat in withered Grapes:
And no Knight ever won my Grace
Of the Order of the Ill-favored Face.
Well, (quoth Sir Knight) this your Reflection,
I grant, would be enough to vex one
Who has no other able Talents,
That may with handsome Features balance.
But Worth in Secret often lies.
You Would fain insinuate (she replies)
That you're possessed of Treasure hidden,
Which is too good to be forbidden,
And bear about you concealed Merit,
Relating to your Flesh, or Spirit.
The first I must suppose but weak;
The latter for its self can speak:
For Nothing's less a Secret, than
The vast Productions of your Brain;
Which, like a common Prostitute,
Yields daily most unwholesom Fruit:
Of which throughout the Kingdom surfeits;
And it increases, not cures her Fits;
Although the Press no Prints produces
For more Variety of Uses.
To Pies and Tarts your Papers cling,
And make Band-boxes Covering;
Beside the many thousand Pages
Backside receives, and Privy lodges.
Since then sufficiently you're known,
I need not bid you to be gone,
And haste home to your Pen and Ink-horn.
He star'd like Devil over Lincoln,
His Speech being stopped through Wrath and Wonder.
They parted several Ways asunder.
Thus Days, and Hours, and Minutes fly,
While the Sun goes through Gemini,
To all alike not pleasantly.
Great Wits, as well as Hero's Great,
Are never always Fortunate.
June's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
Selena's well, never looked finer,
Laughed more, nor eat a heartier Dinner.
Sir Grog'ram wooes with costly Present:
With other Matters not unpleasant;
Which as you find them represented,
Are very easily apprehended.
CANTO.
AT the Sun's entering into the Crab, he
Makes the long Day of bright Barnaby:
When our famed Lady, no less bright,
Triumphs over both the Squire and Knight.
The first repulsed with Box of the Ear,
The latter struck with Shame and Fear
Of losing what he never had,
His Heart was sunk and very sad,
Which drove him almost to Despair,
(I say, Not quite, but very near)
Of ever getting Ladies Favor,
At least so as to Hold and Have her.
Whom for a time we leave to forage
On his own preternat'ral Courage,
And keep the Headquarters of Affliction
In Philosophy's Jurisdiction;
While we shall, without Breach of Charity,
Attend the Lady in Prosperity:
Who the other Day, though down in Crest,
Behold her now completely dressed;
Her sullen Dumps, and lowering Powts,
Transformed to Waggery and Flouts.
All Spirit, Life, and Air possess her,
In stead of Chagrin and Displeasure:
And though in Habit lately careless,
Now her Attire was rich and peerless.
And strange Conjectures may be made,
According as a Woman's clad;
The Body being much inclined
To wear the Liv'ry of the Mind:
And as the first is mobb'd or dressed,
The others Humor may be guest.
Those Looking-glasses, which she threw
About before are placed in view,
And the Resemblance proudly bear
Of gay Selena, lovely Fair.
Charmed with her Features in the Mirror,
She owns her self a Conqueror,
Laughs at the Names of famed Statira,
Of Parisatis, Albemira;
The proper Luster of her Eyes
Strike such Reflections, which despise
The Poet's Fopperies and Stories
Of Phillis, Amoret, and Chloris:
Because she thinks her self possessed
Of Charms as powerful as the best.
Which pleasing Images are brought
By needful Train of flattering Thought,
First kindled at the sight of Skin,
To blow up Self-conceit within:
Which can be reckoned no Crime at all,
If it be of Necessity Fatal.
Many Conveniences beside
To Womankind accrue from Pride.
It Is that keeps Ladies under Switch,
It dares not scratch where it does itch,
Preserves the stagg'ring Reputation
Of many a Lady in the Nation,
And that no more of them fall down
To the Lacquey, Groom, or Country Clown;
That makes them splendidly accouter'd,
And always sets the best Side outward,
Appearing to the Stranger's Eye
Of good sufficient Quality,
When Wits Contrivance is put to 't
To compass Morsel for the Gut:
That hides Infirmities, Defects,
And common Blemishes of Sex.
That makes them, on occasion, swear
Themselves much younger than they are;
And when the Fortieth Year is gone,
But Eight or Nine and twenty own.
And that the same Assistance lends
To Mankind, for the self-same Ends.
Now though Selena all this while
Was pleased to have her Thoughts recoil,
Yet so many strong Excellencies
Tired almost her Intelligences:
Variety new Pleasure brings;
She trips about the Room, and sings
To her soft Pendent-bearing Ears,
Hence, hence ye vain fantastic Fears
Of Ills to come -- And so to the end on it,
In Airs melodiously transcendent.
When Thom'sine came in to acquaint her,
The Dinner on the Board did want her.
Of which to make exact Relation,
Would be below the Reputation
Of any of the Highborn Muses,
Such Common Work about the House is,
Too sordid for the Child of Jove,
Got on Mnemosyne his Love.
Ours therefore does forbear to treat
Of the choice Bits the Lady eat;
Or to demean her self to wait
Behind a Chair to change a Plate;
Or talk over all the Tittle-tattle
Of Women's Table-talk and Prattle:
For even Selena the Accomplished
Sometimes talks idly, and is nonplus'd.
Let it suffice for us to tell,
After sh' had dined extremely well,
Victual, and Cloth, and all being gone,
Grace, after new Mode, they had none;
That still her Humor she maintains
In Frolicks and Extravagance.
She pinches her Companions Cheeks,
And plays them twenty wanton Tricks;
She gets across a Chair to ride,
With her divided Legs astride;
She challenges them All to leap,
And straddle widest at a Step;
From that, to molding Cockle*bread:
When in Sir Grog'ram puts his Head.
Selen' who first cast Eyes on him,
Set her self right, by saying Prim.
The rest surpised, ran helter-skelter,
As Shame does always seek for Shelter.
He, seeing Coast on all Sides clear,
Thus spoke, advancing up to her.
Madam, I fear my bold Intrusion
Has put the Ladys in confusion:
But you may pardon the Surprise,
Knowing the Vigor of your Eyes,
And the Grand Embassage I carry
From Love, Plenipotentiary.
Sent hither solely on his Errand,
Permit my Lips to kiss your bare Hand;
And know, this silent eager Breath
Plights Love and everlasting Faith,
Passes my Worth, and all I am,
Over to you, without a Sham.
Quoth she, Sir Grog'ram, you're mistaken;
I Am not the Person as you reckon.
But setting Raillery apart,
Suppose I should accept your Heart,
With its Appurtenances, then
You Would gladly eat your Words again;
Or if we were about to Indent,
And Article for Settlement,
The Terms on which I should insist,
Would fright you like a Will in Wisp;
And at the Matrimonial Noose
You Would be as daunted, I suppose.
To which he answered, I imagine
The Worst you would have me to engage in:
Hap what hap may, Fall Back fall Edge,
Madam, I say, I do engage;
Be your Conditions what they will,
I Will to a Tittle them fulfill,
If you with Matrimony close:
Now, Lady, pray where is your Suppose?
She not expecting him so ready
In his Compliance, cried, God speed ye,
Sir Grog'ram; for I shall require
Wainscot of Cedar, Cedar Fire,
Gold never to desert my Pockets,
Nor Pearl my Neck, nor Arms rich Lockets:
For other Parts, if ill supplied,
I shall, as Need requires, provide:
And, to that End, I shall demand
A Coach and Six always at hand,
With Footmen, Liveries, and Pages,
Kept, as the Mode is, at Board-wages.
Nor would I have you take 't in dudgeon,
I tell you of a Blot in Scutcheon.
Your Aunt, the Daughter of your Grannum,
To whom y' allow Two Pound per Annum,
Let her complain no more, nor mention
The backward Payment of your Pension.
Sir Grog'ram, though the thing was true,
Was more concerned because she knew
His mean Original and Kindred,
Lest by 't his Marriage should be hindered;
And fearing such another Bob,
He steals his Fingers into Fob,
And then replied, Madam, I Am sorry
You're troubled at an idle Story:
Alas! What has a viler Name
For Lying, than Report and Fame?
And he who credits all he hears,
Prostrates his Faith, and fools his Ears.
Pray let us talk no more about
A thing so frivolous. Then out
Drawing his clumsie Fingers forth,
Madam, (says he) though it is not worth
The acceptance of so fair a Lady,
Yet it is presented to persuade you
That He who gives it does bestow
His Heart entirely with it too.
Selena thought not sit to dally
With any thing of such a value;
And having well the Necklace eyed,
Truly, Sir Grog'ram, she replied,
I thank you for your Heart; but since
When you depart you take that hence,
This may content me for a Pawn,
Or a Remembrance when you're gone.
The secret Joy that he conceived
Hereat, was scarce to be believed;
Concludes himself cock-sure to have her,
Since she accepted what he gave her.
Delighted with these happy Thoughts,
Taking his Leave, away he trots.
Selena, no less gratified,
Her Speech thus to her self applied:
"A Present of Five hundred Pound
"Affords a comfortable Sound,
"And is a most substantial Proof
"The Donor loves me well enough.
"There Is nothing makes the Purse-strings fly
"Of an old Fool, like Letchery.
"But in return what must I do?
"Marry, and kiss, and cokes him? Fogh!
"That Is but an awkerd sort of Pleasure:
"I Will think upon it more at leisure.
"Honey has Stings. -- With that she stopped here,
For in they came to interrupt her,
To make a Jest and Sport about her,
Having Sir Grog'ram for a Suitor.
Selena no less merry was,
And laughed most, having the most Cause.
But let us leave her in fruition
Of present prosperous Condition;
And make a Visit to the Knight,
Too long left out of Mind and Sight.
(Note, When we say The Knight, we mean
Sir Pendragon (...).)
With whom the Curate, having heard
How he in late Adventure fared,
Does with submission offer Solace,
In most obliging Terms, as follows.
Sir, What the Lady to you said
So smartly, was in Masquerade.
Though she knew you, you cannot infer
From thence, She knew that you knew her.
And 'twas but Raillery, to try
Your Courage, or your Constancy.
Had her own Father been in place,
She Would not have bated him an Ace;
But as she found him a-transgressing,
Backward she would have asked him Blessing.
Or had he attempted to abridge
Her of her Sexes Privilege,
To lay Restraint on Lingua Franc,
She would have conn'd him scurvy Thank.
Alas! (quoth Sir Pendragon) I
With ease could bear her Raillery;
But by some Words she did impart,
I fear that she is a Whigg at Heart:
She told me, as I understood,
My Writing did more Harm than Good;
Wherein the Want of Jest does show
The rather, she believes it True.
If so, it is fit she should be mumbled,
And in all sort of Senses humbled.
Quoth Laurence, If she be a Whigg,
Then I Am a very Putt, a Prigg.
I know she very often speaks
Perversely, for the nonce to vex;
And nothing in the World's more pleasing
To her, than being Cross and Teazing.
Whatever her Words may sound, she means
Things of a clean contrary Sense,
And must have almost all her Speeches
Read backwards, like to other Witches.
Here, to the Curate, and the Knight
Enters the Squire, in dismal Fright,
Upon whose Perriwig did stand
The Hairs, quite out of Curl, on end;
And told them, (being asked, What News?)
Worse than if Hell it self broke loose.
The Stubborn Prelates, late committed,
Have all been Tried, and are Acquitted.
One Minute bore the cursed Shout
Of Mob for several Miles about.
We teach to Laymen Loyalty,
Which Clergy, when concerned, defy:
Passive Obedience never begot 'em;
And They, or We, are in wrong Bottom.
Quoth Sir Pendragon, It Is amazing,
And sets my inward Lights a-gazing.
Too strong Convulsions needs must loosen
The Macro, as the Microcosm:
And Griping in the Guts does boad ill,
Because it may affect the Noddle.
Let us advise upon this Junto,
Consider what it may amount to:
For when Times wear a Face of Trouble,
Then should our Diligence be Double.
Quoth Hugo, Si non sero sapis,
I hope you will prove an Aesculapius.
A Cloudy Morning may grow clear,
And make an Evening Bright and Fair.
July's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
Knight, Squire, and Curate hold Debate
Concerning -- None of them know what.
Yet each one eagerly maintains
His own peculiar Sentiments:
And many are severely chidden,
Who will not do as they are bidden.
CANTO.
OLD Bays, according to his Name,
Had long wo^e Chaplet of the same,
That gracefully his Temples-crown'd:
But when Times changed, his Brows were bound
With Rosary thereof in stead,
Which caused new Singing in his Head.
As he the famous Fable forges
Of Beasts, and Birds, and Men, and Churches,
He a new Method institutes,
In managing his several Brutes:
Which bona fide he commends
To Smith and Johnson, two old Friends.
For out he brings his Wolf and Boar,
And showed them; but he did no more:
He would by no means let them fight,
Which nor instructs, nor yields Delight;
But when he 'ad given the Character
Of Hind and Panther, Fox and Bear,
And all sufficiently were seen,
He wisely shut them up again.
So pardon if we imitate
One of Authority so great:
We shall not let our Hero's deal
Either with Powder or with Steel;
Though they may snarl, talk high, and chafe,
Yet all the while we'll keep them safe.
They really shall do no hurt;
For, Mischief always spoileth Sport.
But when they have run their Risque, and tried
(While they had with them Wind and Tide)
What they would be at, by change of Wind
We'll send them Puff as far behind;
We'll make them scour (when the time's come)
Abroad, or be confined at home.
Such is the Contest in the Game,
Of so much celebrated Fame;
Which we in English call The Goose,
And Rome's Wise Conclave did compose:
Where every Party still does strive
(Preserved by equal Hopes alive)
To compass that, which can be done,
In the conclusion, but by one.
He that is repelled, as much of Chance has,
As he who the mean while advances:
And he that is laid in Custody,
Looks for a Time to be set free,
And feeds on Expectation
To rise from Prison to a Throne,
Till by the strong decisive Cast,
The Fortunate confounds the rest.
But it is not fit too long Preamble
Should from the present Business ramble.
In Gray's Inn Walks we lay the Scene
Where Knight, Squire, Curate met again,
And reassumed Discourse once more
On that they entered on before.
Pendragon first did Silence break,
And thus from Second Thoughts he spoke.
The Changes which are rung from Steeple
Are always pleasing to the People:
And the most dangerous Commotion
Is kindled from too hot Devotion.
But the poor Priest is more the Zealot:
We seldom find it in the Prelate,
Who having got a bigger Share
Of this Worlds Goods, divides his Care,
And makes him hold the Balance even
As ever he can, 'twixt Earth and Heaven:
Yet spite on's Teeth, he will be inclined
To the Scale where lies the Earth refined:
While poorer Wretches, less content
With that which Providence has sent,
Raise Faction, and tear all in pieces,
In hopes of better Benefices.
But as for want of a Supply
Of Fuel, Flames do quickly die;
So will your formidable Shout
In Fumo vanish, and go out.
My Shout! Deliver me! (quoth Hugh)
It does as much belong to you.
What Hurt can I sustain, should all
The Bishops in the Kingdom fall?
And yet, on the other Side, what Good
Will that be to my Livelihood?
Who am as firm a Son of the Church,
Though I say 't my self, as D -- B -- --
Or as your Worship's self, Sir Knight,
Tho you get much, I nothing by it.
Nay, quoth Pendragon, if you're teasty,
Try what you will get by riding resty;
And if you fancy you have fared ill,
Go turn the Buckle of your Girdle.
Howsoe'er my self I have acquitted,
Let me be envied, and not pitied.
Pray, quoth the Curate, give me leave
This sudden Squabble to retrive,
And offer something in due season
To Men of so much Worth and Reason;
Who both are real Friends to the Church,
And scorn to leave her in the Lurch.
(By Church, I mean the Hierarchy,
Its Grandeur, Power, and Dignity.
Coetus fidelium is the Mobb,
Who may our Shrines and Altars rob.)
Therefore to you I dare appeal,
If what those Bishops did was well.
I judge them damnably mistaken,
Though by good Luck they saved their Bacon.
The Crime was very great and foul,
The Prince's Pleasure to control.
Whatever he would have them read,
They ought to do it; and so I did;
And so should every Loyal Priest,
Without Refusal, or Contest.
If we have any who profess
Supremacy beyond the Seas,
In this they may comply, the rather,
Because approved by Holy Father;
With whom the Church in this our Nation
Might meet with Reconciliation,
If 'twas not kept at such a Distance
By those who love to make Resistance.
Why should we not in Manners come
As near as ever we can to Rome?
Since she upon the Hills is high
In Honor and in Quality,
It is more reasonable and fitter
That we should first advance to meet her:
And if we are not too proud to stoop,
With open Arms she will take us up,
Never reproach our going astray
So long, and being out of the Way;
But bid us VVelcome, and caress
Us with the greatest Tenderness.
The Papist, and the Protestant,
Exploded Terms of foolish Cant,
When once made Friends, whoever thinks on,
This or that Name for a Distinction,
I Would have him hanged up by the Neck,
Or Spitcock'd for a Heretic.
And here, Great Sir Pendragon, you
May justly claim our Thanks as due,
That the Church-Trimmers (who the while
VViden what we would reconcile)
Have that Nickname preserved alive,
To make their Infamy survive.
In all your VVritings your strong Reasons
Have strangely mended my Persuasions.
That which we call The Reformation,
Is but a Scandal to the Nation;
And for John Calvin and Mart. Luther,
I will not say what I think they both were.
Hold, quoth Pendragon, you say more
Than ever you had my Warrant for:
You never met with such Expressions
In all my First or Second Lessons.
That Is true, you are too wise a Man
(Quoth he) to speak your Mind so plain:
But you will allow me so much Sense,
From Doctrine to raise Inference.
(Quoth Hugh) Methinks you both are in, and
Out too, by turns, with your Opinion.
Quicksilver's very hard to fix,
It has so many shifting Tricks:
And Weather-glasses fall or rise
According to the Clouds in the Skies.
I Have hearkened to you till I Am giddy,
And do but grow the more unsteady.
Could I discern wherein you differ,
My Thoughts were easier to deliver.
You, Master Laurence, very fairly
Seem to be bound for Rome thus early;
And though I cannot keep equal Pace,
I love a Man that shows his Face;
But wish your Riding so Tantivy
(As the Whiggs call it) don't deceive you.
If Sir Pendragon would unveil
Himself as far, 'twould please me well;
And not converse with us, when he has
A Misty Cloak on, like Aeneas.
Good Squire, compose your self to rest,
(The Knight replied) Repeal of Test
We all are for, and think it just
To gratify the Royal Lust.
There Is none of us would make Defeisance
Of Active, or Passive Obeisance.
And sure my Writings clear this Case
Plain as the Nose upon your Face.
All People that on Earth do dwell,
But those who purpose to rebel,
Without Conditions should obey
What Rulers bid them do or say.
Hamlet, because he was a Prince,
The Lord Polonius could convince,
That the same Cloud was like in all
TO a Camel, Weezel, and a Whale:
And make another (spite of Thought)
Say as he pleased, 'twas Cold or Hot.
Indostan's Greatest Emperor
Rules with so uncontrol'd a Power,
That if at Noon, when Sun shines bright,
He says, it is middle of the Night,
His Courtiers dare not for their Ears
But cry, Behold the Moon and Stars.
No Monarch in the Universe
Has more his Peoples Dread and Fears,
Than Boutan's Arbitrary Lord,
Who Is like a Deity adored.
Being set, or Justice to dispense,
Or to give needful Audience,
Whos'e'er into his Presence goes
Must clap his Hands together close
Above his Forehead, then fall down
At a good distance from the Throne.
Thus prostrate on the Ground when laid,
He dares not once rear up his Head;
Which humble Posture and Condition
Those use too, who prefer Petition;
And he that makes Retirement quite,
Moves backwards till he is out of sight.
But what is yet more strange, and greater*
When ever their King has eased his Nature,
They carefully preserve his Ordure,
And dry it like to Sneezing-Powder;
Then, as we Snuff in Boxes shut,
So they the choice Provant do put,
And with them every Market Day
They carry that, to give away
To Men of Wealth, with whom they Trade;
Which Kindness is by them repaid.
Who thus possessed of Good so rare,
Convey it home with no less Care;
And when they invite their Friends to eat,
They strew the Powder on their Meat.
Two Boutan-Merchants, says my Author,
Showed me their Boxes, and the Powder.
These Eastern People can digest
What ours would not vouchsafe to taste:
They swallow a Sir-Reverence
With greediness, that comes from Prince.
Nothing goes down with us, forsooth,
But what is pleasing to the Tooth.
And more he was about to say,
When he was called in haste away:
The Squire and Curate at the Gate
Parted too, without further Chat.
'Twas now the Time the Politicians
Seemed wondrous full of good Conditions,
Made Proffers very much obliging
To All of different Religion.
And though Dispensing Power they held,
Yet they in Loving Kindness yield
To have all Penal Laws repealed,
Which gave the Subject any Grief
Concerning Matters of Belief.
Some eagerly caught at the Bait,
And with the Sugar-plums were caught;
But others more considerate,
At distance having spied the Trap,
Sought Means the strong-laid Snare to escape.
While those who were possessed of Places
Found themselves driven to Distresses,
From which they could have no Release,
Unless they left behind their Fleece.
For when the Question once was put,
Yes, you must answer, or turn out.
Will you at Call of Parliament
Give Vote for such who will consent
To take off Test and Penal Laws?
He that said Yes, was where he was:
He that unhappily said No,
Was used untowardly, like a Foe;
Threatened with Fines on Goods and Chattels,
Confinement, and the Lord knows what else.
Which Method, needs must be confessed,
Was driving out of Test with Test.
The Thoughts of riding in the Saddle
Made weak Dissenter's Brains turn addle;
He could not see (he grew so blind)
The Jesuit getting up behind;
Who soon with unexpected Flirt
Would throw his Worship in the Dirt.
Many they were to whom the Question
Was boldly put: Among the rest, one,
A stout and valiant Son of Mars,
Who had spent all his Days in Wars,
Regardless of Religion,
'Twas thought that any might go down.
Therefore they prayed him (with his leave)
That he would the Romish Faith receive.
It Is true (said he) that saying Prayers
Has been the least of all my Cares;
But if I ever change from That
Wherein I first was bred and taught,
My Honor is engaged to embrace
That of the Emperor's of Fez,
Who showed me Death, and Blood, and Wounds,
Yet could not get me to renounce.
Poor Slaves were brought into his Court,
And murdered, only to make Sport:
The Agonies I saw, and Twitches,
Of miserable dying Wretches,
Yet I never turned my Head awry,
Nor frowned, nor asked that Monarch, Why
He caused the needless Execution.
Who when he saw my Resolution,
And found me not inclined to Pity,
Cried, Our Religion best would fit you.
(You Christians use to show Remorse)
Your Faith should be the same with ours,
If I changed mine, I promised then
That I would turn Mohammedan.
Their Wisdoms had as ill Success
With other Closettings, as this;
And Corporations Regulator
Proved a good Subject, fit for Laughter.
In Man no greater Folly is,
Than that of being over-wise.
August's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
By Curate's Help, the Knight and Lady
Meet merrily, and Days are gaudy
A while, too hot to hold; Cold Dew
Is ushered in by Barthol'mew.
But yet the Curate's Heat does grow
Toward Thomasine, and warms her too.
CANTO.
THOUGH Hero's Pictures best do show
In Shades of Misery and Woe,
And more the Luster shines when set
In Frame of Ebony or Jet,
As all our Logicks tell us, else
Their Rules of Opposites are false:
Yet, on the other Hand, if they
Should never see one happy day,
Meet with no comfortable Chequer,
Their very Vigor would grow weaker,
And from the greatest Wits and Braves,
Become the meerest Sots and Slaves.
Poor Sir Pendragon yet has had
His Love-Concerns run Retrograde,
Without Support of one kind Look,
Which any other Heart had broke
But his, that lay so fortified,
Entrenched in Self-conceit and Pride.
Now therefore it is extremely fit
To let him lie no longer by 't,
And for his Sally to set open
Although but a Trap* door of Hope.
Laurence, to further this Intent,
Proves a successful Instrument;
Who, big with joyful Tidings, came
In so much haste to tell the same,
That all in Sweat the thick round Drops
Cours'd one another down his Chops.
Some Time he took to gather Wind
Sufficient to express his Mind.
He to Pendragon then imparts
That his unparalleled Deserts
Were to Selena truly known,
Which she in sober Mood did own;
That all was Banter in the Park,
And Random-shot beside the Mark.
Nay, she requested me, moreover,
(Quoth Laurence) very like a Lover,
That I Would engage, without Delays,
TO oblige her with the Happiness
Of making you and her acquainted,
And promised I should never repent it,
And made me in a manner swear
That you should come and visit her.
I thank you (quoth Pendragon) if
It Is safe to be of your Belief:
Yet it is not strange; for there is no doubt
But Weather-cocks may turn about:
Methinks it is worth my while to go
And try if she continue so
Ay, (quoth the Curate) pray be gone
This instant, while the Day's your own;
For to the Gods belongs to morrow,
And who knows whether Joy or Sorrow?
Cutbeard was called to cure Excrescence,
And bring his Iass'mins choicest Essence;
To fill his Perriwig with Powder,
And dab it round about his Shoulder.
Thus very smug, and very sweet,
Dressed in all Circumstances neat,
He sallies forth on bold Adventure,
The charming Lady to encounter;
And Laurence with him takes along,
To be his Guarrantee from Wrong,
That he receive no further Harms
Than what come fairly from her Charms:
And neither could the Advantage carry
By their Perfumes Auxiliary.
After Attack betwixt their Cheeks,
(As fitting) first Pendragon speaks.
Madam, To Master Laurence I
Pay Thanks for this Felicity;
That he has brought me to salute you
With all Devoir, and do my Duty
Unto the fairest of the Sex
Which our Horizon circumspects.
Beauty and Wit surround your Throne,
And you, like both the Sun and Moon,
Maintain an equal Power and Right
To govern us by Day and Night.
Quarter, (Dread Sir) Selena cried;
I cannot so fierce a Charge abide:
I Am altogether insufficient
To prove your Stock of Ammunition,
And do confess my self unfit
TO engage with such a Fund of Wit,
Whose strong Redoubts make all Opposers
Retreat, and turn away the Losers.
I bear no Terrors (quoth the Knight)
Which may your Ladyship affright.
What I pretend to of Abilities,
With all the Efforts of my Virilities,
A Sacrifice without Reserve is
Devoted solely to your Service.
Beasts were for Sacrifice of old,
( Selena said) as I Have been told,
Creatures with Horns and cloven Feet,
Which after that were exc'lent Meat,
First broyl'd on the Altar of Devotion,
Then served at Supper for Collation;
Wherewith not only hungry Priest,
But Wife and Children made a Feast.
Now to suppose that you were slain
On such account, 'twould be profane;
Or were you to be carbonado'd,
He gad! I could not be persuaded
To suffer come betwixt my Lips
The tightest Bit about your Hips.
And though my Kindness may be great to you,
Yet not to that degree to eat you.
(When Laurence thus engaged did see
Them in slap-dash at Repartee,
He slipped out of the Room unseen
To find out Mistress Thomasine.)
Quoth Knight, Dear Madam, have a care;
You drive the Metaphor too far.
In Lit'ral Sense I should be sorry
To verify the Allegory,
And run into that rash Mistake
Which pious Origin did make;
Who, to become more good and gracious,
Parted with Movables so precious.
To complement away my Gender,
My self incapable would render
To pleasure You, and do that Duty
Which I in special manner vow to you.
Thank you (quoth she) that I Am befriended
With so much kindness but intended;
Although your promised Resolution
Be frustrate of its Execution:
For it is a Truth, That Ferdinando
Can do no more than what he can do.
And you shall find me so well bred,
As to accept the Will for Deed.
That Is kindly said, (quoth he) Dear Lady:
But it behooves me to persuade you
(For Credits sake, without Denial)
To have this Business put to Trial.
Suffer my Love to take its Course,
And prove its energetick Force.
Softly, good Sir, Selena cries;
We 're merry, and we should be wise.
Determination of this Matter
May be made time enough hereafter.
We have advanced as far as fitting
For any Two at their first Meeting.
Blind Love ought to be gently led,
And taught to step, and taught to tread.
Mean while Pendragon slily strove
To pull from off her Hand a Glove.
She asked him if he meant by that
To have it fastened in his Hat,
And wore thereon, like Wedding-Garter,
To show the Passion he did bear to her;
As Brunswick's Duke the like was seen
To do for the Bohemian Queen.
(Quoth he) That famous Duke of Brunswick
Saving his Love, was mad and Brainsick;
All whose frenetick Actions showed
Him Cruel, Barbarous, and Lewd:
And scarce, since Julian that Apostate,
Has the Church known a Foe more cross to it:
For if on Steeple high as Paul's
He spied a Workman stopping Holes,
He never ceast pelting him with Stone,
Until he foully fetched him down;
And such a Fall from Top of Steeple
Must beat out Brains, or make a Creeple.
In Munsters sacred Dome he sees
The Twelve Apostles Images,
All of substantial massy Plate;
When pond'ring well their Worth and Weight,
After reproachful Speech to the Statues,
For keeping idle Station gratis,
He swore he would make them travel through
All Countries, as the were bid to do.
Then with them (coined into Rix-Dollars)
He paid his Army off, and Followers.
To Priests he bore such fell Antipathy,
He caused them to be smitten Hip and Thigh:
Deaf to their miserable Moans,
Either he cut their Throats or Stones.
But I run on with a Discourse
Unsuitable to Love-Affairs.
She (looking round her with a Frown)
Perceiving Laurence was withdrawn,
Inquired, and found him not within,
But gone abroad with Thomasine;
Replies, O rare! Your Curate-Thief
Has stole away, without my leave,
Not only his own Logger-head,
But hers whom I do call my Maid:
On what particular Pretense,
A little Time will evidence.
At present I Am become uneasy.
Since then my Company cannot please ye,
You being a most accomplished Courtier,
Will cut your Visit so much shorter.
Madam (quoth he) I Will never dispute,
Your Will and Pleasure's absolute.
Then bowing low, with a loud Smack
He kissed her Hand, and turned his Back.
Your Servant, Sir, (quoth she) God b' ye;
Adieu to Love and my Dear Joy --
She softly sung in silent Tone,
Till he was out of hearing gone.
Then smiling said, I Have seen enough
Of this Sir Curly-murly Puff,
Whose Screams (I Am told) are cursed loud
Against Patriots for the Public Good:
I Am sure his making Love's a Farce,
In Strains untunable and harsh.
If with his Quail-pipe he decoys
Some heedless o'er-grown Scholar-Boys,
Who with their Money part, to buy
Dear Pen'worths of false Loyalty;
Let him not think that I Will be fed
With his gilt printed Ginger-bread.
Infallibly that Man's in fault
Who calls his Neighbors all to naught.
Trim-tram, such as this Master Tory,
Such Man Squire Hugh, such Chaplain Laury.
Then fretting at the Misbehaviour
Of Thomasine, a while we leave her
Riding on Grubb, a Trot most sore hard,
And put the Clock a little forward,
To make it just the Time of the Year
Of famous Bartholmaean Fair.
Not that we mean to sing the Matter
Of such Variety for Laughter;
But in brief only to disclose,
Among the many Raree-Shows
Then met to make all London Town stare,
There was a Female German Monster
Had Scales on one Side, like a Fish,
TO other clear-skinn'd as one would wish;
One Buttock was just like a Horse's,
TO other like other Humane Arses;
Misshapen Legs, and on Feet grows
Members too big for Petit-Toes.
She, the Chief Princess of this Sort,
Could never fail of a full Court,
To pay a Courtier's Complement,
Brought Sir Pendragon to her Tent.
^t the same time, to gratify
^n Itch of Curiosity,
unto the same identick Place
^lindfolded wanton Chance conveys
Selena, splendid as the Moon,
Well guarded by a Beau Garconne.
The Knight, through his Sagacity,
Had quickly got her in his Eye;
When moving forward to salute her,
^^e as quickly turned about, Sir.
^t that, he changed his Course; she then
^s nimbly tacked about again;
^s he to get the nearer strove,
Perceived she hitch'd the further off.
He sat him down, o'er-whelm'd with Grief,
Despairing of the least Relief,
Because his Noble Heart was sunk
Down to the bottom of his Trunk.
While thus in melancholy mood
He chewed Tobacco and the Cud,
And at a distance, with her Centry,
Selena looks for Monster's Entry,
Laurence and Thomasine were got
More close together, piping hot:
Not in a Booth of Monsters frightful,
But where they found it more delightful.
No Puppet-Shews, nor Dancing Bears,
Nor merry Drolls of Strouling Players;
No Tumbling Andrew, nor Iean Pudding,
Could please them, who were set a brooding,
And hovering over each others Love,
In Box as warm as any Stove.
To noisie Jests they bid Defiance
With Sack and Sugar, Cates and Viands,
And nothing wanting on the Place
To make their amorous Flames increase;
Which was performed by secret Course,
Unsearchable as is the Source.
Great was their mutual Satisfaction,
Where Passion makes up all the Action,
And Interjection all the Speech,
Description is beyond our reach.
By Thoughts, and in Dumb-shew, the rest
Is with best Eloquence expressed.
Laurence thus drawn (as with a Cable)
By this Importance Comfortable,
Had all the Faculties of 's Mind,
To gratify the Flesh, resigned;
And his acute Intelligences
Were humble Servants to his Senses.
His Ratiocination fared ill,
While his Wit worked beneath his Girdle:
And him the insatiate Gypsy drains
Of Money, Blood, and Guts, and Brains.
Among the poignant wise Adages,
Recorded by the Italian Sages,
One is, Priests, Women, and the wide
Ocean, are never satisfied.
September's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
Laurence and Thomasine's Proceeding,
Who make at Westminster a Wedding.
A Letter to the Knight does come,
With Present, from he knows not whom;
Which struck him with tormenting Cares,
And dread of Change in State Affairs.
CANTO.
It Is plain, by what was lately said,
That Thomasine's a cunning Jade;
Who having made a Wit a Fool.
Had the Sense not to let him cool,
But plied him with warm Clothes and Kisses,
Till sh' ad accomplished her Wishes,
And got him hampered with a Padlock
As strong as could be made of Wedlock.
The better to bring this about,
She most successfully had wrought
Her self into her Lady's Favor,
And her good Grace, as firm as ever:
Which Reconcilement was so hearty,
Selena was become a Party,
An Accessory to the Chouse
Of drawing Priest into the Noose:
Who now grown pampered with high Feeding,
Impatient grew to fix his Wedding;
Of which was held Solemnization
(Merely to give gratification
To his own Humor) on those Days
When London-Town was all on Blaze
Just Two and twenty Years before,
And Rome did brand her for The Whore,
When their St. Peter mocked the Fall,
And triumphed over our St. Paul.
Let Rome Burlesque the same, while we
Regret the sad Calamity.
The Time's a-coming, not far off,
When we shall have our Turn to laugh.
But other Matters press us much
To give these Nuptials a Dispatch.
At Westminster their Hands were joined,
And at a Tavern there they dined;
Its Sign (O wonderful in this Age!)
Was the Pope's Nuncio, Dada's Visage.
Selena's Bounty cleared those Scores,
Beside a hundred Loui' d' Ors,
Obliged for Portion of the Spouse,
On Day of Marriage to depose.
At Night she gave them a Sack-posset,
And with the Stockin Bridegroom's Nose hit.
Then after all the merry Guests
Their Wits discharged in Bawdy Jests,
Selena drew the Curtains close,
And left them to their Discompose,
Not suffering any one to come at
The married Pair while they consummate.
Pendragon, late oppressed with Wrong,
Calls out to have his Cause come on,
And prays he may no longer wait
His Hearing in the Court of Fate;
With Hopes to have from its Decrees
Allowed him Costs and Damages
For Falsehood and injurious Slight,
Wherewith his Mistress did requite
His Love unfeigned, and so debarred
Both that and him of due Reward.
Expecting Fortune more benign,
In haste his Boy came running in,
Tells him a Parcel's left in the Passage,
By a Porter brought with blund'ring Message,
Who being asked, he would not say
From whence he came, but run away.
That it is a very handsome Packet,
And for his Worship's Use directed.
Fetch it up hither, (quoth the Knight)
I find I Am not forgotten quite:
When the kind Donor will not tell you
His Name, the Present's of most value.
And here is a Parcel which within has
For certain a good Purse of Guinea's.
But first he found, handling the Matter,
That the Direction was a Letter;
Which shall be every Tittle read,
Without the Breaks Pendragon made:
And after that is fully done,
We shall impart his Notes thereon.
THE SUPER-SCRIPTION.
THESE

To Sir Pendragon be conveyed,
At the next Door to Godfrey's Head,
In Upper Old-bourn, toward St. Giles,
Where there be Two or Three Turn-Stiles,
Deliver,
With a Parcel tied,
Carriage paid and satisfied.
The LETTER.
SIR,
AFter hearty Commendations
Tendered to you and your Relations;
Hoping your Health's as good a plight in
As mine is at this present Writing.
Accept these Lines from unknown Hand,
Yet from a true unfeigned Friend,
Who doing the Duty of Plain-dealer,
Treats you with Terms the more familiar,
To bring y' acquainted with your Sins,
Which very seldom Favor wins;
Yet much more Good may work upon you,
Than gathering you a little Money,
Than hawking for you up and down,
To pick up here and there a Crown,
From the unwilling Contributor,
Who when hard pressed, is forced to do it, or
With his Great Neighbor lose his Credit:
Thus many against the Hair have paid it,
And their own Foolery have blamed,
For being topp'd upon, and shamm'd.
Yet to tell Truth, and shame the Devil,
Scarce Man of Honesty believe will
The Sums that have been gathered for you,
Of which thou art so little worthy,
That put thy Merits, nay, put all
Thy Loyalty into one Scale,
And throw a single Brass Half-crown
In to other, that shall weigh it down.
The only Reason, I conceive,
For your extravagant Relief,
May be, that when there is a Collection
Made for the Head of any Faction,
You always greatest Gathering have
For him who is the greatest Knave.
So Beggars raise Supplies for Want,
By their Felicity of Cant;
Not he that needs it, most does get,
But he who best can counterfeit:
And it is a common thing to pay
False Guides for leading us astray.
This, to your former Comfort, you
At others Costs have found so true.
There Is an old Proverb, which does say,
That every Dog shall have his Day.
You have had many that are past,
Successful to your Interest;
Crowds of Disciples you have led on,
Like Loyola, or John of Leyden;
When many a small High Priest did watch,
Thy precious Oracles to catch,
And preached them to their Congregations
In Doctrines, and in Applications.
As a famed Traveller once had
His Ordure Sacred Relic made,
When Votaries scraped clean his Breeches,
So carried those to Church thy Speeches,
And did on Sunday following vent
For Holy Truth, thy Excrement:
Which if a wiser Man then blamed,
Or disapproved of, he was damned.
Till Arbitrary Power, grown strong
And malapert in doing Wrong,
Seized on the Properties of Priest:
Thenceforth thy Oracles have ceast;
Exploded is thy slavish Lore,
By those who cried it up before;
Who blush to have been led aside
By such an Hocus-pocus Guide.
The Blaze your Reputation kindled,
Of late is grown so dim, and dwindled,
And with that shameful haste declines,
It with as little Luster shines
As Glowworm, or Tobacco-coal,
Or rotten Wood in a dark Hole.
The Time is past which thou have seen,
And never to come about again.
Let Friar Bacon's Brazen Head
Tell thee, thy Golden Days are fled.
By this time you may grow impatient
To be acquainted with your Present,
(One may presume) and that you're scarce well
At ease, until you have opened Parcel.
Prepare your self then, wipe your Eyes,
And see how prettily it lies
In Rolls, and Folds, which you may take
Perhaps at first sight for a Snake;
Like one in Timon's covered Course,
To sting his vip'rous Senators.
But ben't affrighted; on my word,
It Is but an honest Hempen Cord,
A Halter, which alone to you
By your own Hands can Justice do;
The due Reward of all your Pains,
And best Cure for your Flux of Brains:
Before the Mobb shall gut your House,
And greater Troubles interpose;
With that small Joy you yet possess,
And every Day is growing less;
While you have some Remains of Reason,
Prithee make use of them in season;
And without any more delay,
In secret make thy self away.
Dear Rogue, go hang thy self; I vow,
I would not urge thee to it now,
But that it will so well become you,
And every one expects it from you.
'Twill be the most Heroic thing,
Resolved like a true Brentford King,
Who by his own Hands would have fell a
Sad Sacrifice to dead Lardella.
You may give out, Selena's Scorn,
Intolerable to be born,
Occasioned it; and you may feign,
The dire Effects of her Disdain
Cut you so deeply to the Heart,
That it was better to depart
This Life, and end your Miseries,
Than to die daily by her Eyes.
You Have read of the Queen of Carthage, Dido,
That dancing, drinking, merry Widow,
When her beloved Aeneas shook her
Off, and unworthily forsook her,
She grew the melancholiest Creature
On Earth: She Would wring her Hands, and beat her
Breast, plunged in ruful Woe: At last,
Convinced all Hopes from him were past,
An end to her fell Grief she puts,
By striking Dagger in her Guts.
This useful Halter, if you please,
Would fain afford you the same Ease,
And free you by convenient Stretch
From growing more and more a Wretch.
Altering the Motion of a Muscle,
Or so, does it without a Bustle.
More Instances I dare engage
To cite, and Arguments allege,
To prove this Action truly needful,
And graceful for you, though it is dreadful:
But if you're scrupulous to do it,
Let these Five Motives press you to it.
First then, You far in Years are gone,
And broke in Constitution;
Your Vigor fails, and Natural Talent,
Which best should fit you for a Gallant,
Is now enfeebled, and become
Already a mere Pendulum.
Yet by your Freaks, and Monkey-Tricks,
Do you debauch the weaker Sex.
Not that the slender Wast of Miss
By you receives a Prejudice;
There your Efforts are ineffectual:
But on their slenderer Intellectual,
By the Fop doodle of your Wit,
What horrid Rapes do you commit?
And Ravishment, you know, is Death,
Anno Dec. Oct. Elizabeth.
Secondly, Once for all to dangle,
Is better than continual Wrangle,
Than Roguing the King's best Liege people,
As meriting the Gallow Tripple,
Without affording the least Proof,
As if thy Say-so was enough,
And held by Patent Ipse dixit,
Infamy where you please to fix it.
No Man reputed Loyal was
For his Obedience to the Laws,
And therefore ought to be protected,
But he who did as you directed.
Go hang thy self, since Caesar's Due
Is not to be purloin'd by you.
Thirdly, You ought to close your Chaps
By your own Hand, because, perhaps,
Transgressions by thee perpetrated
Are with that Subtilty committed,
They cannot come within the reach
Of Laws, or Cognizance of Ketch;
Yet, if well-weigh'd in their own Nature,
They may be judged to merit greater,
And should have Punishment severer,
Than either Felon or Burglarer.
Hence therefore you're obliged to be
In Equity Felo de se.
Fourthly, You cannot think it strange
If Times should have a sudden Change:
Nothing (you know) that is violent
In Nature, can be permanent.
Britannia sore with Wrongs oppressed,
Has her Eyes fixed toward the East,
And seems with eagerness from thence
To look for a Deliverance.
Such Revolution will for certain
In no wise meliorate your Fortune.
The Office may your House ensure,
Yet not your Person be secure:
For on so great an Alteration
The Whipping-posts throughout the Nation,
The Rods and Axes, Pill'ry, Gibbet,
Will change their Side too, and distribute
Due Punishments for old Abuses,
On those who put them to wrong Uses.
All this may come to pass, and rotten
Eggs for a little may be gotten.
Rather than (like Sir Hudibrass)
With Orange-tawny Slime your Face,
Some bold unlucky Knave should maul,
Truss up your self for good and all.
Which brings me to the Fifth and Last
Motive to make you tie it fast.
(For do but you secure the Knot,
I Will pass my Word the Rope holds out.)
Fifthly, You cannot for shame refuse
To thrust your Head into the Noose,
Because so many of your Followers
At Tyburn have wore Hempen Collars.
Thither your Devilish Doctrines brought them,
Merely for doing as you taught them:
Your self the Procatarctic Cause
Of their transgressing of the Laws.
Your Will in Wisp was their Undoing,
And led the Wretches to their Ruin.
Therefore what I advise you, do Man:
You know 'twas usual with the Roman;
Who when he found himself in trouble,
Esteemed the Practice Brave and Noble
Himself by Poniard to dispatch:
Why not as Brave, by Rope to stretch?
Why should the Rope be reckoned meaner?
When Sons and Brothers of the Grand Seignior
Repute it no ignoble thing
To have Death given them by a String.
For Use then, Quae cum ita sint,
You Will hang your self, I Am confident.
Let not one Doubt or Fear prevail;
Be res'lute, and you cannot fail.
Farewell; make haste to Execution;
Do It handsomely; and, for conclusion,
When in the Highway they have made your Grave,
I Will give you this for Epitaph.
EPITAPH.
HERE lies (take notice you that travel)
With Stake of Wood drove through his Navel,
That which remains of Sir Pendragon,
A famous Writer not long agone;
Who, when his Ink-bottle was spent,
Thus perished in a Discontent.
Die with him all Prevarication
On Laws, Religion, Prince, and Nation.
Yours, --


Yours, -- (quoth the Knight) and there is an end.
My what? -- My precious loving Friend.
A fine Epistle, to collogue
Me to believe my self a Rogue!
Nay, 'twould persuade me very fain
I am so great a Rogue in Grain,
That I without demurring ought
Into this Rope to thrust my Throat,
And (maugre natural Aversion)
Destroy my goodly proper Person.
Soft! if I Have played the Knave, no Rule
From thence, that I must play the Fool,
Murder my self, for sneering Knave
To gibe thereat, and jeer, and laugh.
I Am not from Glory's Precipice
So fallen, to follow this Advice. --
And then he paused. -- But yet I doubt
My Candle is a going out.
This filthy Letter does unfold
More Truth than's fitting to be told,
And hits some things so devilish pat,
From Lapland it must bear its Date.
What but some Devil-Scout could tell
That lately all my Presents fail?
Because I Am sure no Man alive
Can ever prove a Negative.
And what but such could undermine
Each secret Practice and Design
That I have driven on of late
Both in Affairs of Church and State?
What else could give that shameful Tergi-
versation to me from the Clergy?
And some of them who licked my Spittle
Sent me perhaps this very Snittle.
What made Selena (like a Jilt)
To foster Love, and then to kill't?
As they who wrote this base Epistle
Know that she used me like a Beast, ill.
Yet I must yield, for want of Powers
To force the Sex to pay her Scores.
Though I bristle like a Turkey-cock,
I have not half so fine a Dock.
It Is as in vain t'attempt to spread
My Tail, as it would be to tread:
I Will walk no more amongst the Hens,
Lest they find out my Impotence.
A long Farewell to now the stupid
And childish Fooleries of Cupid:
But I Have no Reason to complain
Of Disabilities of Brain.
Yet should the Fourth vile Motive prove
A Truth, I may see Cause enough
To hang my self; I should be a Man
In worse Condition than was Haman:
The very Thoughts whereof do make
My Limbs and Faculties to shake;
Because there flies a strong Report
Concerning terrible Effort
Preparing to be made against
Our Tory Friends, and Popish Saints.
But Hope says, Accidents may slip
Betwixt the Cup and upper Lip:
Let not (before the time, so soon)
My noble Courage be cast down;
And let not Fear with wonder gaze
On what may never come to pass.
I and my Monarch rest secure,
Defended by the double Power
Of potent Army in the Land,
And Judges, who the Laws command.
October's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
The Knight and Squire in Coffee-house
Hear most unacceptable News:
They meet their Match, being told their own
By one to both of them unknown.
Yet Laurence Tidings does impart,
Which puts them both again in Heart.
CANTO.
PEndragon, when we left him last,
Promised Security and Rest
TO himself, and those of his Adherence;
But every Day gave less Appearance
(From the black Clouds of threatening Storm)
That he this Promise could perform.
For not a Night he laid him down
Without deep Sighs, and many a Groan.
His Anguish sometimes made him Weep;
And if by chance he fell asleep,
It yielded melancholy Theams
Dire Specter, and most frightful Dreams;
A formidable Whigg Hobgoblin,
With Sawcer-Eyes, appears to trouble him,
And running on, with crooked Prongs
Pok'd at Sir Knight, for former Wrongs.
If this withdrew, his Fancy next
A Hempen Apparition vexed.
While Hugh, kept waking with like Feats,
Betimes unto the Knight repairs,
To ask him whether he could tell
If what was talked was credible;
Or knew from out what Trumpet came
This strange Report of tat'ling Fame.
I Am in great hopes (quoth Hugh) it flies
From that wherewith she scatters Lies.
Pendragon said, I Am not without
Some Fears, and Jealousies, and Doubt,
That such concurring various Causes
Might contribute some pretty Crosses:
But saw no danger of Event
To over-turn the Government:
Nor did he think the Tales which flew
About confus'd'ly, could be true.
Yet that they well might understand too
The Quis, Quid, Quomodo, Cur, Quando,
Of this bold Whisper, Both agreed
To walk with all convenient speed
To the next Coffee-house of Fame,
To learn the Certainty of the same.
Mean while there is not a Word let drop
About the Adventure of the Rope;
Of which the Knight as little said
As Hugh when he was nipt of the Head.
Crossing the Street, it so did fall
By chance, that Hugh was next the Wall;
For which he does apologize,
And cries, Sir, let me blush for this;
It Is indecorous; nor should I
Take Place of better Quality,
But that a Surdity in Ear sinister
To me much Trouble does admin'ster.
The Knight replied, Custom and Use
Was a sufficient full Excuse;
And bid him speak no more of that,
But keep the Wall, and put on's Hat.
When they were come in Coffee-room,
Through misty Clouds of different Fume
Spying one empty Table there,
They sat them down with prick'd-up Ear.
No sooner each had called for's Dish,
But enters one with smiling Phiz,
With Riding-Whip, and dirty Boots,
And in 'twixt Knight and Squire he puts.
What News? was asked by every Body,
Who had their Answers to it as ready.
Yet Hugh this Stranger pumps beyond
Good Manners, and the decent Bound
Of Modesty, that he would unload
What he had gathered on the Road.
Sir, quoth Ignotus, (so an't please ye
We call the Stranger) You're uneasy
Methinks, at these Reports which fly
About our Ears, beneath the Sky:
Therefore, for Satisfaction, know,
Arthur of Britain, like a Crow,
Has gone the World round many a Year,
And just now we expect him here.
Which News as sure and certain is,
As that there was an Amadis
De Gaul, a Fiarbras, or Guy
Of Warwick, or of Burgundy
A Lanc'lot de Lake, and Queen Genover,
(Who by none living now were seen ever)
A British Lady called Quintanione,
Who drank as much Wine as did any one:
Yet, says the Knight of the Mancha, those
Must not be reckoned Fabulous.
As sure as (I dare boldly say)
Perseus relieved Andromeda,
Prince Arthur's sailing cross the Seas,
Even now, Britannia to release,
To heal her Wounds, and break the Shackles
Put on her by unnat'ral Rake-hells;
Who by pretense of Loyalty,
Would bring us into Slavery;
And fain would cokes us, or affright,
From Liberties, and Law, and Right:
Who Rome's Religion here would fix,
In Masses, and the Crucifix;
And would have nothing more to do
With the Old Testament, or New:
As Dunkeld's Bishop told Dean Thomas,
I Have lived as comfortably as some has,
And yet, upon my Word and Troth,
I never read either of them Both.
Look you, Sir, whosoe'er you are,
I know not, and as little care:
But mind me; We have had of late
Such precious Ministers of State,
Such Priests, and Lawyers, who laid by
Religion, Law, and Property.
Once cried a Priest of ours, Alas!
Why should we start at hearing Mass?
We liked it once, before we lost it,
And shall again when we are used to it.
'When introduced (over or under)
Twill give us about Nine Days Wonder.
As well might the same Gentleman
Have said Nine more for the Alcoran.
Another, some few Years before,
Fond of a Popish Successor,
In his Address he makes to the King,
Tells him, to fright him from the Thing,
His next Heir's Disinherison
Was such, that no Religion,
No Law, no Fault, no Forfeiture,
(Take Wind a little, Doctor G --)
Could the same alter or diminish:
And why not, add to, or replenish?
Such was the Learned Doctor's Speech,
As Cobblers, who when heard to preach,
Do always go beyond their Last,
This out run Constable as fast,
Who might (upon a due Enquiry)
Have seized him on a Praemunire.
Thus it is when Priest will blindly rush on
Things quite beside his Pulpit-Cushion.
Suppose the next Heir was a Felon,
And caught in the very Act of Stealing;
Sure that which takes away his Life,
Will of Succession him deprive.
Which for a Truth you may rehearse.
Sir, I love Reasoning in Verse.
All this did Sir Pendragon hear,
Who could not for his Blood forbear
Longer from giving smart Reply;
Sir, it is a saucy Liberty
You take, in making these Reflections
On Statesmens, Priests, and Princes Actions.
You who the Government arraign
For not conforming to your Brain,
To know your Duty better ought,
Or be to its Rods Submission taught.
It Is therefore very fitting I
Demand of you Security,
Or make your Mittimus unto
A Place where you would be loath to go.
How! (quoth Ignotus) What I Have told
Touches your Worships Copyhold.
Have I found where the Shoe does pinch?
I see I make a galled Horse winch.
On second Thoughts you will take Advice,
And ever you act, consider twice;
Suspend your own Authority
A while, and lay Resentment by.
Not that I want sufficient Bail;
But it is at present under Sail.
I Will be forthcoming, on Parol,
On day of Trial, safe and whole.
You hear of strange unusual Lights
Which in the Skies appear at Nights:
Some wear a discontented Look,
That High Commission Seal is broke,
Now that Old Charters are restored,
And Councils tend to an Accord.
He that afresh creates a Squabble,
Displeases both the Court and Rabble.
It Is unsafe to lay a Man by the Heels
Now a Day's coming for Appeals.
Pendragon gnash'd his Teeth for Anger,
Not knowing how to deal with Stranger.
Hugh bit his Lips with Indignation,
To hear of Charters Restoration;
Grew pale, lest he who caused Surrender
Should be impeached for an Offender.
But the Knight muttered, Talk's but idle,
Licentious Tongues may meet a Bridle
When least they think to feel Restraint.
Then up he rose, and out he went.
Hugh stands and strikes his Fist like Muttons
On his own Breast, against his Buttons.
Quoth he, No Man that wears a Head
Durst speak the Things that you have said,
Without being called to account therefore:
Then cocked, and strutted out a-door.
Pendragon made a little Stop
A Pissing-while, till Hugh came up;
Then whispered, as along they sawnter'd,
What a strange Fellow we encountered!
Who, had he what to him belonged,
Ought to be whipped, and racked, and hanged.
A Commonwealths-man, you may swear,
By his unlucky Looks, and Fleer;
And in Religion his Opinion
Is Calvinist, or else Socinian.
I hate him for the News he told,
Which makes my very Blood turn cold,
Puts me all over into a Shiver,
Like a strong Access of a Fever.
Nor can I draw a Right Conclusion
From Things appearing in Confusion.
O lamentable, Sir, (quoth Hugh)
What we have heard's most certain true;
And should our Fears too come to pass,
We Are in a miserable Case;
All of us ruined and undone,
The Father, Mother, Sister, Son.
Thus with Complaints most dolorous
Hugh waits upon the Knight to's House:
Where Laurence met them at the Door,
And, seeing them look sad and sour,
Courage, (he cried) my worthy Friends,
Much better Fortune us attends,
Perhaps, than may to you be known:
By an Express this Afternoon
Certain Intelligence is come,
That adverse Storms have driven home
The Armado, which it seems designed
To reach our Coasts against the Wind.
The Fleet which would have been invading
Our Shore, is on their own unlading.
Strong Boreas, and the gentle Zephir,
(Thank them) have done their Business clever.
And bravely whistled in the Poop
Of those who bore so briskly up;
Who sail without the leave of Neptune,
And Aeole better might have kept in,
Than thus to hazard what they have lost,
That is, their Labor and their Cost.
A most severe Rebuff from Fortune.
And now the Days begin to shorten,
Now Sol curtails his daily Journeys,
No fear in haste of their Return is.
In Arms next Spring we'll meet our Foes,
And all the Winter sing Old Rose.
Your welcome News (Pendragon said)
Revives and makes my Spirits glad.
In hopes kind Fortune will not forsake us,
We'll make a Sacrifice to Bacchus.
Come in, Friend Hugh, and honest Laurence,
I Will find a double Flask of Florence;
Of which we'll drink first every Man
A Bumper to the Health of Pan.
That down, we'll fill and drink another
To beauteous Syrinx, happy Mother
Of little Daphnis; then a Third
To that young, thriving, hopeful Bird:
And then, Confusion to all States,
Founded on Piles, and Water-Rats.
So these Canary's of a Feather
Do for the present flock together.
And it is but reas'nable and fit
That short-lived Pleasures should be sweet.
Mensis Octobris explicit.
So was Authentic Chaucer wont
At a full Period or Point*
Of the same Tale, to close the Joint.
November's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
The last Months Rumor true in this is:
And Knight and Squire are broke in Pieces.
The one the others Woe recites,
While Sol in Sagitt^ry smites:
And all unfortunate Presages
Promise them Payment of their Wages.
CANTO.
JUst as old Time does Seasons vary,
So does he all Things Sublunary.
Fortune stands never at a Bay,
But dances a continued Hay
To the same Measures, and same Tune;
As little Orbis, Sun and Moon.
Things Good, Bad, and Indifferent are
Making a Tripartite Indenture.
Sometimes the Best, and sometimes Worst,
Are First, and Last; and Last, and First.
Of some sweet Pleasures the Acquaintance
Is dearly purchased by Repentance.
Joy ended, turns to Melancholy,
And Wisdom quits the Chair to Folly.
Sunshine does for a Time prevail,
Then down it pours in Rain and Hail.
Riches themselves are brought to (by
Privation of them) Poverty.
Long Luxury and Idleness
Make War succeed inglorious Ease.
Which Aphorisms, like conj'ring Spells,
Hebrew or Pagan Oracles,
With the same ease may be read backward,
And teach us how this World is checkered.
As, War brings Poverty and Peace;
And, When 't has rained enough, 'twill cease.
Health follows Sickness; Plenty, Dearth;
And, Sorrow is relieved by Mirth.
Pleasure arises from Disasters;
And, Sores are cured by healing Plasters.
Fortune the Riches may increase
Of one so poor he scarce can piss,
And such like intermediate Changes
Turn on Occasions pliant Hinges.
An Evil and a Happy Day
By Turns each other will repay.
The faulty Curate, Squire, and Knight,
So lately wrapped in false Delight,
Are now to drink unwelcom Dose;
And, Sweet Meat must have sour Sauce.
The Mirth which with the Flask was brought,
Almost as soon as That, was out.
Approaching Changes in the State
Alarmed our wise Triumvirate,
And made them shake their Ears, and rise
From their mistaken Paradise.
With Consternation they were struck,
And showed it plainly in their Look;
And the most wise amongst them knew
Not what to think, or say, or do,
Convinced that Laurence's glad Tiding
They could no longer now confide in;
Hearing the Wind about had turned,
And quite contrary News confirmed.
For Carriers, Travelers, and Post,
Not only told, that Arthur's Host
Was landed: but Bells jolly Ringing,
And Peoples merry Looks and Singing,
Proclaimed the glad Intelligence
Of the Deliverer's Advance.
As Hugh walked out, a Raven over
His Head flew croaking, -- Come ashore.
To shun that Sight, he downward looking,
Spied wrong side outward of his Stockin;
And when at Dinner, by mishap,
He spilt the Salt in his own Lap.
Then hastening to Pendragon's House,
Three Drops of Blood fell from his Nose.
Entering he stumbl'd at the Threshold,
And had fallen, had he not caught fresh Hold.
All which ill Omens, so tremendous,
Made Hugo sigh, Ye Powers defend us.
The Knight received him with an Air
Disclosing Grief and sad Despair;
Not bid him Welcome, or Sit down;
But wrapped up in his Studying-Gown
The thoughtful Sir Pendragon sat,
Most woefully disconsolate,
Deprived a while as much from Speech
As when Selena turned her Breech.
Hugo, no less concerned, was fretted,
And felt his Spirits agitated;
Who thus accosts the Knight, Your Silence
Was not so great, when but a while hence,
Sir, you could laugh, and talk, and drink:
Now, Sweet Sir, tell me what you think.
They Are landed, and advance; I pray,
What is thy Counsel? Prithee say,
What it is that you design to do?
Sir, (quoth the Knight) What Is that to you?
Your Question's insolent and base;
I lived before I saw your Face,
And shall know how to steer my Course
Unaided by your Silver Spurs.
If this be all that I (quoth Hugh)
Can for an Answer get from you,
I ask no Succor from your Gilt ones;
Your Par'dise is as lost as Milton's:
Your Friend, the Devil, called Old Nick,
Has served you but a slippery Trick,
And keeps himself at greatest distance
When you have most need of his Assistance.
I thought the Articles, when drawn
Betwixt you, had been made more strong,
The mutual Compact and Agreement
Been sealed with a more lasting Cement;
Not to determine at a Day,
But hold for Ever and for Aye:
So that no Chance of War, no Change
In Church or State, could make you strange
To one another, once so loving,
And in one Interest interwoven.
Quoth Sir Pendragon, You're a Puppy
To talk thus, and it is time to stop you.
A saucy Jackanapes you are,
Or turned as mad as March's Hare.
You should be shackl'd, and sent home,
And locked up in a darkened Room,
Blooded and purged, to keep you quiet,
With Meal and Water for your Diet;
Fresh Straw, yout Hair close cut, or Shaving
Your Coxcomb, to prevent its raving.
Quoth Hugh, You're sooner like to find
A Lodging of another kind:
Be sent to the same Place again
Where you in former Days have lain,
Safely by Locks and Bars secured,
Betwixt thick Walls of Stone immured:
The Room not dark, shall yield you Light
Enough for you to see to write;
Where Sunshine, Rain, Beetles, and Gnats
Shall play betwixt the Iron Grates.
The Walls embelisht with the Slime
Of Snails, which winding upward climb:
In every Corner of the Room
A Spider working at her Loom:
Visits from Courteous Rats and Mice,
Millions of Philanthropick Lice,
Unwillingly will meet abstersion
From close adherence to your Person:
With great variety of swarming
Insects, and pretty sort of Vermin.
Thou take a wonderful delight
In thy own Prate, (replied the Knight)
But can thou think that I shall take it,
Without belabouring thy Jacket?
Or fairly breaking of the Scull
Of such a gross insipid Fool;
Whom nothing can retrieve, so lost in
His Wits, but Cudgels and Dry-basting.
(Quoth Hugh) before you go to Blows,
Think what you're like to get or lose.
Though I so Low, and you so Tall,
Your Haughtiness may catch a Fall;
And when I Have got you underneath,
Should you escape with any Teeth,
With Limbs un-broke, or Life, I dare say,
'Twill be all owing to my Mercy:
Or if I leave that Nose your Face on,
Thanks to my Bowels of Compassion.
Hear me (quoth Knight) ever Passion rise
To these most dire Extremities.
Before you further me provoke
To such an all-confounding Stroke
As may prove fatal to Squire Hugh:
'Twere better timely he withdrew;
It Is worth his while to avoid the Blow,
And while Skin's whole, to keep it so;
To fly from Lord and Master's Anger,
Before it is grown to too much Rancour.
So then (quoth Hugh) since both to quarrel
Are thus agreed, whichever Barrel
Betwixt us be the better Herring,
Give me, before we part, a Hearing.
You Have been a sort of Lord and Master
To me and many in Disaster;
But such an one as no Description
Will suit, but that of an Egyptian,
Expecting from us Labor hard,
And Toil, without the least Reward.
You Are Author of our Griefs and Ails,
But never got us any Veils.
Is it enough to call me Friend,
Without a Penny Dividend?
Crosses indeed I Have shared, but not
One Cross in all the Coin you have got;
Maugre your specious Promises,
And cheating me of all my Fees;
Maugre the Sums that you have gathered,
My Nest's not much the better feathered.
Take notice, that I let you know,
I Will not go Snips with you in Woe.
I doubt not but to make good shift,
When thou art sadly run a-drift.
Whatever Turn of Times we see,
My Legs shall be at Liberty,
When yours, committed to a Jayl,
Shall lie without Mainprise or Bail.
So, (quoth Pendragon) like a Dolt
Thou wisely have discharged thy Bolt:
It Is n't strange when Cowards and Poltrons
The Cause they have espoused, renounce;
Who make by their vile treachrous Fears
The weakest sometimes Conquerors.
Thou have betrayed thy self too soon,
And do, before thou need, run:
You change your Side, before you know
On which Side Victory will go.
But should the Foe receive Defeat,
I Will stop you from a fresh Retreat.
No petty Riot in the West
Of Loyalty shall me divest;
Not Arthur shall obstruct the Course
Of my all-conqu'ring Monarch's Force.
Though 't may be so, (quoth Hugh) it is
More likely to be otherwise:
Because I Am very confident
You're not so blind and ignorant
As not to know, Shoals of Deserters
Run daily into Arthur's Quarters.
His Army gathers like a Snow-ball,
While to other only grows in trouble;
As plainly may be seen (IN fack!)
By the Face of every Teague and Mac,
Who frighted, starts at his own Shadow.
Be gone, thou scoundrel Renegado,
Take that ill-boading Phiz (quoth Knight)
Henceforth for ever from my Sight.
For ever then (quoth Hugh) farewell;
And in my Breast, where Love did dwell
To thankless Knight, let Hatred come,
With Wrath, and fill up all the Room.
Let me with Scorn as much despise
The Blockhead I once thought was wise.
Pendragon could for's Skin and Bones
No longer put up these Affronts,
Nor more such Provocations bear;
But up he rises from his Chair,
(With much ado he did refrain
From meddling with his Sword or Cane)
Takes Hugh by the Shoulder, and per Force
Thrust him directly out of Doors.
Which, though it vexed him to the Guts,
Yet walking forth, he cocks and struts.
Pendragon, in distracted Thought,
Now found it time to cast about
What Course was best to save his Bacon,
Suppose his Cause should be forsaken.
Like Hugh he could not save himself,
Because he wanted Hugo's Pelf:
And, for Offenses more notorious,
He feared Catastrophe inglorious.
The great Volpone was at a stand,
Driven, by his Fears, to his Wits end.
The* crafty, but distressed Ulysses
Himself most woefully bepisses.
December's CANTO.
ARGUMENT.
In haste Selena gets a Spouse.
Laurence in haste from his gets loose;
Who crossed the Seas, with many more,
Whom guilty Consciences made scowr.
Hugo runs in, with Coin compounds.
Pendragon in Despair absconds.
CANTO.
ONE Labor more (Dear Arethuse)
Thou can perform beyond a Muse:
For none of them, like thee, can sing
Of Scowring and of Scampering;
Who learnt to play at Hide-and-Seek
When Alpheus put thee to the Squeek.
Perform this Task which I impose
Upon thee, and I Will let thee loose.
But it will prove like that which shuts well
All Homer's Iliads in a Nut-shell.
Since Phoebus last was in the Balance,
Selena had tried all her Gallants,
Searched each Man's Humor, Wit, and Person,
Estate in Present, and Reversion:
And having weighed them all, she found
Sir Grog'ram heaviest many a Pound;
Who had not only the best Purse,
But took the most obliging Course.
Whats'e'er she asked, he granted all;
His Love was Unconditional.
She was supplied of every Want,
And unconfined without Restraint:
While he consented to be tied,
And make all binding on his Side.
What Woman can on Terms like those
A Husband get among the Beaus?
Beau would be free himself, yet have
His Wife a perfect Indian Slave.
Pendragon, grown both Old and Poor,
She slighted; but a great deal more,
For that so much concerned he was
In the declining Tory-Cause,
Now like to bring him to a Noose
Much worse than that of Married Spouse.
'Twas she, assisted by Whigg-Friend,
Who jointly did compile and send
That Roguish Letter, and the Cord,
Which he was told of afterward.
The more she saw the Times unsettl'd,
She grew the more agog and nettl'd
To marry; for her Character
Was to do nothing Regular.
Since Handmaid Thomasine was gone,
Friend, Servant, and Companion
In her was lost; but yet she found
No Woman in the versal Round
Ever met Encouragement to Wed
On Terms so advantageous made:
So, without any further arguing,
She boldly struck the Marriage-Bargain,
And swore she would try't, whatever it cost her,
Though undone, as Man undoes Oyster.
To whom we have no more to say,
But send the Violins away,
The Drums, the Trumpets, and Haut-boys,
To wish them all the thundering Joys.
Mean time, one melancholy Morn,
About Sol's entering Capricorn,
As Thomasine lay fast a snorting,
Laurence lay thinking of His Fortune.
Unwilling to disturb her Sleep,
He slily out of Bed did creep,
Groping for Slippers underneath,
He brought out a Glass-bottle, with
This Paper Label fixed thereon,
Aqua Te-tra-chi-ma-ga-gon:
Which Sentence struck him so, he took hold
(Being satisfied he was a Cuckold)
Of Thom'sine's Head-clothes, whom with Shriek
Most dismal, he compelled to wake:
Then cried, Look here, (my precious Evil,
Fit to be married to the Devil)
What a Discov'ry have I made!
Thou damnable confounded Jade.
She soon obtained her Breath, and she
Was not behind in Repartee;
When the best Words in eithers Speech
Were Whore and Rogue, and Dog and Bitch*
Which Decency will not repeat,
Nor will our Brevity admit.
Laurence grown sensible beside
Of the quick Turning of the Tide;
Finding both Spouse and Times too hot
For his abiding on the Spot;
Resolved, since he could have no Room here,
Straightways to pack off to St. Omar.
And in the Turning of ones Back
B^hold him under Sail of Smack.
Thom'sine put Finger in her Eye
At Parting, but she could not cry;
When all she said was, Since it is so.
As he came, lightly, let him go.
Many with Laurence put to Sea,
And some of Highest Quality.
The Mixture was as universal
As that of Grand Dance in Rehearsal.
Here a fat Friar may be seen
Shouldring and sidling to a Queen:
A Foot man there in Cabin thrust is
With one but late a Lord Chief Justice.
A Prelate, lately clad in Purple,
Stuck 'twixt a Laundress and a Tarpol.
So may be seen, in the same Cellar,
In London-Town, of some close Dweller,
Cold Scraps set by, with Shoes and Sandals,
Raw Joint hung up near Pound of Candles,
Drink-Barrel, Cobwebs, Culm, and Coal,
Behind the Door the Privy-hole.
As different Sort did now embark,
As once were stowed in Noah's Ark:
But only those were Beasts and Fowl,
And these had once a Humane Soul;
Which now transformed to that of Hare,
Was put in such a Fright and Scare,
That every pitiful Crowdero,
That could but tune or sing Burlero,
Beyond Sea drove the flying Hero.
Even Fear in Triumph rides and seizes
All Sorts now; (Pardon Catechresis)
Not only those who were surrounded
With Guilt, were by its Terrors wounded;
But Men of Honesty Britannick
Were strangely struck with Horror Panick,
As if Old England was to perish
By a small Handful of Wild Irish;
Towns burnt, Throats cut in the Neighborhood,
Though no Man saw nor Smoke nor Blood.
Yet the false terrible Alarms
Provoked the Peasant to his Arms.
Great was the Outcry in its kind,
Which, carried on the Wings of the Wind,
Left Danger, Fears, and Foes behind.
Though soon the frightful Dream was over,
And Foes, Fears, Danger, out of door.
Who fell on Thursday in a Swoon,
Oppressed with Laughter, tumbled down
On Friday Morning, for the Cause
Of Terror so ridiculous.
So soon the Innocent were freed
From Harm and Peril, Fear and Dread.
But to the Obnoxious, various Ill
Does threaten to continue still.
Though Hugo was last Month o'er-run
So far with Superstition,
Made by ill-boading Birds afraid,
Which muted (as they flew) on's Head;
Yet he took Heart-a-grace, and tried,
By the quick changing of his Side,
His Neck and Substance both to save,
For all he' ad played so much the Knave.
Perceiving where his Bread was buttered,
(Himself equipped and well accouter'd)
Away he gallops on his Horse,
Until he met with Arthur's Force;
Whom he shakes kindly by the Hands,
And cries, You're welcome, my dear Friends:
This is the joyful Day indeed
When we shall be from Bondage freed:
The Popish Priests and Emissaries
Rub off in Mists, like juggling Fairies;
Our Properties are laid a whitning,
And our Foes fly away like Lightning.
Strangers believed the Man spoke true,
Because they saw him clad in Blue;
And if it was Dissimulation,
He managed it with great Discretion.
He patiently Reproaches bore
From those who knew him heretofore;
And if he met with Kick or Cuff,
Put it up quietly enough.
Who of his past vile Actions told,
Had his Mouth straightways stopped with Gold*
Hugh's open Purse was held in Common,
And many a Friend he made with Mammon.
He now stands (having paid his Fine)
Rectus in Curia, by his Coin.
Not so Pendragon, whom we said
Was sore afflicted and dismayed:
He knew not where he best could stay,
Nor had the Power to run away.
If seized, he must expect to fare
Alike with Aesop's Trumpeter:
His pleading that he never drew Blood,
Would do him very little good;
Himself not fighting, only was
An Aggravation to his Case;
Because it was most evident,
That he had been an Instrument
To blow the Bellows of Destruction,
Who shares more Guilt than he who looks on.
A Tyrant in his raging Fits
Owes half the Murders he commits
To scoundrel Cowards, who incense
Him with the specious Pretense,
That Cutting Throats, and Desolation,
Is for the Public Good of the Nation;
That driving Subjects from their Dwelling,
Is but to hinder their Rebelling;
To burn, and stab, and hang, and flea,
Means of expelling Heresy;
And the well-exercis'd Dragoon
Fittest to plant Religion;
That Monarchs who the same will not license
Ought to be made away with Poisons.
Sick at the Heart Pendragon grew,
And as unsav'ry as a Jew:
It cut him to the very Soul
To meet with nothing but Control;
To find the Politics he taught
Were rendered false, and worse than naught.;
His Wit, so sharp in the Lampoon
On Mobb, was by the Mobb run down;
And for the Crimes his Wit committed,
By Mobb he feared to be De Witted.
All his Offenses with his Pen
Were by the same paid home again:
Exposed and made ridiculous,
And peppered worse than D'avenant's Mouse,
Which got (poor Thing!) a Pocky Clap:
But a more fatal dire Mishap
Impended over Pendragon's Head;
For when an Act of Grace was read,
(Pardon almost for every Crime
Was granted to the present Time)
He heard (poor harmless Wretch!) by Name
Himself excepted in the same.
Nay then (quoth he) wherever I go,
The Halter still does me pursue.
Of all the Friends I lately had,
There Is none in Circumstance so bad.
Laurence, who parted with his Faith,
With a false Consort parted has;
Welcome to his Fraternity,
He Is safe enough, from Hanging free.
Madam, once Darling of my Soul,
Has played the Jilt, but not the Fool:
She Is married to a wealthy Cit,
And Money far surpasses Wit.
Witness that Rogue my quondam Squire,
Lately so much at my devoir,
Abused me grossly to my Throat,
And turned (without a Blush) his Coat.
His having Money, makes the Knave
Now in his Life and Fortunes safe.
Easily that Wretch does Scandal slight,
Who saves his Life and Substance by it.
My Life's on Wing, my Fortune's flown,
And Infamy survives alone.
A Diego's Will before my Death,
(When I have Nothing to bequeath)
Would but expose me to the Mock
Of all Men for a Laughing Stock.
Strange Things my Fancy does presage;
It sets before my Eyes a Sledge,
By which there stands, with uncomb'd Hair,
A Blear-eyed Executioner,
With Nightcap, Halter, Saws, and Knife,
Prepared to take away my Life.
My Ears hear nothing but the Knell
And Sound of St. Sepulchre's Bell.
The Turks believe, and Tunquinese,
That Death most Honorable is
Which sheds no Blood through any Hole,
But keeps the Skin entire and whole:
Then Hanging they must needs prefer.
But what make Saws and Hatchets there?
Avaunt -- My Brains grow hot, and burn;
And though I cannot, yet they may turn,
And so may prove the happiest Remedy
That can assist me in Extremity.
Mean time, these frightful Sentiments
Do not become a Man of Sense,
A celebrated Wit to cry,
Because he is about to die.
For shame! Since Power is left me yet
To walk, and talk, and drink, and eat,
I Life enjoy, and so long hope
That I may slip beside the Rope.
Which to effect, it will be wise
To put my self in such Disguise
That none can know me, and then skulk
Close under a Translator's Bulk.
THE CLOSE.
THE Farce is ended: What remains
Will not become our Dogg'rel Strains.
Let a refined Heroic Verse
Great Arthur's History rehearse:
Be That committed to the Care
Of wise Apollo's Son and Heir,
Who all (so wondrous are his Merits)
His Father's Faculties inherits.
His Cures extend to Humane Kind,
Diseased in Body and in Mind;
Expells the Modern Malady
Which had o'er-run our Poetry.
His Verse, so purged and fined from Dross,
Exalted, others does surpass
Far as the Hero whom he sings
Excells all other Mortal Kings.
Burlesque may serve us to remove
(Wheel-barrow-like) our Dunghills off;
To clear the Rubbish from our Home:
But He must sing of King Dom. Com.
FINIS.
Books printed for John Newton at the Three Pigeons in Fleetstreet.
THE Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire his Charge at the General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace for the County of Surrey, held at Darking. The Second Edition, corrected.

An Historical Relation of the Conspiracy of John Louis Count de Fieschi,
against the City of Genoua, in the Year 1547. Written in Italian by Augustine
Mascardi, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to Pope Urban the Eighth. Done into
English by the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire

Dr. Falle's Account of the Isle of Jersey, with a New Map, dedicated to the
King.

-- -- His Three Sermons on several Occasions.

Sir Francis Bacon's Essays.

A Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion, in several Essays: Or, The Light
of Nature a Guide to Divine Truth. By Mr. Timothy Nurse.

The Anatomy of the Earth. By Thomas Robinson, Rector of Busby in Cumberland.

New Observations on the Natural History of the World of Matter, and this World
of Life. In Two Parts. Being a Philosophical Discourse, grounded upon the
Mosaic System of the Creation and the Flood. To which are added, Some

Thoughts concerning Paradise, the Conflagration of the World and a Treatise of
Meteorology. With Occasional Remark upon some late Theories, Conferences, and
Essays. By Mr. Tho Robinson.

Pendragon: Or, The Carpet-Knight his Calendar A Poem.

A Panegyric to the KING on the Peace. By Jo. Glanvill Esquire of Lincoln's Inn.

The History of the Campaign in Flanders, for the Years 1692, 1693, 1694, 1695,
1696, and 1697, being the Ye^ of Peace. All written by Ed. d' Auergne, M. A.
Rector of St. Brelade in the Isle of Jersey, Chaplain to His Majesty's Regiment
of Scots Guards.


