A POEM On the Fall of the Southside of S. Paul's Cathedral.

To which is added, A SATYR Against the Fanatic BOUTEFEUS OF THESE TIMES.

And a Memorial Offered up at the Tomb of the Incomparable Mr. JOHN CLEAVELAND.

Never before exactly Printed.

Licensed and Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Roger Vaughan in S. Martins le grand.
1662.

TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND, EDWARD DARELL of Calehill in the County of Kent, Esquire
SIR,
THese Poems written some years since, like some Rivers and streams, which are
transfused, and conveyed through several Channells and Aquaducts, by the
Injuries of erroneous Transcriptions, Rasure, mis-interpretation and the
surreptitious Inadvertency of the Press have contracted much Dregs and
Sediment. To restore the first to their native Integrity, and the Press to
its Genuine Purity, I have made them Public and offered them up to your Name,
whose Protection will I hope, like an Vmbrella or Skreen, rescue them from the
Heat of Censure: For (Sir) I know you have both Art and Candor, which are so
equally complicated and twisted together, that with the first you may winnow
and judge, and with the last afford a benign and flexible Patronage to him who
is

Sir, Your most affectionate Servant T. P.

On the Fall of St. PAUL's Cathedral.
HOmer's vast Illiads found so small a Cell,
They were recluse to the Cloister of a Shell.
Their Fate attends this Ruin; Paul's must be
Unto it self both URN and ELEGY.
But must the Marble from thy Carcass rent,
Thy Glory once, now turn thy Monument?
Can there no Sheet, or Sere-cloath be allowed,
But thy own Lead to be thy Fun'rall Shroud?
And since by public Vote this was thy doom,
Thou and Religion were to have one Tomb,
And wrapped up in one common Ruin, lie
Buried in the Grave of a wild Anarchy.
Must thou thy self, thy crumbled self interr,
And to thy self be thy own Sepulcher?
Nay, must thy Ruins too, instead of Verse,
Hang like dull Penons on thy scattered Hearse?
Sure when the Eastern Monarchs shook a way
The narrow Circumscription of their Clay,
'Twas thought contracted Mankind did expire,
And mix its Ashes with their Funeral Fire:
Such Hecatombs of dying Tribes became
Unto their Urns both Hecatomb and Flame;
So now the unhallowed breath of storms has thrown
This Pile into a rude Confusion,
And from its aged head fierce Zeal has torn
That reverend Pomp which there so long was worn,
That now its face appears like withered Care,
Or wilder than the looks of Fevers are.
All other Churches, which like lesser Rays
That darted are from the Suns nobler blaze,
Did into Order and fair Figure fall,
As Transcripts drawn by this Original,
Lest this sad Heap its Funeral Rites should lack,
Should put on Ruins too like solemn black;
But if these will not, sure the dust of those
That slumber in the silence and repose
Of their dark Urns, will like an Earthquake swell,
And break the gloomy Cloisters of each Cell,
That treasures up their drowsy clay, and make
All the Convulsed limbs of London shake
So long until they drop one Heap, and be
At once its Mourner, Tomb, and Elegy.
An Invective against the Fanatic Boutefeus of these times. Written 1648.
Occationed upon the Armies interrupting the Treaty in the Isle of Wight.
SHould all those various Gates whose Titles are
Enrolled upon the Pilots Register,
Break from their drousy Dens where they have lain
Bound up in Slumbers, and invade the maine,
They could not raise a storm, like that which they
Raise in the Commonwealth, who would betray
Our Peace to Civil war, in which the State,
Must Bleed it self to Death, and have the Fate
After its stock of Life is spent, to lie
Entombed in the Rubbish of an Anarchie;
Should Ravens, Bats, and the shrill Owl conspire
To twist their Notes into one General Quire
And choose the Mandrake for their Chaunter, they
Could not thrill forth such an ill boding Lay,
Or strains so Jarring as do those whose throats
Warble the Clamourous and untuneful Notes
Of Blood and Death, some Whirlewind sure has taken
Its Lodging up in the Fanatic Brain
Of these bold Sons of Tumult, I dare say
They molded were of some distempered Clay
Which from its center was by Earthquakes torn,
A Tempest shook the world when they were born
Sure from its Sphere the Element of Fire
Is dropped, and does their Bosoms now inspire,
The Flame locked up in bold Ravillack's Urn,
Is leaped from thence and in their Hearts does burn.
Night open thy black Womb, and let out all
Thy dreadful Furies, yet those Furies shall
Not chill my Heart with any Fear, since Day
Has Furies shown, blacker by far than they;
Let Faux now sleep until the Day of Doom
Open his Eyes forgotten in his Tomb,
Let none Revile his Dust, his Name shall be
Extirpated from every History,
To yield a Room to others; for it is fit
Their Names in place of his should now be writ
Who think that no Religion can be good
Less it be writ in Characters of Blood,
And lest that Blood should seem too cheap they will drain,
T'improve its Rate, the rich Basilick Vein;
No marvel if the Rubric then must be
Blotted from out the sacred Liturgy,
And those red Letters now no more be known;
They Will have no other Rubric but their own.
But shall they thus impetuously roll on,
And meet not any Malediction?
Yes sure; May sleep, that mild and gentle Balm
Which all unkind Distempers does becalm,
Be unto them a Torture. May their Dreams
Be all of Murders, Rapes, and such like Theams,
And when they are spent, may Wolves approach, and howl
To break their slumbers; May the Bat and Owl
Before their Gates, to usher in the Days
Unwelcome Light, screetch out their direful Lays;
May sudden Flames their Houses melt away,
And Fevers burn their Houses too of Clay
Amongst their disordered Humors may there be
A Deadly Feud and fatal Mutiny;
May all their Faculties and Senses be
Astonished by some drousie Lethargy,
That there may be allowed them only sense
Enough to feel the Pangs of Conscience
Griping their Souls, that they who thought it Sin
TO have Peace without, may have no Peace within.
On Mr. John Cleaveland's Poems.
BEhold how here both Dove and Serpent twist
The Poet does entwine the Saryrist;
These Pages he one Common Bed does make,
Where do reside at once both Dove and Snake;
Yet though amidst these Leaves he seem to stick,
As on their stem, the Flowers of Rhetoric
No Venom does debauch, or stain these Flowers;
No Serpent lurks amongst these hallowed Bowers:
Although his Serpent hiss, it does not kill,
It may some salt, no Poisonous steam distill;
It blisters not the Fame, nor does it Cast
Such Vapors forth as men's fair Honors blast;
You may his Snake, with the same Freedom clasp
As you these Leaves, or their rich Flowers do grasp:
Survey his Rebel Scot, and there you will see
The Pourtraict in each Line of Loyalty,
Who though his Verse does wound, and Pen does dart
Such Arrows forth, the Nation feels the Smart,
Yet done it is with such Finenesse, they risent
Their wounds both with Regret and Blandishment,
Although his Verse pretends the Kings Disguise
The sense lies Naked yet to vulgar Eyes,
No Veil does muffle up the Phrase, the Text
Is not with sullen Mists or Clouds perplexed,
Here His Rupertismus.
Rupert Cloistered up in Lightning fights
With the same Heat and Flame with which he writes,
As if that Courage which in him was seen
Had but the Transcript of this Poem been,
Though to Kings Learned Dust strict Fate allowed
No Tomb nor Trophie, but a watery Shroud;
Yet here his Urne is fixed, which shall outvie
Vain Cleopatra's marble Pageantrie,
Where he the Fate of drowning twice shall shun,
First in the Waves, then in Oblivion,
Here Cupid may retrive a fresh supply
To stock his Quiver from his Mistress Eye,
Who from that Orb such pointed Glances darts
She makes an Holocaust of humane Hearts,
So that we justly may the bleeding Pile
An Hecatomb paid to Loves Altars, style;
His Apparition proves so soft a Theme,
We wish our selves engaged in such a Dream;
When in the S. John's at Cambridge.
Baptists House to the King he spoke
With those calm Aires which from that Music broke
Which tuned his Accents (like Amphion) He
Made the stones dance into new Simmetrie;
Land in these sheets enshrined a Cere-Cloath wears
Beyond the Eastern Balm or Mourners Tears,
The liquid Salt which melted from his Pen,
Seemed to embalm his bloody shroud again;
And though that Colchester may seem to be
To List and Lucas, Urne and Elegy;
Posterity will find a nobler Hearse
Adorns their Dust, built up in Cleaveland's Verse,
Thus like Fames hollow Trump, his Verse does spread
The Records of the living and the Dead,
So that succeeding Times, this Book shall style
The Public Repertorie of this Isle.
FINIS.

