ARROWS AGAINST BABYLON. OR Certain Quaeries serving to a clear Discovery of
the Mystery of Iniquity. Whereunto are added Endeavors for Reformation in
Saints apparel. With some Quaeries for the people called Quakers.

By JOHN PENDARVES a well wisher to Sion.

Put your selves in array against Babylon round about, shoot at her, spare no
arrows, etc. Jerem. 50.14. v.

Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul, be not cut
off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lords vengeance, he will
render unto her recompense, Jere. 51.6. v.

And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that
yet partake not of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev.
18.41 v.

O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us. Psalm. 137.8. v.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in
Popes-head-Alley. 1656.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the precious Sons of Sion, who mind the work of
their generation; and to all the faithful, and beloved Servants of God, small
and great.
THe fall of Babylon being decreed in Heaven, and declared on Earth, and the
time said to be near at hand This is one of the things of which John says,
They must shortly come to pass, Rev: 1.1.8.
, so many hundred years ago, as have past since the revelation was given to
John Much nearer now.
; Why should it be thought beside the work of this day, to seek her downfall?
and to cry aloud unto Gods people to come out of her? Has not God, and man of
late years, appeared against her oppressing powers, spiritual, and civil, in
these Nations? Her maine Pillars, the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. with their
grand supporter, where are they? Did not the sure word of Prophecy against
Babylon, take hold of them? since those Pillars have been removed, has not
that unhappy building, been as a falling house, out of which many thousands of
Gods people have hasted forth? the Lord going before them by many wonderful,
signal providence, opening a wide door unto them. If the remnant of old, who
preferred Jerusalem above their chief joy (which holds forth a true Character
of Sions lovers) were so bold in her behalf, to tell the daughter of Babylon
to her face, Thou art to be destroyed, calling them happy who should be the
Instruments to reward her cruelties to Gods people, Psalm. 137. If they speak
thus, whilst yet remaining captives, let it not seem strange, if we, who are
in so great a measure delivered, do in the same spirit of faith, declare
openly the approaching fall of the daughter of mystical Babylon; which (that
we may not shoot at rovers) I have in the ensuing Quaeries labored to
discover, the mother, and her daughter, the mark at which those arrows are
shot. The mother being more notorious for her bloody persecutions, and filthy
abominations, may soon be discovered; her daughter, having putt on a new
dress, appears fresh colored, and well-liking, and has her lovers amongst
great, if not good men. They who drink of her wine, and eat of her dainties,
praise her beauty, as she is now reformed. She has (it seems) painted her
face with more art, and better success, then Jezebell, or else some have had
less zeal then Jehu, who having no great power on his side, yet commanded
(that) painted Jezebel to be thrown down. With this Jezebel the daughter of
Babylon, men formerly of great note for zeal, and piety, (preferring peace
before purity The wisdom that is from above preferres purity before peace,
Jam: 3.17. Its first pure, then peaceable; the wisdom from beneath is quite
contrary, opposing truth under a pretense of peace: in that true wisdom, they
who have acted of old, and of late, are accounted troublers of Israel.
) become confederate to oppose a through reformation, who seem well content
with the old garment, some new pieces put to it, which (as our Savior says)
makes the rent worse; they cannot bear to have the axe laid at the root. How
do many in our days, like Herod, hear good men gladly, till their lusts and
wills be crossed? their hearts cleave to some worldly interest, which, (being as
the right eye) they will not part with. Such can take Law and Covenant in their
mouth, pray and preach well, with much excellency of speech, but their spirits
may be discerned by this one thing, They like not to reform, or to be reformed,
with a through reformation, which is the only right reformation according to
the word of God; to which our solemn Covenant binds us, as also (with
subordination thereunto) to the example of the best reformed Churches; which
are such undoubtedly, as stand at greatest distance from Antichristian
pollutions. Is the Religion of this Nation so reformed? if not, why do they
not press forward? Nay, do not many sit down, and take up their rest, as if
they had attained, and as if the work were perfected? Has mystical Babylon
been rased to the foundation thereof? If not, ought not that remnant of Gods
people, who retain their first zeal against Babylon to proceed to pray
against her, as the remnant of the faithful of old against the Children of
Edom Is it not the duty of Gods elect to cry day and night for vengeance upon
Babylon, see Luke 18.1.7. and 8 verses.
, Psalm. 137.7. Remember, O Lord, the Children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem:
who said, raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof; Let us take heed
of concluding such prayers, though put up by godly men of like passions with
us, to be the fruit of their passions, and peevishness. If here were need of
further Apology for this work, and for the Saints zealous praying and declaring
against Babylon in a right spirit, sufficient might be offered (not only to
justify the practice, but also to invite thereunto) from this one
consideration, that the glory of God, and the comfort of his people are so
highly concerned in her fall, as the Scriptures largely show. Oh what joyful
Hallelujahs shall be sung by the Saints, when they shall see the judgments of
God on the great Whore which corrupted the Earth, Rev. 19.1, 2. etc. If men of
great light see not how this matter concerns the glory of God, Is it not
because they study to promote their own interest more then his? have they no
better insight into the things that make for their own glory? It is the joy of
my heart, in the midst of many causes of grief, that God will form, yea he is
forming a people for himself which shall show forth his praise And the people
which shall be created shall praise the Lord, Psalm. 102.18. Esaias 43.21.
. The naked single design of the people of this new Creation shall be that the
Lord, the Lord alone, may be exalted: which (if the Author know his heart) is
the one thing aimed at in spending those Arrows upon Babylon, as also in those
endeavors for reformation in apparel, wherein opposition is made against one
(not the least) of her evils. That which is added in those Quaeries to the
Quakers, serves for the discovery of Satan, transforming himself into an Angel
of light. It is no new thing for scornful men to set light by plain
testimonies against their abominations, and lay a snare for him that reprooveth
in the gate Isay 29.20, 21.
, making a man an offender for a word; if such shall count me vile for this
work, I shall not think it strange. If the Lord shall make it appear that the
least of the poor of his flock receive light, and reap benefit hereby, and
give the glory to him; I shall rejoice therein. Although my service to Christ
in this, or any thing I can do, be but small, I am comforted in believing that
there shall a time come, and that its not far off, when God shall reward his
servants, not only the great, but the small Rev. 11.18.
. The high esteem I have of the prayers of the Saints, together with a deep
sense of my need of fresh supplies of grace, put me upon this humble suit to
you, who are the seed of Jacob, that after your supplications to the Lord for
all Saints, he may obtain a special remembrance, who is unworthy to be
accounted

The least of those who follow the Lamb. J. P.

A word of Exhortation, To the people of God in Babylon.
Dear Friends,
I Beseech you in the bowels of Christ, consider, that like as it was a
singular act of Gods grace to warn Lot to come out of Sodom, when fire and
brimstone was ready to come down upon that City: so is it now no less but
rather a more eminent act of his rich grace, to warn and woo you to come out
of Babylon, lovingly engaging you thereunto, (even as though he did beseech
you) by, and for all the interest he has in you; saying, Come out of her my
people, Rev. 18.4. The mercy to you, may appear far greater, the judgment
of God upon Sodom being more tolerable, then the grievous torments and
spiritual plagues belonging to Babylon, whose sins reach unto Heaven, Rev.
18.5. and her judgment is lifted up unto the skies, Jerem. 51.9. Herein is his
great goodness to you, that he has not only given you timely notice, before
the Decree bring forth, but in this also, that he has condescended to afford
many helps in his Word for the discovery of Mystical Babylon, which with so
much serpentine wisdom transformes her self with such fair pretenses, that
she is least suspected to be what she is, by most who dwell with her. That
little light which the Lord has lent me concerning this Mystery, I here impart
it to you as your right, considering my self as in the body of Gods people one
with you; though not so, in respect of a visible orderly Church State and
worship, wherein the name of God is greatly concerned. Beware of that which is
a common evil among the people in the broad way, whom you join hand withal;
to speak evil of the things they understand not. Pet. 2.12.
Ye are bought with a price, be not ye in such bondage to men, as not to try
their way, opinions, and sayings by the Spirit, and the word of God, whereby
David was made to understand more then all his teachers, and more then the
ancients, Psalm. 119.99, 100. Why should it be thought unlikely that God should
reveal unto babes and sucklings that which he hides from the wise and prudent.
Oh read and weigh these Scriptures, Mat. 11.25. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. Psalm. 8.2.
Isa. 29.14, 15. My bowels being troubled, and my soul in travel for your
deliverance, I have as a learner by way of Quaerie, presented diverse weighty
things, backed with Scriptures, to your consideration; whereof the meditation
has been sweet to me, the Lord make the reading so to you. And whereas God
does and will by men as instruments call to his people to come out of Babylon,
before her utter destruction, which is not far off. As the day, which has
already dawned comes on upon us, we may expect cleerer light, and better
helps. In the mean time, accept of, use, and improve such as you have, and
the Lord command his blessing, that his name may have glory. So prays.

The Lords unprofitable servant. J. P.

Arrows against Babylon. OR Certain Quaeries serving to a clear Discovery of
the Mystery of Iniquity.
1 Quae: WHether Israells going into Egypt their bondage there, and their
deliverance, were not all typical, to set forth the state of the Church and
people of God under the New Testament?

And whether this has not been by the tongues and pens of all parties of the
godly in England, who have publicly contended for Reformation in Religion, of
late years generally confessed, and asserted?

2. Whether the Church of Rome, and principally the head of that body, her
Ecclesiastical powers, the Pope, with his Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. be not that Mystical Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots; described
in Rev: 17. who is said to be the Whore sitting upon many waters, commiting
fornication with the Kings of the Earth, etc. Having in her hand a golden cup
full of abominations etc. drunken with the blood of Saints and Martyrs of
Jesus? And whether those Characters with others there laid down by the blessed
Spirit of God for our information, That the church of Rome is no true Church of
Christ, have not diverse Martyrs sealed it with their blood. Read Acts and Mon.
do also fitly agree, and may be applied to any Church or State whatsoever, as
to the Church of Rome? And if the Church of Rome be Mystical Babylon, then
whether is she any more worthy to be accounted Syon, or a true visible Church
of God, then was Babylon of old her proper type?

3. Whether the Church of England (the Nation considered as a Church) with the
Parochial Congregations, as Churches, be not a Daughter of that Babylon, the
Mother of Harlots? and their Ministry, in point of Ordination, the offspring
of the Pope? Have they at any time, even to this day, either by word in any
solemn Declaration, or by practice in gathering a Church out of the Nation, as
out of the world, disclaimed that Church State which in its grossest corruption
was avowed and maintained by the Popish Ministry and people of this Land in
Queen Mary's days? Is it not apparent that some new pieces only have been
put to that old garment, that old Church state, yea whilst first the same, and
since the like people without any visible Marks of Conversion, with their
Romish Baptism and Ordination of Ministry are still retained? And whether the
aforesaid Characters in the second Quaery describing the Mother of Harlots the
Church of Rome and her Ministry, do not in like manner, in their measure,
appear upon her Daughter, the National Church of England, and her Ministry?

If so, then

4. Whether is it not the duty of all Gods people in this National Church, and
in the Parochial (pretended) Churches, to separate from that false
Church State, and their professed Church worship, in all the exercises thereof;
together with their Church-Ministry, as they stand and act on the account of
office in that false Church? And whether the Commands of God to his people to
come out of Babylon, Rev: 18. To flee out of the midst of her, Jer. 51. To
depart thence and touch no unclean thing, Isa: 52.11. Let such as (...) at the
Word read and weigh those Scriptures quoted in this Quaery.
be not a sufficient Scripture-warrant for their so doing? And whether Gods
people neglecting to come out of Babylon, do not thereby do great disservice
to the cause of Christ against Antichrist, and expose themselves by their
disobedience in this thing, to the danger of receiving of her plagues, by
pertaking of her sins? Rev: 18.4. v.

This Quaery with the two following may afford some help to discern the times;
and to resolve the (...) Question what is the work of the day?
5. Whether the strange and wonderful providence of God in the late Wars in
England, Ireland, and Scotland, have they not in their courses (not in one
single act only) agreed with his word, to clear the call, and open the way,
to his Saints to come out of Babylon? Has not the Lord eminently appeared
against King, Bishop, and Scotch-Presbyter, who refused to let Gods Israel go
free from the hard bondage of a forced Conformity to the National
Church-worship? And did not God (who put it into the heart of Cyrus, to give
liberty to the Jews to go up to Jerusalem to build Gods house, Ezra 1.1.) put
it also into the hearts of our Rulers, after great and signal successes given
their Armies, to grant liberty to his people to walk according to their light
without restraint and confinement to the Parish-Churches? And was not the hand
of God strong upon them to vouchsafe that release from our bondage,
notwithstanding the uncessant provocations of some to compel us to their way?
If we ask our Fathers can they show us, our Elders, can they tell us of such
a deliverance wrought out with so high a hand for Gods people in this Island?

6. Whether if we look at inward impressions on the hearts of Gods praying
people, (which when they agree with the word, and providence of God, are
special helps whereby to judge of our duty, and the season thereunto
belonging) may we not observe how the hearts of Saints have, during the late
wars, Let such as have lost their first zeal against Babylon, remember from
whence they are fallen and repent. The people had a mind to the work, as in
the days of Nehemiah, Neh 4.6.

Such are more like the Children of Hagar the bond woman, then Sarah the free
mother.

Some are so filled with prejudice against Separation, that they will not hear
a word of it. Do not such speak and think evil of the things they know not.

Is it because they have no need of this. Ordinance? or because they have not
living enough to bury their dead? Are not many thieves, murderers, adulterers,
such as are publicly convicted of such offenses, harbored in the parochial
Churches without any Church censure upon them? And if this be so, there is
little cause why they should blame those who leave such a company of corrupt
men. O horrible hypocrisy!

Do not some Parish-Ministers act as if they were willing to slide out of their
old way, not fai ely taking their leave, taking to themselves the shame of
their abominations.

Let such as speak against Babylon, take heed that they do it in a right
spirit.

Rev. 18.6. Jer. 15.14. Shall not the steps of the poor (...) down the lofty
City Isa 36.6. Even the steps of those who walk by the footsteps of the flock?


been stirred up to a great zeal against the whore of Babylon? Has not God
cast that false Church state and worship, root, and branch, out of the hearts
and affections of very many of his people, who being dead to men's traditions,
mind a pure way of worship, clearly discovering to them the confusions and
corruptions of that way, causing them to protest against it, and forsake it,
though to the hazard of their credit and profit, suffering great opposition on
that account from their near relations? Have not few years brought out of
that way many thousands in this Land, who have turned their back to Babylon
with their faces toward Syon, enquiring the way thitherward? And of those who
remain behind, are not many held back by worldly interests, and slavish fear
of man? The more ingenious of them blush to affirm (being driven to it in
defense of their staying there) that their Congregations are true Churches,
either in respect of matter, or form, yet some there are who are so affrighted
with fear of error, that they are not free to enquire after the truth in this
thing.

7. Whether the zealous and tedious labors of the Parliament and Synod for
reforming of the National Church Discipline, has not proved like the washing
of a Blackmore, and answer not to that saying We would have healed Babylon,
but she is not healed? What follows, as the Saints duty then but to forsake
her? Are not the people in their Parish-Congregations so incorrigible, that
their Physicians despair of the cure? In stead of cutting off the corrupt
part, have they not even rejected (for some years) that Ordinance of
Excommunication which serves to keep a true Church pure? If one wicked person
must be cast out with his wickedness, least a little Leaven might leaven the
whole lump may we not think their lump is long since leavened who have in
their Congregations so long retained, as members, without rejection, so great
swarms of profane ones? Is not their National Church (if we denominate them
ought with respect to the greater number) rather a Cage of unclean birds, and
a hold of every soul spirit, then a true visible Church of God, a spiritual
house consisting of lively Stones? Some indeed exclude the rude rabble from
partaking in the Supper, which is but one act of Church-worship; but, Do not
many professing to be Ministers of their Churches, make large show of zeal for
Ordinances, as if they strained at a gnat, and yet in this thing easily swallow
down a Camel, taking no notice in any way of practice, of so great an
Ordinance, which being duly practiced by a true Church, tends to the
destruction of the flesh, and the saving of the soul in the day of the Lord, 1
Cor: 5.8? If men take not to themselves the shame of these their abominations
in the matter of worship, what grounds have they, or their followers, to
believe, that God will show them the pattern of his house, the goings out, and
commings in thereof, etc. Ezekiel. 43.11.

And if these things be so,

8. Whether then the Saints and servants of God ought not to declare the
Nationall-Church of England, (viz. the Nation pretending to be a Church) to be
indeed no Church of Christ, but a Daughter of Babylon? And is it not their duty
to discover her abominations, in such Language (in speaking of Babylon, either
the Mother or her Daughter) as the Spirit of God makes use of, and commends to
us in the holy Scriptures? Does not that command to Gods people, to reward her
as she has rewarded them, extend to a full reward, both in words, and deeds?
And if through flatteries of men, slavish fear, or foolish pity, Gods Archers
(his Ministers) withhold to shoot such arrows against Babylon in preaching,
or printing, as God has put into their Quiver for that purpose, may they not
be justly rebuked for it?

9. Whether a bare forsaking of the National Church, and a verbal declaring
against it, be a sufficient witnesse-bearing for Christ, against Antichrist, in
the matter of Worship? or whether besides all this, are not Gods people called
by a bold profession, and visible practice of the ordinances of Christ,
according to the Gospel pattern, to hold forth a true Baptism, and
Church-worship, and so by a contrary practice, to bear their testimony in the
strength of Gods Spirit, and truth, against that false way? And in so doing,
though the work of Zions building, may appear, now in its beginning, as
nothing, in comparison of that glorious pattern in the Apostles days, is
there not ground to believe God will vouchsafe his presence and help to his
people in the work, according to his good word, Haggai 2. 1, 2, 3? And when the
Saints come out of Babylon, ought they not then to call upon one another, to
flow to Zion, and there to declare the work of the Lord? Jer. 1.6.9, 10. And
if this be the season for the former duty, why not for the latter and having
with, and amongst them, the Word, and Spirit, according to that stable Covenant
to beleivers in all generations, Isa. 9.21. Neh. 2.18.
What hinders but they should rise and build?

10. Whether many zealous Ministers and people in the Parish-way, by reason of
their ignorance of the times, and seasons, and the great work of God at this
day, to bring his people out of Mystical Babylon; may they not be in danger of
fighting against God, and kicking against the pricks; as did many devout Jews,
who were zealous of the old legal Worship, not knowing or considering that the
time of reformation from Jewish rudiments, Heb 9.10.
was come? And, do not many now as they then, little consider Gods call to his
people to reform thoroughly from all Antichristian pollutions, and to touch no
unclean thing, in this day of the Lords controversy for Sion? And may we not
see, as then, so now, the things which God winked at in times of ignorance, he
will not wink at, but witness against in times of light? And is there not a
very great security upon many professors, Can ye not discern the signs of
the times? Mat. 16.3.
and darkness upon their right eye, that notwithstanding all the signs of the
times, and all the late wonderful works of God, they are not awakened to
discern, and do the special duties, which God by his strange dispensations
calls them to? And is it not apparent, that many who should instruct others in
the duty of the day, It is the duty of the wise Steward to give the Children of
God the portion of Doctrine suitable to the season. Luke 12 42.
do discourage them from enquiring into such things, telling them of the
danger of mistakes, and the great difficulty of finding out truth, referring
them in many things to the footesteps of the flock in times of Popish
darkness? But is it not high time for Gods people to go a step beyond such
Watchmen, enquiring after Christ in the further discovery of truth? And seeing
God has chosen the weak and foolish things of the world to confound the wise,
ought not even such to search into the book of revelation, seeking God by
faithful fervent prayer, for his promised Spirit to lead them into all truth,
remembering the words of David, Thou through thy precepts have made me wiser
then mine enemies, I have more understanding then all my teachers, Psalm.
119.98, 99.

11. Whether the Parish-Ministry in their standing, and acting, as such, are
not found taking part with Babylon, and warring against the true visible
Churches of Christ, and all others who withdraw from and witness against the
Common polluted way of worship? And if so, whether those who are enlightened,
may warrantably upon the account of the gifts and godliness of such Teachers
follow after them, so as to have fellowship with them in their broad
Church Way? And is it not to make Idols of them, and prefer them before
Christ, and set them above him, if they choose rather to follow after such
Ministers in that way which has no word of God for it, then to follow Christ
in that despised way of worship, which has the sure word of Scripture for its
warrant? Mark how Satan makes use of Eminent instruments sometimes, to promote
his wicked Designs.
If Peter that eminent Preacher, might be, and was so far captivated by the
Tempter, as to oppose by rebuking Jesus Christ himself, when he spoke of his
suffering death, Mat: 16 21, 22, 23. And again denied him shamefully when he
came to suffer, with cursing and oaths, saying he never knew the man; And
after all this at another time the same Peter who was so famous an instrument
in Gods hand for converting so many souls, even he becomes a misleader in a
way of dissimulation, Gal: 2.11, 12, 13, 14. so that Barnabas an eminent
Minister of Christ, If some who see such dissembling tell them that dissemble,
that they are to be blamed, they do but as Paul did who told Peter of his
fault. Gal. 2.14.
and diverse others were carried away with his dissimulation. If so it were with
Peter, is there not ground enough for the good people in that way to fear,
that their Ministers, even the choicest of them, may be fallen into temptation,
to be prejudic't against the work of a thorow-reformation, seeing their
preferments, livings, and honors seem to be struck at; and so being offended,
labor to draw in others to be one with them, in their offense and opposition
against the Saints in their present warfare for Christ against Antichrist?

12. Whether the greater number of people in the Parish-Assemblyes, are not in
danger of eternal Damnation, through their high presumption that they are in
Christ, and in a good estate? And whether have not Englands Church-Ministry
much to answer for, who have begotten, and cherished this confidence in them,
by declaring them in their old Catechism, To be regenerate in their Baptism,
made Members of Christ, and inheritors of the kingdom of Heaven? If this be
true, and no lie they have taught them who thus exalted them unto heaven, may
they not boldly conclude from many promises to believers, that their souls are
in a safe condition? But it may now be said, they have laid by that Catechism,
and now they preach to them a necessity of regeneration; But seeing they have
been trained up from their infancy in this belief, which they have by heart,
as we say, that they were regenerate in their Baptism long wnce; Is it
probable that the old evil sent which has remained in the vessel, for so
many years, will be removed by telling them now, and then, they must be borne
again? Although many declare this to them in the Pulpit, and so wound them a
little for the present time, yet do they not quickly heal them again at the
Font, or Basin, Is not this to justify the wicked? that evil condemned Prove.
24.24.
accepting them there for believers, by administering that to the children of
all or most of them, that which they declare to be the privilege of the
Children of godly believing Parents? Does not this easily help them to
conclude, that whatsoever they say in preaching, their Ministers by their
practice declare them to be believers? And have their Ministers notwithstanding
so much talk of reformation, at any time, plainly, solemnly, and openly
declared their repentance for this their sin, or the sin of their predecessors
in this thing, whereby they have deluded thousands of souls? Have they
declared it so, that the common people might run, and read their meaning?
should not the plaster be made as broad as the soar?

If so then

13. Would it not be a praiseworthy deed, and that which would much tend to
free the present Parish-Ministry from being guilty of the blood of their
people, for them to confess openly, the great sin of their predecessors, and
their sin, so far as they have partaken with them, in declaring the people to
be borne again in Baptism, and made inheritors of the kingdom of heaven,
discovering the danger of this horrid delusion, giving them plainly to
understand, that they, the generality among them, who say they are Christians,
are not such, but are of the world, as appears by their hatred of those whom
God has chosen out of the world? And should they not do well to inform the
godly among them, that they are in no visible orderly Church State, provoking
them to arise and measure the pattern, and sending them forth by the footsteps
of the flocks in the primitive times? and would it not well become them having
thus borne their testimony in word against the aforesaid evil, to back the
same in their practice with a plain denial to administer any Ordinance of
Christ to the common multitude, more then such as are for conversion, which
belong to Heathen and Publicans, Luke 6.44.
till they see them bring forth fruits meet for repentance, Good and bad men
must be known by their fruit. Luk 6.44.

The Parish people are a people of man's forming by such means.


whereby a man may probably know, and warrantably judge them to be converted
and brought to the most holy faith of Christ? And as for their present
profession taught them by the tradition of fathers, and by the customs and
precepts of men, not by the mighty power of God through the Word, what solid
satisfaction can it administer whereon to ground a probable judgment that they
are in the faith, Considering that in this Land, there is now no persecution as
in the Apostles days, but on the contrary, many worldly advantages attending
the common profession of Christ? And except some such effectual course be
taken, as is before commended in this Quaery, can the Ministers of such a
people by all their fair glosses and subtle arguings acquitt themselves from
the blood of souls? Is it not their duty to take up the stumbling blocks out
of the way of their people? Are not many thousands of poor ignorant souls, by
looking at such things as these, their supposed Christning, and Church State,
together with their dead says, hindered from receiving Christ, and strongly
armed against the sight and sense of a lost estate, to their eternal undoing?
Shall God make inquisition for the blood of men's bodies, and shall he not one
day make inquisition for the blood of souls, and require it of those who have
helped them to, and strengthened them in such delusions?

Woe to them that call evil good. Isay 5.20.

If that old saying, Quod fieri non debet factum valet, will justify such an
unlawful act, why may it not justify any other act of will worship when it is
done?


14. And if so,

Whether the Ministry and people in some Congregations separated from the
Parish way, may not do well to consider, whether they be not found accessory
to the aforesaid great transgression of the Parochial Ministry, in justifying
the sprinckling of ungodly profane and Popish Parents Children, as a
sufficient obedience to Christ's command of Baptism, doctrinally discharging
from the obligation of that command the consciences of such of their Members as
have no other visible Baptism? Is not this to call evil good, will worship
service to Christ, and by man's tradition to make a command of God of none
effect? Do they not by such a practice, though themselves refuse to sprinckle
such Children, yet strengthen the hands of those who do? And whether this be
not more then a touching, even the retaining an unclean thing, forbidden to
those who come out of Babylon, the command requiring to destroy her utterly,
Let nothing of her be left, Jer. 50.26. Whilst this unlawful sprinckling of
the seed of the ungodly is thus set up, may it not stand in their way as an
obstruction to the sight and acknowledgement of the truth, concerning the true
visible Baptism? Can it be true Baptism according to rule without a right
visible subject?
And whether all their arguing to prove that sprinckling before spoken of
(which themselves say has not warrant for it) to be sufficient obedience to
the command, be not that which will be found wood, hay, and stubble, when every
man's work shall be tried by fire?

15. Whether the unwarrantable mixture of Legal and Gospel Worship and
worshippers, accounting this Nation a Church after the likeness of the Jewish
Nation, not by regeneration, Antichrists device to form a false Church.
but by fleshly generation, gathering together into a pretended Church-body the
visibly Godly with the ungodly, withal promoting again tithes, offerings,
consecrated places, Altars, with many other such like Jewish Ceremonies, which
were typical, The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
charge also of the Law. Heb. 7.12.
and to cease in Gospel-dayes; the joining with all these a show of the
Ordinance of breaking bread, and Baptism? Whether, (I say) may not such a mixed
worship, and the worshippers be fitly termed Babylon, or confusion? And whether
to establish such a worship be not to deny in a Mystery (as does Antichrist,
Christ's greatest professed friend) that Christ, 1 John 4.3.
the substance of the Legal shadows is come in the flesh? See Quae: the
third.
And whether the pretended reformed Church of England retaining the old Romish
Church State, and confused mixtures, maintaining the same things in substance
with them, be not to be esteemed as a painted Jezebel?

16. Whether the Mystery of iniquity which wrought in Paul's time, were not the
same which now works in the Church of Rome, and her Daughter-Churches? Did it
not then work mainely, to bring the Saints back under the bondage of Moses his
killing doctrine; and his rudiments, and shadows? And whether the Apostle as
a faithful Witness and Watchman did not bend his doctrines and discourses in
his Epistles, especially to the Romans, Corinthians, and Galatians, against
this way of confounding the grace of God with man's works in justification, and
confounding Moses his old Laws with Christ's New Testament Ordinances? The same
mystery being at work now, not only in Rome, but in this National Church, Is
it not the duty of Gods faithful Ministers, and Watchmen to war against it,
by preaching, and discourse, with the sharp sword of Christ's Word, warning Gods
people to beware of being seduced with this iniquity, which being discovered in
many things more gross putts on a new dress and works most mysteriously, so
that the workmen say, who sees us? Isa. 29.15.

The mystery of (...) is now (...) with a (...).
17. Whether the Mystery of iniquity that now works be not founded upon the
will of man, confederate with Satan? And is it not promoted, and upheld by
humane and Serpentine wisdom, with worldly power and policy, opposing and
counter-working the Gospel-graces of God, and Spirit of Christ, exalting the
creature above the Creator? And whether the Abettors and promoters of this
Mystery, may not be discovered and discerned in our days, by their prizing men
much more for their natural, and acquired parts and abilities, then for the
anointing, looking more at a man's learning, and prudence, then at the teachings
of the Spirit, minding excellency of speech more then the power of godliness,
seeking more after their own honor from men, then to bring honor and glory
to God?

18. If so then,

May we not well expect that God who has laid by so many instruments, whose
design is to exalt his own grace, his Son, and Spirit, will choose and use
most unlikely instruments in men's account, as the weak and foolish, in respect
of worldly wisdom, even the younger brethren, even as David amongst the sons
of Jesse, spiriting them through faith and prayer to bring to pass those
things which by humane power and policy could not be effected? Whether then
are not many (and some good men) like to be deceived, who look as did Samuel
on Eliah, on some wise, expert, prudent men to be the only prime instruments
for Gods great and strange work, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28.
which will not be done by power or might, but by the Spirit of God? Zach: 4.6.

19. Whether the faith and prayers of Gods people were not once as the
Chariot-wheeles to the great work of God in this Nation, but now of late since
our enemies have been subdued, have not many good men slacked their hands to
those duties, and by looking and leaning to man's wisdom, power and policy,
turned aside to crooked ways, and so have lost the footsteps of the Lord in
his work? And whether can they come to a clear sight of them again, except
they humble themselves and return to a diligent exercise of faith and prayer?
And if they will not be otherwise provoked thereunto, may it not be just for
God to reduce them unto sore straites, that so they may learn to seek him
early? Hos. 5.15.

20. Whether the continuance of diverse godly men in Babylon, and pertaking with
her, be not one great occasion of stumbling many weak Christians, with some
other enquirers after truth? And ought not such then in the fear of God, to
consider and examine their standing, and to lay to heart how great service they
do to Antichrist, and disservice to Christ, and his cause? And does not the
deceiver suck no small advantage from godly men serving his design which puts
a fair face thereon, though they do it ignorantly or inconsiderately? May we
not observe that since godliness is in some request, Satan puts on such a
dress as may most take with the godly to seduce them? And if these should flee
out of Babylon, would she not soon appear to all good men to be what she
is, and the judgments of God would they not come suddenly upon her, as did
the fire and brimstone upon Sodom the day that Lot came out? Whether that
which hinders many from coming out, be not a slavish fear of man, and the
flattery and friendship of this world? Whether such only will not be found fit
to follow the Lamb even whither soever he goes, who first sit down and count
the cost, and so build the Tower of their profession upon Gods grace alone, as
held out in his Covenant, trusting him with all their concernments? If they
only are said to overcome who loved not their lives unto the death, as Revel.
12. What becomes of all the other professors, Remember the hand of God against
the rebellious Scots at Dunbar.
the fearful and unbeleeving, etc? If Gods servants shall abide there,
notwithstanding all the warnings they have had, and all Gods patience toward
them, may he not justly slay them with the wicked, though he save their souls
at the last?

21. Whether the Antichristian Ministry in the Nations, which derive their
Church State from Rome, are not found committing fornication with the Kings of
the earth? No Bishop, No King.
And whether this fornication be not by interweaving their interests, for the
upholding one another: thus by flatteries and by force bringing the people and
keeping them in bondage to their wills, enslaving their bodies and insnaring
their souls?

22. Whether seeing the greatest judgments belong to Babylon, may not God in
justice to aggravate their sins who receive not the love of truth, lend them so
much light as that many of them shall be found wilful Apostates, after all
their other persecutions, at length persecuting the Spirit of Christ, so
bringing upon themselves swift destruction? Are not many found persecuting that
light which they once professed? Is not that word made good in them, They shall
go and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken? and if it be so,
is it not high time to bid them take heed, lest they sin wilfully after they
have received the knowledge of the truth?

23. Whether by that sure rule of justice that all the blood from Abel should
come upon the persecuting generation in Christ's time, Math. 23.34, 35. And that
in the Revel: 18.24. that in Babylon was found the blood of all the Saints shed
from the foundation of the earth; Does there not lie a heavy load of
blood-guilt upon the Antichristian faction, who strike in with that deadly
interest at the latter end of the day, to act their part against Christ and his
Cause? Should not all men take heed how they touch or take part with that
interest, least they come under the guilt of all the former bloody persecutions
of Gods Saints? Whether are not the opposite interests of flesh and Spirit now
at war, the same interests which were at variance in Cain and Abell, the
seeds being the same two as formerly, though brought forth in several ages,
though the controversy betwixt them not always upon the same part or point of
truth or error.

ENDEAVOVRS FOR REFORMATION IN APPAREL. OR Some reasons rendered for Saints
forbearing to put upon their Garments such trimmings and ornaments as are
altogether superfluous, and apparently useless. With Answers to several
Objections.

Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14.

Moreover, the Lord says, Because the Daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk
with stretched forth necks, wanton eyes, walking and mincing (or tripping
nicely) as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet. Isa. 3.16.
Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the
Daughters of Sion, etc. verse. 17.

In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinckling ornaments,
etc. verse. 18.

Behold the day comes which shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and
all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and that day that comes shall
burn them up, (says the Lord) that it shall leave them neither root nor
branch, Mal. 4.1.

If ye will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride,
Jer. 13.17.

LONDON Printed for Livewell Chapman in Pope's Head Alley. 1656.

I shall gladly submit to the judgment of such touching these following
Endeavors; knowing full well that they dare not so turn the grace of God into
wantonness, as deliberately, to slight on the account of liberty, the least
hint of truth, clearly convincing them of duty; yet seeing such may be tempted
(for a worldly interest) to stifle their light in this thing, my Counsel is
that they bare in mind the great price of their Redemption from a vain
conversation; which if they do, they will not think it much to suffer loss
in their names, and trades, for righteousness sake in this fiery trying day;
which is grown so dark to some, who not long since rejoiced in the light,
that now they complain in the words of the Prophet Isaiah 59.9. We wait for
light, but behold obscurity, etc. Whilst knowledge seems to be desired, is not
doing omitted? And are there not many, who will not see the things they have no
mind to practice? But precept must be upon precept, line upon line, here a
little, and there a little, that they may go, and fall backward (as men do
who begin to reform, and then when their interest is struck at fall backward)
and be broken, snared, and taken, Isa. 28.13.

Courteous Reader, I shall not hide from thee the rise of this discourse, and
the occasion of its publication. The Lord having eminently appeared to a
considerable number of his people in their waiting on him, together in several
solemn Meetings, clearly witnessing to their Consciences against their
superfluous ornaments on their apparel, in so much as diverse did forthwith
repent, and reform; Some calling for a reason for this reformation, I thought
it needful (to avoyde much speaking of this matter) to put pen to paper; and
since that (to prevent the labor of transcribing Copies) to put my papers to
the press: If God teach thee to profit by them, give him alone the glory. As
for scorners, let them delight in scorning; but let the wise hear the whole
matter, and then give judgment.

And as for such who are strong, and by reason of use, have their senses
exercised to a clear discerning between good and evil, let such bear with my
rude Endeavors, and bring forth a better testimony against that abomination of
pride in apparel, wherewith most professors are so spotted, and the
profession of godliness, by reason thereof, so much evil spoken of, that if
all should hold their peace, a man might expect, according to the words of
Christ in another case; Luke 19.40. The stones would immediately cry out; Who
knows, but the least of the flock, by an holy zeal (accompanied with many
infirmities, which love should cover) may provoke some great Preachers to look
more narrowly into this matter? Romans 2.14.
and to examine themselves, why (seeing there was never more occasion given to
declare against pride) they have no more discovered this iniquity, which now it
is to be feared, they wink at in others, because so much of it cleaves to
themselves, and theirs; The Lord, who is faithful and true, has promised,
That he will purely purge away all the dross of Syon, and take away all her
tin; then will he restore unto them Judges as at the first, and Councellers
as at the beginning, Isai. 1.25, 26. Which good thing that the Lord may
speedily perform, is the hearty desire, and daily prayer of

The Lords most unworthy servant, whom he has plucked as a brand out of the
fire. JOHN PENDARVES.

ENDEAVOVRS FOR REFORMATION IN APPAREL. OR Some Reasons rendered for Saints
forbearing to put upon their Garments such trimmings and ornaments as are
altogether superfluous, and apparently useless. With Answers to several
Objections.
THe first reason, or argument, First Ground or Reason.
takes its rise from the death and resurrection of Christ, and the Saints
fellowship with him in both; and first, from his death; The Cross of Christ is
that by which every true believer is taught with Paul to be crucified to the
world; and that not only, as his faith presents to him the glory of a
crucified Christ, hidden from an eye of sense, Gal. 6.14. 1 Pet. 2.11. Tit.
2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9.
far exceeding all outward worldly glory; but also, as it teaches him to
war against all sensual worldly lusts, in confidence that Christ dyed to
redeem him from them. And herein does the virtue and glory of the sufferings
of Christ on the Cross, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
(wherein he is commended to us as amost glorious pattern of self-denial)
eminently appear in his followers in crucifying the lusts of the flesh the
lusts of the eyes, Gal. 5.24.
and pride of life; Romans 6.4.
all which stand in opposition to that newness of life Saints are called to
walk in. Now seeing the lusts of the flesh were found warring against Christ
on the Cross, and do daily war against his Spirit in the hearts of Saints;
and Christ warred and does war against them; Gal. 5.17. Romans 13.14.
his Soldiers ought not to make provision for them by such superfluous
deckings, least in so doing they be found feeding and clothing Christ's
enemies, whilst they neglect to feed and cloth his members; and least thereby
they obscure or hide the glorious power of the death of Christ, which should
appear to the eyes of all men in the visible self-denial of believers What
is there that is more visible to all that behold the Saints then their
apparel. Phil 3.20.
.

Secondly, As in consideration of his death, the Saints are called to dye to
this world, so with respect to his resurrection, all those who are risen with
him, ought to seek those things which are above, Col: 3.1. And having their
conversations with Christ in heaven, to mortify their members which are upon
earth Do they mortify their members, who seek so much to please their eye.
Joh. 15.19.
: Col: 3.5. And thus plainly declaring by their words and actions, behavior
and apparel, that they are not of this world, but are strangers to it; in so
doing, they show forth the power of Christ's resurrection, drawing up their
affections to himself. As the corruption of men's hearts does appear (as it
were written in their foreheads) in their vain wanton fashions How do these
or their sureties for them keep their promise at the (...), to forsake all the
pomps and vanities of this world? 1 These. 5 22.
; so on the contratrary, the grace of God in man does appear and shine in his
Saints in their abstaining upon pure Gospell-grounds from all appearance of
pride, and vanity in apparel, and clothing themselves with humility, as
becomes the selfe-denying followers of Christ Such selfe-denyall does become
those who say they are (...) with Christ in Sap^isme.
. But as Paul complains sadly of some, who minded earthly things, that they
were enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. May we not take up a light
complaint of many now, who in adorning themselves show that they mind earthly
things, by heaping on vain superfluities; are not such enemies in this thing,
or at least, apparent non-conformists to the Cross of Christ? Great reason
there is therefore that they who have otherwise learned Christ, dead and risen,
should make it appear, by putting off, or at least forbearing to put on, such
things, which are not only unbecoming their profession, but also are abused by
most men, for an occasion to the flesh; and as they are commonly borne about,
are apparently useless to all, Ephesians. 4.17, 20, 21, 22.

2 Ground, or Reason.
As the first reason chiefly respects the cross of Christ, the sesecond in
like manner, relates to his yoke, to which all believers owe subjection, and
ought to manifest the same by a visible universal obedience to him, whom we
are bid to hear in all things, Acts 3.23. Who, as he has by his own mouth,
spoken to his followers to deny themselves, Math. 10.38. Mark. 8.34. So has he
by the mouth of his Apostles, in the holy Scriptures which he has given to
furnish the man of God to every good work, prescribed profitable and precious
directions for regulating the Saints practice in apparrelling themselves. These
are either, first, more express and particular, as to this one thing of
adorning; as in 1 Timothy: 2.9. Where not only is forbidden to believing women
(that vanity they who have wherewith are too prone unto) to adorn themselves
with gold or pearls; but also the adorning themselves with costly array is
there forbidden; that array being there counted costly, which men crucified to
this world, 2 Cor. 6.4. 2 Cor. 11.27, 28.
and often in necessities, and sensible of the wants of others, as Paul and
Timothy, with others like minded accounted costly.

Secondly, There are directions which are more general; of which I have here
set down some of the principal; as, Rom, 12.2. Be not conformed to this
world. 1 Pet. 1.14. Fashion not your selves according to the former lusts of
your ignorance. Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.
Romans 13.14. Moreover, we are commanded to lay apart all filthiness, and
superfluity of naughtiness. Jam: 1.21. And in the 1 Pet: 4.10. we are required
to be good Stewards of the manifold grace of God; which relates not only to
spiritual gifts, but also to things of this life. Now with that special rule
before-going, let us take these general rules, and well apply them Those Rules
with many more such are assented to in general, but seldom applied to any one
thing in particular. 1 John 2.16. 3. Ground.
to the particulars of evils forbidden, and duties enjoined in those
Scriptures, and this doubt may soon be resolved, Whether Saints are called to
refrain from further expense in such vain superfluities, which the men of
this world procure, and put on, to satisfy the lusts of the flesh, and the
lust of the eye.

The third ground is made good from the present apparent wants and streights of
diverse poor precious Saints, that lack to be supplied with things necessary;
who by reason of sickness, weakness, or want of Stock to manage their honest
trades, are unable to provide for themselves, and theirs so, that they may
attend on God without distraction. Is not the supplying of their need, the
feeding and clothing of Christ in his poor members, (for so he accounts what
done to them, done to him, Math. 25.40.) to be preferred before providing such
needless trimmings? Let the tenderhearted sober Christian consider it well.
should not Saints lay to heart these things, with a due respect to their
receivings from Christ, and engagements to Christ, not forgetting the Law of
their relation, as fellow members with the meanest in that body whereof Christ
is head.

The third ground thus briefly laid down, (with the case of the poor Saints
unrelieved, stated truly, as it is) I leave this to the judgment of those who
are spiritual, and proceed to the fourth.

4. Ground.
The fourth ground is, That by ceasing to cast away their substance on such
superfluities, Saints may be in a better capacity to adorn by their good
works, the doctrine of God our Savior; the credit whereof ought to be much
dearer to us, then our lives; and how much then to be preferred before our
needless ornaments? How few of the men of the world are convinced at this day
by the Saints liberality to the poor, their seeking out the widow, and the
fatherless, the blind, and the lame, to relieve them in their distress? How
few, I say, are convinct on this account; viz. of such good works done by
professors, that God is in them of a truth? and that the doctrine of grace they
hold to, and maintain is the true doctrine; Do not many great professors (on
their part) leave the Gospel naked, (without those good works of mercy and
bounty which should adorn it) whilst their flesh is gorgeously arrayed? Have
not such need to be put in remembrance of their duty, To honor the Lord with
their substance, and with the first fruits of their increase, Prove. 3.9. No
sooner do they abound in wealth and riches, but suddenly they abound in costly
superfluities (not in good works proportionable to their ability) thus instead
of honoring the Lord, they honor themselves with their substance, and instead
of serving him, they even serve their lusts with the first fruits of all their
increase.

5. Ground.
A fifth reason for Saints reforming their apparel, is taken from the manifold
great temptations, and evils, Saints often fall into, to get that which is so
lightly parted with in superfluous ornaments. Is it not easy to be seen, and
sadly to be lamented, that to provide and maintain costly apparel, stately
houses, rich house-furniture, delicious fare, and such like things, according
to the fashion of this world; those crying sins of covetousness, deceit,
injustice, with other like evils What evil fire is that which must be fed
with such fuel?
, act their parts in some professors of an high strain, to the great dishonor
of the glorious name of God? And why is it that precious opportunities of
assembling together, and visiting one another, are so often neglected by the
Saints? And oh, whence is it that there is so little looking after, and
preparing for the great day of Christ's coming; the hearts of professors being
surfeited with the cares of this life, and that day ready to overtake them
unawares; and they in danger to be found without their wedding garments? Is it
not so with many, or most, because their endeavors are overmuch laid out, and
precious time (not to be redeemed with gold,) unprofitably spent Is this to
walk wisely, redeeming the time, thus to spend it in vain adornings?
, and wasted in providing, and putting on costly and curious apparel; whereas
to provide convenient garments, without such ornaments, and to procure other
accommodations in, and about their houses suitable thereunto, so much time need
not to be taken up, nor careful thoughts How many careful thoughts do some
take to provide and put on needless deckings? how do such obey that word of
Christ, Mat. 6.28. Take no thought for raiment? 6. Ground.
(forbidden by Christ) laid out for themselves, or their Children after them.
Observe that word, Mat. 6 28. Why take ye thought for raiment? and verse. 32.
After all these things do the Gentiles seek.

A sixth ground is taken from the glorious things promised to the people of
God, who deal their bread to the hungry, and bring the poor outcasts to
their houses. Isai. 58. 7, 8. etc. viz. That their light shall rise in
obscurity, their darkness shall be as the noone day; they shall call, and the
Lord will answer. Those high enjoyments are here promised to a people who make
another use of their outward substance, then to lavish it on needless
ornaments, as the manner of some is. Unless there be a reformation in this
thing, what singular works of this kind beforementioned can be done by the
Saints, which may be good Evidences, that God has set them in the ready way
to those high seize. They who wait for such glorious things, and expect
such large measures of the Spirit, must learn to be good Stewards of the
things of this life They who wait for the Spirit must be content to part with
all their fleshly delights, and act as the wise Merchant man, who having found
one pearl of great price, sold all and bought it. Mat. 13.45, 46
. He that has an ear, let him hear what Christ says; If ye have not been
faithful in the unrighteous Mammon (the riches of this world) who will commit
to your trust the true riches? He that is unjust (or unfaithful) in that
which is least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16.10.11. The people whom God will
use and honor, to raise up the foundations of many generations, to repair
breaches, and to restore paths to dwell in, Isaiah 58.12. They shall not (as
others have done) seek great things for themselves, but shall be a merciful,
holy, humble, selfe-denying people; as may appear by comparing with the 12th
verse, the five foregoing verses of that Chapter. And if God will do such
great things by them, without doubt the Spirit of the Lord shall be early and
abundantly powered out upon them. These things duly considered, it appears,
that those precious promises, together with the Saints earnest expectation of
such great and glorious things to be fullfilled in this generation, do lay a
strong engagement upon us, to cease from our superfluous ornaments, and all
things else that hinder Saints from doing those singular things before
expressed, Isai. 58.7, 8, 10.

7. Ground.
Seventhly, The day and time we live in, calls to this reformation. Is it not a
time of trouble, a day of great rebuke, and grievous blasphemies See how
Hezekiah though he were a king humbled himself, and put on sackcloth and how
the Lord takes notice of his so doing. Isa. 37.1, 2.
, wide breaches still remaining among Gods people, glorious things brought to
the birth, and no strength to bring forth? And is not this a time for Saints
rather to be rending, then decking their garments Observe the practice of
Josoah and Caleb, when the people speak of making them a Captain, and
returning again into Egypt, Number. 14.4.6. And see also the practice of Barrabas
and Saul. Acts 14.14.
. Undoubtedly, the day calls to mourning, and humbling our selves, laying aside
our vain ornaments? Is it a light thing to turn a deaf ear to Gods call by
such dispensations? And when he thus calls to a people to deny themselves of
their liberty Are there not many such professors who mind their liberty more
then their duty?
in outward things, then to stretch to the utmost bounds thereof? Isai. 22.12,
13. In that day (says the Prophet) did the Lord of hosts, call to weeping, and
mourning, and girding with sackcloth; and behold killing of sheep, and staying
of Oxen, etc. And what follows? verse the 14, And it was revealed in mine
ears, says the Lord of hosts, This iniquity shall not be purged from you till
ye die. With this let the Reader compare diligently that noted word in Amos
6.5, 6, 7. Where those are severely threatened, who drank wine in bowls, and
forgatt the afflictions of Joseph Let the women professors in London and
elsewhere, who spend so little time in private praying and humbling themselves,
and so much in adorning themselves with costly array, and plaiting the hair,
let such, I say, read and mark well Isaiah 3. From the sixteenth forward. Can
they choose but blush or rather tremble at that word?
. And can they escape much longer without correction, who do such things at
this day? Do not Saints put far away the evil day, when they put on their
vain ornaments, and appear with badges of pride, and not the mark of
mourners upon them Who that beholds the appartell of most professors at this
day, would take them to be such as sigh and cry for all the abomination of Gods
people? Is not pride in apparel one abomination? their partaking in it so
apparently, plainly shows them without grief for it.
? And should it not be a Lamentation (that which is yet more unbecoming
Christian profession) some glory in such things, which are indeed their shame?
He that feels not the force of this reason taken from the hand of God upon us,
and the many abominations and grievances beforementioned, and has no
heart-bleedings because of the reproach that is daily cast upon the name of
God, and his people, etc. let him examine himself, whether has he Psalm. 28.4,
5.
due regard to the work of the Lord at this day? And whether he be a real
mourner for Sion See those promises to them that mourn in Sion. Isa. 61.2.3.
and 66.10. 8 Ground.
? and one that preferres Jerusalem above his chief joy.

The eight is derived from that duty incumbent upon the Saints, to walk as
lights amidst a crooked generation, Phil: 2.15. and as the Lords holy remnant
whom he has reserved to witness against the evils of the times. And who sees
not that pride in apparel, is now a reigning sin in this Land, even among
professors, who, in their adorning themselves, differ little, or nothing, from
the world, that wallowes in wickedness, and vanity? 1 John 5.19.
That which aggravates this evil, and renders it more odious, and should set
Saints at the greater distance from it, and from all appearance thereof, is,
that there is a troop of evils, as covetousness, defrauding, lying,
oppression, grinding the faces of the poor, etc. with many such like sins,
which do attend it. Can we be zealous and jealous for the Lord of hosts, and
refrain from bearing a testimony of our dislike of this abomination? And how
can this be done, except we first begin at home, putting from us all appearance
of that evil, which we condemn in others? Gods people, Rev. 18.4.
who are called to come out of Babylon, are straightly charged not to partake of
her sins Christ's witnesses do torment the beast not only by word but
conversation. Did not Noah by his practice in building an Arc condemn the old
world?
; One reason is because God will make use of them to declare against them. Now
that the Saints may bear a full testimony against this evil of pride in
apparel, which is one of the sins of the times, and one of Babylons sins, (as
appears. Revel: 18.12. and 15, 16 verses.) It behooves them to clear
themselves from it by a contrary practice In such away we ought to man fest
our dislike, so that he may run that reads it. 9 Ground.
to this corrupt generation in their proud manner of adorning themselves.

Ninthly, The presence of the Lord with his people, encouraging them to this
reformation, affords another ground As God goes before his people to bring them
out of Babylon, so to bring them off from her sins.
: His hand (as they are persuaded) having strongly set it upon their hearts, in
several Assemblies, solemnly waiting on him, to reform without delay,
accounting that now God is purging away all the dross of Syon, he will not
leave such worldly superfluities long remaining upon the garments of Saints.
Its confessed, that inward impulses, and persuasions of good men, are not always
good arguments to prove a matter: yet, when a praying people, such as desire to
tremble at the Word, and labor to walk exactly, are unanimous in a persuasion
or motion, which has such Scripture-grounds for it, as has been alleged for
this; Such an argument in its place, well accompanied with other weighty
reasons, deserves to be considered by such as fear the Lord.

10 Ground.
The tenth and last ground is, because of offense, which is taken by those who
sigh and cry for all the abominations of professors God has great regard to
such as sigh and cry for all the evils of professors, though men make light
and puff at them. See and consider well, Ezekiel. 9.4, 5, 6.
; They cannot but mourn to behold such needless costly deckings upon the
apparel of Saints. They also declare their conscientious offense thereat. If
Paul would not eat flesh while the world was to stand rather then put a
stumbling block in the way of his weak Brother, 1 Cor: 8.13. should not Saints
much rather refrain from those needless things, then give offense, and cause
grief to the tender hearts of those for whom Christ dyed? And whereas it may
be said, some good men are offended at the leaving off such ornaments We may
justly refrain from our liberty to avoid offense, but we may not neglect our
duty to God for fear of offending good men.
; Is it from their goodness? Is it not rather because some private interest of
their own, or their friends, is thereby struck at? If they be conscientiously
offended, the reasons before-going may suffice to show, that the offense is
unjustly taken at those, who on the grounds laid down, cease from putting on
upon their garments such superfluous ornaments, and in conscience toward God
choose to walk in that way of reformation, whereon so clear a light of truth
shines.

Now, for as much as all reformation meets with opposition, it cannot well be
expected, that this, which runs so contrary to the stream of the common
opinion and practice, and is so opposite to men's fleshly lusts and interests,
should easily take place. I shall therefore proceed to consider, and answer
several Objections, which are, or may be made against the reformation pleaded
for, and the grounds before laid down.

1 Object. Did not Sarah and Rebeccah wear rich Jewels, and if so, why may
not beleivers in these days, wear such ornaments, if their abillity will
extend to provide them?

Answ. First, We find not that there were at that day (as now there are) many
poor Saints on every hand needing to be relieved.

Secondly, Neither was provision made for their costly ornaments by such
notorious abominations, of covetousness, and extortion, etc. nor the pride of
professors, their pride in apparel, grown up to that height, as that there
needed then, as now there does, such a loud sounding-testimony in word, and
practice, to be borne against it.

Thirdly, Some things practiced by Abraham, and David, with as much
approbation, as the wearing of Rings and Jewels Did not their earrings soon
become a snare unto them, else why did Jacob take them away and hide them under
an Oak when he reformed his family, see Genesis 35.2, 3, 4. With this compare
Exo. 32.2, 3, 4. See what use the Israelites made of their golden earrings.
And did not gold eare-rings prove a snare to Gideon and his house, Judge. 8.26,
27.
by Sarah, and Rebeccah, it becomes not Saints to practice: Had not Abraham his
Concubines, and children by them? Gen: 25.6. And did not David take unto him
many wives and Concubines? 2 Samuel: 5.13. Would not Saints blush to be found
walking in their steps in these things now?

Fourthly, In those days of ignorance, in the infancy of the Church, God dealt
with his people as Parents do with their little Children, who give them such
things as are taking to the eye, to win upon their affections; and lay such
commands upon them, as are suitable to their tender age, and present capacity.
So did God give goodly outward gifts, and ornaments to his people of old under
the Law. And as he has at sundry times, and in sundry ways, so also by
several degrees, discovered his will to his people, according to that ability
he has given them to bear. Wherefore it will not follow, because God did at
first tolerate the wearing of such ornaments, that therefore now he calls not
his to deny themselves in these things. The president of some wearing such
ornaments then, makes not so much for that practice, as those many
Gospel-precepts laid down in the second ground, with those other arguments
accompanying make against it now.

2 Object. This is for the honor of Christ, that his servants and followers
put on such ornaments, seeing thereby they make it appear they serve a good
Master.

Answ. It is for the honor of Christ our head, and Lord, to have his members
and followers conformable to him It is enough for the disciple that he be as
his Master, and the servant as his Lord.
, even to Christ crucified, as were the Ministers of Christ, and his despised
followers in the primitive times. As for those who judge of the condition of
the servants of Christ, either of their happiness or misery, with respect to
their outward state, and accommodations, what would such have thought of
Christ, had they seen him borne in a manger, and hanged on a tree? The
mistaken world, which (as John says, 1 John 3.2.) knows not the Saints,
judging after the wisdom of this world by such false rules, may, and shall,
stumble at the Saints, as they did at Christ, who were offended at him, and
said, Is not this the Carpenters son? It is the glory of the members to be
like their head, the followers to be like their Master. The legal worship,
Temple, and worshippers, had indeed rich adornings belonging to them, which was
to the honor of God in that day, under that dispensation; But the new
Testament-glory is inward, in the Spirit, in the hidden man of the heart. The
typical Temple was adorned with Gold and Silver, but the true Temple spoken of
2 Cor. 6.16. is adorned within with that which is not corruptible, and
outwardly with such selfe-denyall and good works before men as do become the
Gospel.

3 Object. Some object, this would be to expose our selves to scorn, and to
make our selves ridiculous in the eyes of men, if we should put off our
ornaments, and walk in that way which here seems to be prescribed.

Answ. First, Such extremities are not here pleaded for, as may occasion such
contempt to be cast upon you. Who will laugh at you, for forbearing to put on
upon good and convenient garments, such superfluous trimming, as has no show
of use? Is it not usual with civil people to commend going plain, as they
call it, and to condemn professors for their pride in apparel? As for holy
mortified persons, they are more exercised in sighing for all the abominations
of the times, then that they should be found to contemn any man upon such an
account. Some light professors there are, who neither lay to heart their own,
nor others sins, but like Dives, they cloth themselves sumptuously, and fare
deliciously every day Luke 16.19.23, 24, 25, 28.

This description of Dives his fine clothing and sumptuous fare, etc. and
withal his fearful end, may serve for a profitable Caution to some who even
tread in his steps.

They who keep to the word may expect to be for signs and wonders in Israel,
even among professors.

^^a. 8.16, 17, 18.


, such (being too much accustomed to vain laughter) may laugh in the face at
such a reformation, whilst inwardly they have indignation against it, because
it witnesses against their vain practice.

Secondly, The servants and followers of Christ ought not to think it strange
if they be counted for signs and wonders, seeing it is no other then what was
prophesied beforehand in the Scriptures, Isai. 8.18. Zach: 3.8. How could such
lay down their lives for the truths of Christ, who cannot bear to be laughed
at for righteousnesse-sake? whilst the glory of God is promoted by their
endeavors for such a reformation, whereof they see there is at this day among
the Saints so great a need.

4 Object. God has promised that his people shall possess the riches of the
Gentiles, Isai. 60.9.17. and that they shall have plenty of Gold, and Silver,
Isai. 61.6. If so, and God has already begun to subdue our enemies, so that
they submit themselves, and come with presents to us; why then, may we not
prepare, and put on costly jewels, and ornaments? What better use can we make
of the riches we possess?

Answ. First, That those Prophecies do agree with what is written in the book
of Revelation concerning new Jerusalem, and have relation to the same glorious
state of the Church, may evidently appear by comparing the sixtieth Chapter of
Isaiah with the 21 of Revelation. Its true indeed, the Kings shall bring their
glory into it, etc. but that the Saints are not yet come to that new
Jerusalem-state, is sufficiently manifest from that sorrow, and sighing, and
the many sad complaints of Gods people as at this day; all which, as also the
present poverty and suffering, of many Saints, are inconsistent with their
glorious privileges in the New Jerusalem; for there shall be no sorrow, nor
crying, Revel: 21.4. If it be granted, that such ornaments shall be worn by
Saints in their triumphant state then, it will not therefore follow, that they
may put them on in their militant state now, whilst the days of their mourning
are not ended, and whilst the bridegroom is not with them The children of the
bride-chamber cannot but mourn whilst the bridegroom is not with them.
.

Secondly, Saints ought to be so afflicted in and for the afflictions one of
another, that as fellow members of one body; If one member suffer (says the
Apostle) all suffer with it, 1 Cor. 12.26. Upon this account, how deeply ought
we to be affected with the lamentable miseries of Gods people in many Lands,
who groan daily under grievous sufferings by persecution, reproach,
imprisonment, and all manner of oppression? Are any of us set at liberty from
such bondage, ought we not yet, to consider our selves in the same body with
them? and be in bonds (in respect of a sympathy and fellow-feeling of their
grievances) as if we were bound with them? Heb. 13.3. and can we be thus
affected, and yet plead for, and put on costly array, and rich ornaments (as the
manner of some is, who lay not these things to heart) as if all were well Are
not such like Gallio, of whom its said when Sosthens was beaten he cared for
none of these things.
, and nothing aileth us? I shall not here meddle with that question, What times
to come may allow of? only let me allude to the words of Haggai the Prophet,
Hag. 3. Is this a time for you, O ye, to dwell in your ceiled houses? so, is
this a time for Saints to be decking themselves with costly ornaments, whilst
so many of their brethren abroad are wounded, and lie as it were bleeding even
to death Mark how Moses reproves the children of Gad and of Reuben when they
would sit down before their brethren were put into their possession. Shall
your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here? Numb. 32.6.
? Might it not rather become a true hearted Israelite, with a tender eye to
these things, to say with Vriah, 2 Samuel: 11.11. The Ark, and Israel, and Judah,
remain in tents, and the servants of the Lord are encamped in the open field,
etc. shall I then go into mine house, to eat, and drink? etc. May not this
his saying shame many professors now, who abate nothing of their superfluities
upon the account of all the wants, sorrows, and sufferings of the people of
God As those who are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, give themselves
great liberty to drink wine in bowls, etc. Amos 3. So on the contrary they
who are grieved for Joseph's affliction are led to deny themselves to such
things.
, and all that reproach which is cast upon the glorious name and cause of God?

Thirdly, Has God blessed his people in this Nation with the first fruits of
those promises? should they first serve and adorn themselves, and not rather
honor the Lord, and adorn his Gospel, by relieving the poor Saints, and
others, with the first fruits of all their increase God required of his people
of old that they should offer to him without delay the first fruits of all
their increase. Exodus 22.29. With which compare that word in Ezekiel. 20.41. Which
relates to latter or last days.
? As for the late war (wherein the cause of Christ and his Saints was pleaded
with such great resolution and wonderful success) was it not at first
promoted by the free offerings of the godly, and well-affected people, who
brought in their money, plate, and jewels, and kept not back their lives,
when they were called for Did not the people as in the days of old offer
themselves and their's willingly to the work of the Lord, asserting with their
lives in their hands, that the cause was the Lords. The people went out as they
were called thereunto, to help the Lord against the mighty.
? Let it be considered whether the rich spoils gotten by such a war should
not have been brought into a public treasury, to be faithfully disposed of
for the benefit of the cause and people of God Joshua 6.18, 19. the gold and
silver taken from the enemy, converted to private ends and use, became a curse
and a trouble to the Camp.
; the instruments employed taking to themselves food and raiment convenient for
them, not laying up for themselves, nor laying out for their lusts? How well
would such a course agree with that remarkable word, Isai. 23.18. The
merchandise of Tire (which in respect of her fornication with the Nations does
fitly resemble mystical Babylon) and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord;
it shall neither be treasured, nor laid up, but it shall be for them that dwell
before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable Clothing Do not some
to maintain gay cloating, bind heavy burdens on the backs of Saints?
? And if these things ought to have been done, and are not, but that which is
contrary to them, may we not conclude, that the costly apparel, and the
great treasures of many who are enriched by the late wars, (considering the
state of affairs civil and spiritual in these nations Fasting and prayer are
commendable things, but the breaking off hard yoakes is that which is more
acceptable to God, Isa. 58.5, 6.
, and the condition of thousands of Saints at this day in the world) are more
like Achans golden wedge, and Babylonish garment Are there not some Achans to
be discovered and punished before the Lord will give his presence in the Camp?
Do not his late dispensations speak with a voice like that, Josh. 7.13. There
is an accursed thing in the midst of thee O Israel, thou can not stand before
thine enemies, until etc. Read the 6 of Josh, 18, 19. and the 7th Chapter
throughout, and compare diligently the things that have been, with the things
that are, and take heed of being taken with goodly Babylolonish garments,
gotten by the spoils of the enemies, Josh. 7.21.
, then like the great riches Saints shall possess, and the golden ornaments
(as is supposed) they shall put on, in the day of Jerusalems perfect prosperity?

5 Object. Others say we fear least by forbearing to put on such ornaments,
we should give occasion to the world to charge us with covetousness.

Answ. By the exercise of your liberality in relieving the poor Saints, by
entertaining strangers, and such like works, such censures may easily be
prevented Whether they who commit the keeping of their souls to God in
well-doing, ought in like manner to commit the keeping of their good names to
him.
. If any forbear the wearing of costly array, in design to reserve the gain
thereby for their covetousness, they are justly served, if that reproach fall
upon them. Yet all this makes nothing against a conscientious reformation in
apparel, which is a special help against covetousness, an evil practiced
by most men to uphold their pride. Wherefore let them both fall together, and
this objection will be gone.

6 Object. What say some? we fear least by leaving off our superfluous
ornaments, we should bring our selves into danger of being numbered with the
Quakers, seeing they are observed to speak much against pride in apparel.

Answ. I answer, First, May we not as well on the same ground cease to declare
against false worship, and to speak of the Spirit, because they who are called
Quakers do such things, and others who shall so do are like to be so
accounted?

Secondly, Some men do good things on evil grounds, to promote bad designs;
we may not therefore refuse to do the same things on good and righteous
grounds.

Thirdly, How few do show Gospel-faith by their obedience to that Command of
Christ, which bids them to rejoice and leap for joy, when men shall reproach
them for his sake. Luke 6.22, 23.
If this thing be of God (as has been before showed at large) we ought not to
be discouraged therein on any such account: see Isa. 51.7. But herein rather to
rejoice (k), if we be counted worthy to suffer that, or any other shame for
righteousness sake; for Christ has pronounced such sufferers greatly blessed,
Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Luke 6.22, 23.

Fourthly, Consider whether this peoples standing up to plead for the Spirit;
as also for reforming in habit, and for some other good things, at this time,
may not have in it a design of Satan, to bring up an evil report upon those
good things, and the persons that practice, and seek to promote them Satan he
does it in malice, but God in just judgment does lay stu^bling blocks before
men. Jer. 6.21. Luke 2.34. Isa. 8.14. 1 Pet. 2.7.
? May we not, I say, look at this as a stumbling block cast in the way to
hinder this good work by the Enemy of man, who leaves no way unattempted to
stir up the minds of men to prejudice against the truth?

7 Object. The great cry of many is somewhat like to that of Demetrius, Act.
19.25. By this craft we have our wealth, viz. many rich trades by Sea and Land,
whereby many families are maintained, are upheld by the wearing of costly
ornaments on apparel.

Answ. First, Observe that this objection is agreeable to that prophecy, Rev:
18. which describes the doleful complaint of the Merchants of the earth at
Babylons fall, when her pride and pomp is brought down, as we read, verse.
18. They cast dust on their heads, and cry, Alas! Alas! that great City!
wherein were made rich, all that had Ships in the Sea, by reason of her
costlinesse Are there not diverse complaints and murmurings among the people of
England at the removing of Popish superstitions, because the trade was
maintained by costly provisions for them.
. Such complaints becomes not the sons of Sion, who have their conversation in
Heaven. They are bidden to rejoice at her fall, even then when those Merchants
mourn: see Revel: 18.20.

Secondly, As for the families maintained by such trades, are they rich? or are
they poor? If rich, are the Saints bound to maintain such? who has required
this at their hands? If poor, and if the good of the poor and their families
be the mark aimed at in such wearings, were it not much better that what they
have to lay out in such superfluities, might be given immediately into the
hands of the diligent poor? or such as through age, or other infirmity of
body, and unable to work? If in buying such things at the shops, men act
conscientiously for support of the poor; do they act wisely, to let the rich
shopkeeper gain so much by them By that time the gains have passed through
the shopkeepers hands, little is that which is left for the poor.
, who often proves a bad Steward of their bounty, and an hard task-master to the
poor that work for him? The Scripture abounds with many great and precious
promises to him, who from a right principle within, gives liberally to the
poor, as, Isaiah 53.7, 8, 9, etc. Luke 14.13, 14. Prove. 28.27. Mat. 19.21. 2
Cor. 9.6, 7, 8, 9. Mat. 6.2, 3. Luke 11.41. Deuteronomy. 15. 10th. But what one word
of them, or what other promise can a man warrantably apply to himself in
buying such trimmings? Let the gallant professors consider it well, and ask
their experience, Will it give them a clear testimony of Gods promise or
presence with them in so doing? but in giving to the poor, that duty so often
commanded and commended to us by the Lord, many humble and merciful men can
say they have met with many good words of promise, Psalm. 19.10.
more sweet then honey, and dearer then thousands of gold. He that pitieth
the poor (says Solomon) lends to the Lord, and that which he has given
will he pay him again, Prove. 19.17. But can such who lay out their money at
the shops in costly ornaments, account that in so doing they lend unto the
Lord? and that God will pay it them again? so that they who thus act, show
thmselves in this matter neither wise for the poor, nor for themselves.

Thirdly, As for such as are poor in Churches, who are employed in making Lace,
and such like Ornaments, If God enlarge the hearts of the rich Members to study
to do some singular works of mercy, causing them in order thereunto, to cease
from their costly superfluities in house-furniture, apparel and delicious
fare, and from seeking great things for themselves, and theirs, they may
(without doubt) set their poor fellow members on work, in providing things
honest for necessary uses, whereby they may be more profitable to their
Generation, and spend their days on earth with more satisfaction, and to a
better account, than in making, and providing such vain things, which tend to
little profit, but for the most part merely serve the lusts and humors of
proud men. Let ours also (says the Apostle, Tit. 3.14) Learn to maintain good
works (some read honest Trades) for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful. Might not the poor Saints, if the rich were blessed with an heart to
devise liberal things, be set on work, in making coats (with Dorcas, Act.
9.39.) and other linen and woollen Garments for poor widows, and for the
Fatherless? and would not this be a praiseworthy work, and that which would
give occasion to all beholders to glorify God? so that if we respect the glory
of God, the good of the Poor, and our own Comfort, the way that is taken, to go
to the shops, and upon the account of maintaining Trade, to lay out their money
in needless Laces, Points, and Ribbands to put them on upon good Clothes,
which are convenient, and may well become us without them, this way I say is
not the best, and most excellent.

Obj. 8 Some great Professors are ready to object, we may provide and put on
superfluous Ornaments, and yet reserve enough to bestow on the Poor, seeing the
number of them whom we are called to relieve is but small, and most of them
can make a shift to live with little help.

Answ. First, Such ought to know and consider, that of those whom God has
blessed with a liberal portion of outward things, he expects and requires a
proportionable exercise of liberality, for to whom much is given, of the same
much shall be required, Observe how the widows two mites are valued above the
great gifts of the rich, Mark. 12.43, 44. 1 Pet 1.14, 15.
Luke 12.48. Act. 11.29. And yet the rich (even in some Congregations of
Saints) count they do well, and enough, if they give to the relief of the poor
double what other mean men do, two shillings to their one; whereas (did they
dispense their gift according to their ability) they would give fifty for
others one. Believers who are rich in this world, are required to be rich in
good works, 1 Timothy 6.17.18. And if any man minister let him do it as of the
ability which God gives, 1 Pet. 4.11.

Secondly, Do such, in relieving the poor, walk by that rule, Deuteronomy. 15.11. Thou
shall open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy in
the land? and in the verse before, Thou shall surely give him, and shall not
be grieved; and again in the 14. verse, Thou shall furnish him liberally out
of that wherewith the Lord thy God has blessed thee. But on the contrary, is
it not ordinary with some that are Rich, to count it enough to keep their
Brethren from perishing? How few walk up to that Golden Rule, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self? he that so loves his Neighbor, seeks to make his
life in some measure comfortable as be does his own, and in so doing (though
not for so doing in way of desert) more joy is to be found, than in the
greatest worldly glory, which when men have purchased with much expense,
procures them little comfort here, and will afford them less in the day of
Christ. May not many who so lavish out their Gold and Silver on their sumptuous
clothing, justly fear lest they fall under that heavy charge in the day of
Christ; I was naked, and ye clothed me not, hungry, and ye fed me not, Mat.
25.42.43. Such as now wear costly apparel on the back, with great bunches of
Ribbands on the belly (as the manner of some is) will they not then blush, and
be ashamed when they shall be called to look back and see how they have used
their talents, and be required to give up their account to Do not the brave
gallants put that great day of accounts far off?
God?

Thirdly, They know few in want. If they were not willingly ignorant, they
might soon be informed of many objects of pity, who call for large bounty, and
bowels to relieve them in their present wants and Such give little
encouragements to others to acquaint them with their wants.
streights. The time is near, wherein that word shall be fullfilled. Esaias
32.5. The vile person (such an one as first serves his Lusts, and then throws
a little of the overplus to the Poor) shall be no more counted liberal, nor
the Churl (who possibly will do something for the poor by much entreaty) shall
no more be said to be bountiful, but the liberal man shall be known by that
charecter, in the 18. verse, by devising liberal things, and mark what
follows, by liberal things shall he stand. To seek out the Poor and needy, the
hungry and the naked to feed and cloth them, and to avoid all unnecessary
expense, that he may be the better able to do such works, this speaks a man
liberal indeed, thus to devise liberal things. And he that does thus
(providing things honest and needful for himself, and for his family) as he is
likely to find no lack, so to have little, or nothing over, wherewith to
provide costly superfluities. For conclusion of the answer of this objection, 2
Cor. 8.15.
let me without offense propose to some Saints in Churches, whether do they
remember their Brethren in other Congregations besides their own, who suffer
adversity, as being in the same body of Christ with them, and do they make it
appear by caring naturally for them, and extending relief to them, according to
examples of the primitive Saints, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2, 3. compared with 2 Cor. 8.1,
2, 3. etc. Act. 11.29, 30.

Object. 9. It is enough for us to avoid some extreme vain fashions, and to
conform in our apparel to other civil people of our degree?

Answ. This saying suites well with the Laodiocans of our times, who are much
taken with the friendship of this world, but to such I shall use the words of
the Prophet, Arise, depart ye, this is not your rest, for it is polluted: Has
not Pride infected all degrees, high, and low, from the greatest masters to the
meanest of Servants? Not to speak of the Pride and pomp of some men, and how it
is supported, Do we not see, that even those who get their living hardly, by
their daily labor, instead of laying up against the time of age or sickness,
lightly lay out what with labor they get, on vain and costly Such trimmings as
are used by poor servants are often times more costly to them then other rich
adornings worn by men of estates.
superfluities? And what do they allege, but that its ordinary for others as
mean as themselves so to do? But let Saints remember that command of God, Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exo. 23.2. and the words of the
Apostle, Romans 12.2. where we are commanded to be non conformists to this
World, and withal observe his earnest exhortation to the believing Ephesians,
not to walk as other Gentiles, in the vanity of their mind, etc. Ephesians. 4.17. to
the 23. verse, for further answer see the 8 ground.

Object. 10. Some who seem to be high-flown in knowledge and contemplation,
object against this Reformation, that this is a small matter, and so they puff
at it, and are offended as Naaman the Syrian, when the Prophet bid him do a
small thing, 2 King 5.11.13.

Answ. First, Does God call for it? be it granted that the thing is but small,
in comparison of some weighty matters, so much the rather ought it to be done
by the Saints without gainsaying. But so small a thing as it is, weightier
matters are highly concerned in it; for (besides the clear tendency of this
Reformation, to promote many singular good works, which would adorn the Saints
profession, and turn for a testimony to them, that God has set them in the way
of those choice and high enjoyments spoken of in the sixth ground) it lays
siedge to those mighty sins, viz. Covetousness, Oppression, Extortion,
Injustice, Fraudulent dealing, with many other like evils, which are practiced
mainly to maintain a worldly gallantry in costly apparel, and such like
superfluities.

Secondly, To allow our selves in any evil, though but a small one, is no
small evil but a great one, such as makes a deep wound in a tender Conscience,
and prepares the way to the worst of evils, See the danger of sining wilfully
Heb. 10.25, 26 27, 28 and take heed of the least slip that leads to it.
Have not these times abounded with sad examples of some, who at first
slighting some lesser commands of the Gospel, and giving place to sin by
little and little, have at length become despisers of the Ordinances of Christ,
and have set light by Christ himself, and his precious blood, turning the grace
of God into wantonness; abusing Gospel liberty for an occasion to the flesh,
even unto gross Licenciousnesse? Wherefore the rather ought Saints to be
circumspect in all things, and to avoid such arguing in defense of small
sins, Gal. 5.13 Ephesians. 5.15 1 These. 5.22
seeing it proves often times a sad beginning that leads to a fearful end. And
now in as much as God is turning his hand upon his People, to purge away all
their dross, according to his blessed word, Isay. 1.25. We ought to see his
hand upon us, and readily to submit thereunto, as workers with him in the
strength of his grace, Isai. 4.4, 5.
to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

Isai. 34, last. 3 Mal. 2, 3. Isai. 33.15
The bright beams of that light, which is now rising on the Saints, will
discover the least motes of evil remaining in them, and that fire which is in
Sion will leave no stubble remaining. These things duly considered, this
objection is no just exception against the reformation aforesaid.

Object. 11. Some affirm with no small confidence, that their hearts are dead
to things below, they take no pride or pleasure in their costly apparel, though
it be made, and put on after the newest fashion, therefore they may, and can
without scruple wear such things.

Ans. First, If your hearts are dead indeed to them, the offense that is given
to many tender hearts by such adornings, were there no other ground, may the
more easily prevail with you to part with them.

Secondly, Some who have thought thus of themselves, upon a slight search,
upon further and more strict inquiry, have not found their hearts free from the
infection of pride in apparel, which where it is in most Professors, may be
discerned by others, at least by themselves (upon a close search) in these two
things.

First, Their clayming, or at least expecting some more than ordinary respect
suitable to their habit; yea, and if they come into the assemblies of Saints,
they look to be preferred to the best places, and that it should be said or
done to them according to that word in Jam. 2.2. If there come into your
assemblies a man with a gold ring, and goodly apparel, and there come in also a
poor man in vile raiment, you have respect to him that wears the gay
clothing, and say to him, Sir, sit thou here in a good place, Is there not
some such partiality to be seen in the assemblies of Saints at this day?
etc.

Secondly, Their strange carriage to their poor brethren; How do such blush and
are ashamed to walk the streets with their poor brethren in mean raiment? Is
not this denial of Christ in his poor members like that of Peter when he said
in the high Priests hall, I know not the man?
Do they not shun their company in open places of concourse, and sometimes seem
to dis-own them? Are they not ashamed to call them (or be called by them)
brethren v? And why are they thus ashamed to own Christ in his poor members? It
stands not with their honor to be seen with them, or at least to be familiar
with them Yet is not Christ ashamed to call them brethren. Heb. 2.11.
. This becomes not those of their rank that wear such costly rich clothing.
And if these things be so, beware lest your hearts deceive you in this matter,
but let that be taken away, which is such a snare, and a stumbling block to
Saints.

Obj ct. 12. Now may some say, we find our selves upon the consideration of the
whole matter, so far informed, that we know where to begin; we are convinced of
some of our adornings, that they are vain, foolish, and offensive, unbecoming
Saints, but we know not where to end, or what bounds to set to this
reformation. Moreover we fear that hot contentions may arise among Saints about
this matter.

Ans. In following our light, Phil. 3.
we ought not to be of doubtful mind, but in this, as in other things, whereto
we have attained, we ought to walk, waiting for further light in the
improvement of the measure received. In reforming Religion from Popery and
Prelacy, etc. who could at first set, or who can yet set the bounds to that
reformation begun, so as to declare in every particular, whereto it will grow,
so as to say hitherto shall it proceed, and no farther? or who could, or can
yet resolve all the doubts and questions that have risen concerning that
matter? nor was that or any other reformation that I could yet hear of, brought
forth without some contention What birth is there that comes without travel.
; but if upon such accounts any persons whatsoever, should (notwithstanding
their being convinced of the need there was of a reformation) have withstood
the work, or refused to enter upon it, they might be justly judged for their
opposition, or neglect; It being Gods ordinary way when he sets his people
upon a work at first, after conviction, to give them a measure of light
accompanied with zeal and confidence, serving for an entrance, and after that,
to come in with an increase of light for the carrying on the work begun, thus
leading his people, as by step and step. These things are plain, and the
application may easily be made to the matter in hand.

As for the contention that may arise, Is it not the ordinary lot of the work
of Reformation, and every part or piece thereof to pass through such fire, that
both it and those who stand for it, may be tried? And such as hate to be
reformed (though they take Law and Gospel in their mouth) may be discovered?
But let men take heed to themselves that they contend not against any part of
Gods work Psa. 50, 16 2 Cor. 3, 18 we can do nothing against the truth but
for the truth this becomes Saints thus to say and do Matt. 3, 15.
, or that they be not found Newters when God calls to side with him in any part
of righteousness, considering the words of our blessed Lord, He that is not
with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me scatters abroad,
Mat. 12.30. As for removing any other obstruction that may lie in the way to
hinder this Reformation, I refer the Godly Reader to a diligent perusal of
the ground laid down, with the answers given to the several objections before
mentioned.

Query. Here it may be questioned by some, who are or may be satisfied
touching the Reformation contended for, viz. Whether being convinced that
Saints ought not to put on such superfluous trimmings as are before spoken
against: Shall we straightway take off such things if now we have them on?
What good way come to us, or others, by so doing?

Answ. Can you, being convinced in the thing, keep them on with comfort?
Considering

First, That in continuing them on, by example (which is a thing many look at
in such matters) you uphold the evil, and promote it in others, who are
encouraged by beholding your vain adorning, to procure and put on the like.

Secondly, You can not well use tongue or pen to oppose such superfluous
Ornaments on others, seeing they remain on your own Apparel. Will not every man
be ready to say, Pluck out first the beam which is in your own eye?

Thirdly, You may never live to wear out the clothes you put on, so that if
you should think then to reform, when you have done with them, and not before,
you may never live to have the honor to do God that service to bear your
testimony against that evil. Remember the wise man's words, Eccesiast. 9.10.
Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work
nor device, nor wisdom, nor knowledge in the grave, whither thou go. If
therefore you have light leading you to bear your testimony in word and
practice against such superfluities, Walk in the light, whilst you have the
light, Joh. 12.36.

Fourthly, Although the putting off such things seems to present no present
outward advantage to any man, yet inasmuch as it puts a man into the better
capacity to help forward a general Reformation among Gods people, and seeing
the great good which may be expected to come thereby, will, to the great
satisfaction of publick-spirited Christians, soon countervail the parting with
those things, (which are no gain, but rather loss to them that wear them)
therefore let them be parted with, and no longer retained by Saints. The
Conclusion.


That it is expedient there should be some Reformation among Saints in their
Apparel, in respect of some extravagancies and vain superfluities, most, or all
good men acknowledge. As for the way that is presented to the Saints in this
Discourse, I deny not but it may be liable to exceptions in some cases, and so
are many or most general Rules in the Scriptures of That great Command and for
doing no manner of work on the Sabbath, did admit of exceptions in some cases,
as appears Matthew. 12. the beginning of the chapter. 2 Pet, 2.12.
Truth. If they who are friends to this work, dislike this essay, or rough
draught, let them bring forth their polished Endeavors on this Subject. In the
mean time, this I say to all that fear the Lord, who upon the reading hereof
shall remain dis-satisfyed in this matter: Take heed that ye speak not evil
of the things ye know not, or have not considered, but seriously weigh, as in
the sight of God, and in his holy fear, the things laid down in this Discourse,
not forgetting or neglecting to seek the Lord herein, remembering the words of
wisdom, Prove. 28.5. They that seek the Lord understand all things. I shall shut
up all with the words of Gamaliel to the Jews. If this counsel or work be of
men, Acts 5.
it will come to naught, but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest
happily ye be found to fight against God.

QVERIES for the People called QVAKERS.
FIRST,

WHether are you willing that the depth of your persuasion or opinion touching
Jesus Christ his being now contained in the Heavens, the raising of our dead
bodies after natural death, the Trial of Spirits and Doctrins according to the
Scriptures, should be clearly and openly known, and published?

Secondly, Whether do you not by many of your sayings (which admit of a double
construction) craftily hide your persuasion in many things from the sight of
some honest people, who take you to hold the same truth with believers in
general, concerning Christ, the Scriptures, and the resurrection of the dead?
Do you not endeavor to make them believe, you hold otherwise in some things
than you do? And is not this dissimulation at the bests or lying after the
manner of Annanias and Saphira, Act. 5.8,

Thirdly, Whether your selves (even all of you) be not men and women of
sinful failings, and imperfections, as act those Godly people you cry down?
Does not the light within show you this? If not, 1 John 1.8.
tell us who are the persons among you without their failings or imperfections?
And how came they so to be?

Fourthly, Do you in (...) of the Congregations of Believers, as well look
after those things which are Commendable as those things which are Condemnable
in their practices? Do you not overlook the example of Christ in this, who in
his message to the Church of Ephesus, writes in praise of the good things in
them, Rev. 2.2. and particularly that they hated the Doctrine of the Are not
some Churches now to be commended for hating evil doctrins?
(...)? Though withal he reproves them for leaving their first love, and
Sard^s Church being reproved, some few names are excepted. Do not you on the
contrary cry them down in general, without any mercy?

Fifthly, Whether your declaring against instrumental teaching, yet going about
diverse of you, informing and instructing your selves and others, who are free
to hear you; does not discover a gross contradiction between your professed
principles and practice, and plainly show that you would have them hear none
but you? and whether this be right to set them against instrumental teaching,
to bring them to hear your declaring, as some of you call your speaking,
altering only the name?

Sixthly, Whether instrumental teaching be unsuitable to the new Covenant? If
so, Why did Christ being ascended, appoint Pastors and Teachers in the Church,
to continue until we all come into the Unity of the Faith? etc. thus
ordaining Ministers for the work, while work remains for the ministry. Did
Christ burden his Saints with needless appointments?

Seventhly, Whether the Scriptures you bring to oppose Gospel Ordinances, do
not serve only to make void Circumcision, with other Ordinances of Moses Law;
and to witness against walking after the tradition of men, with the carnal
formal practice, or idolizing of true Gospel Ordinances? All you say, making
not at all against a spiritual practice of Church-Ordinances, as breaking
bread, and exhorting one another, etc. wherein the Saints have the footsteps of
the flock in the primitive times going before them, and the appointment of
Christ for the continuance of these till his coming, which must be understood
of his personal coming the second time, he being come in the Spirit with great
glory, when he gave those Commands, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. Revel. 2.25. Heb. 10.25.

Eighthly, Whether it is not better to wait on God in his good old ways recorded
in his word, expecting his work to be gradually carried on as the growth of a
building, or of a plant, or child, so running with patience the spiritual race
set before us? or as the manner of some is, to forsake the principles of faith
(whereof the Saints have had so great experience) in hope to start up suddenly
from a low stature into perfection, by embracing a new doctrine?

Ninthly, Whether Jesus Christ has not prayed for those who believe through
the word of the Apostles, according to John 17.20? And if so, Whether they are
not in a good and safe way who believe accordingly? And whether it be not
better to credit their testimony so fully confirmed by the Lord, and
acknowledged by the Saints for many generations, than to forgo that, to
embrace, Heb. 2.3.
and follow the sayings of some of your company?

Tenthly, What is that faith which the Spirit speaks expressly, Some shall
depart from in the latter days, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines
of devils? 1 Timothy 4.1

Eleventhly, Whether that doctrine which in sum is no more but LOOK TO THE
LIGHT WITHIN, with a curse upon disobedience, and a blessing upon obedience
thereunto; be that glorious Gospel preached by Christ, and his Apostles,
holding forth good news to all people? Or whether it be not a reviving of the
old doctrine of Justification by works, wherein the mystery of iniquity works
to darken the grace of God, in justifying the ungodly without works freely, and
to make void the sufferings of Christ? Romans 3.24. and the 4. Chap. 5. Gal. 3.1.

Twelfthly, Whether the light that is in every man does reveal Jesus Christ as
crucified for sin, and risen again? If so, How came it to pass that so many
strict men among the Philosophers, Acts 23.1. Act. 26.9. 1 Timothy 1.13.
and Paul himself walking according to his conscience before conversion, were
ignorant of him?

13 Whether you have not among you many who presume to be Masters, or Masterly
teachers, contrary to that word of Christ, Matthew. 23.10. in the true intent of
it? Do they not usurp authority over the judgment and conscience of their
followers, requiring them to believe and obey what they say, without asking
their meaning, and examining their sayings by the Scriptures? whereas Christ
expounded his sayings, as occasion was offered, and need required, to his
Disciples, and the Bereans are commended for searching the Scriptures daily,
whether the things spoken by the Apostle were so, Matthew. 13.18, 19.36, 37, etc.

14 Whether it be not high presumption, and spiritual pride, for some among
you to break Christ's commands, and teach men so? and to judge (as many do) the
secrets of men's hearts? and rashly without knowledge of men's conversations, to
affirm that they have not the Spirit? If the Spirit of God witness with their
spirits (as I doubt not but it does with diverse of them, you so judge) that
they have the Spirit of God, and the work of regeneration witnessing thereunto,
may they not by your bold judgment to the contrary, know how to judge of you?

15 Whether do you not esteem the sayings of some among you of equal authority
with the sayings of God in Scripture? and as readily, or more to be believed,
and obeyed without any inquiry, whether they agree with Scripture or no? even
although they plainly contradict the written word? Is it not an usual thing
with many of you, to travel up and down to and fro, far and near, to the
wearying of your flesh, and neglecting your relations, in obedience to such
voices or sayings not warranted by Scripture, but contrary thereunto? yet in
many things of this kind, wherein some of you seem to glory, the Papists
themselves outstrip you, only, they are more modest than to go naked; And who
has required these things of any of you?

16 Whether Satan that old deceiver (who often changes his shapes, being
discovered in many of his old devices) may not now be expected to come in his
best dress, as an Angel of light? and being discovered in his old Antichristian
forms, and in rude ranting, now to come with power, and seeming purity, showing
signs and wonders, to seduce from the plain simplicity of the Gospel of Christ,
according to those descriptions of his coming, and working, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9.
Mark 13.22. 2 Cor. 11.3.14? And if so, ought not all men to take heed how they
believe every spirit, or powerful motion to be of God? as also, how they hear,
1 John 4.1.
and follow every Prophet that comes in sheeps clothing, and pretends to come
with light? And are not those in the way to be easily seduced, who are so taken
with the fair covering, and outside carriage of persons, as to embrace their
principles without a serious spiritual Scripture-trial of them? Whereas we are
commanded, If any man bring not this doctrine, receive him not, 2 Epist. Joh.
10. And Solomon says, The simple believes every word, but the prudent man
looks well to his goings, Prove. 14.15.

FINIS.
Reader,
By reason of the Authors absence at the entrance of this Book into the Press,
and notwithstanding all the care taken afterward, many faults have escaped,
some of the chief of which are here noted, the rest thou art desired to correct
with thy own pen.

Errata.
IN the Epistle to those in Babylon, blot out (And for) p. 1. l. 20. for also
r. so, p. 2. l. 9. blot out ye^, p. 4. l. 5. blot out ought, p. 5. l. 10. r.
Jer. 51. l. 13. r. Is. 59. p. 7. l. 4. leave out from many promises to
Believers. l. 9. r. since. l. 16. leave out that, p. 10. l. 10. for graces, r.
grace, p. 20. l. 24. for light, r. like.

In the Margent of page the 11. read Religious Scots.


