DIVINE ESSAYS OR CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT Several Things in Religion Of very deep
and weighty Concernment, both in reference to the state of the present Times,
as also of the Truth it self. WITH A Lamenting and Pleading Postscript. By
ISAAC PENINGTON (junior) Esquire.

The Darkness of Man (which his greatest Light is) cannot comprehend the Light
of God.

Be not hasty in thy heart, but read and consider: and the Lord give thee a
true eye, and open that eye for thee.

London, Printed by John Macock for Giles Calvert, at the sign of the black
spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1654.

The Contents.
1. OF Knowledge in general. Page 1. 2. Of Scripture-Knowledg. 5 3. Of Radical
or Original Knowledge. 9 4. Of t^^ Word, the Spirit, and Faith, under each
Administration, both that of the Law and that of the Gospel, with an hint of
their further tendency. 13 5. Some few Observations touching the Principles of
the Ranters. 18 6. Of the various false new Births, and the true one, which are
distinguished by their Root and Nature. 25 7. Of the true Nature and Virtue of
the Kingdom of God. 46 8. Of the Weakness, Uncertainty and Invalidity of the
Flesh, in reference to the things of God. 56 9. Of the Certainty of Christ in
his Knowledge concerning the things of God, and particularly of his
well-grounded Testimony concerning the Way to Life: and so consequently of the
Certainty of his Seed in their generation. 68 10. Of the Liberty of the
Kingdom, (or of the great, sweet, spiritual and most precious Liberty, which
springs up in and is allowed unto the Seed in the Kingdom.) 80 11. Of the low
Ebb whereunto Christ was brought by his Death and Sufferings. 99 12. Of the low
Estate whereunto the Seed of Christ are also reduced by their Death and
Sufferings. 108 13. The Course and End of Man. 115 14. The sweet and happy End
of the Righteous. 123 Lastly, A lamenting and pleading Postscript. 127
The Preface.
WOnderfully great and deep are the motions and steps of God in all his ways!
His bringing forth of the Creation and Man, his particular ordering of them,
his aim and end concerning them, who can truly fathom! He must be as wise as
the Lord himself, who fully understands him. But to let that pass as
unexpectable, Who can, after his own shallow manner, measure any of the ways or
works of God from the beginning to the end? How far is the foolish spirit of
man from any true knowledge of the Lord, and yet how bold is the spirit of man
in undertaking to know and determine the will and counsels of the Lord,
especially if he can find any thing revealed from the Lord for his own
understanding to bottom and work upon! How confident were the Jews in their
day, and how confident is every several sort of men in our day, Some in setting
up their own apprehensions from the Word as evident Truth which all are bound
to subscribe, Others in setting up their own mere imaginations above the light
of the Word, not at all regarding whether they agree with it or contradict it.

Man must run his course, It is now his time, let him make use of it. But yet
for all that, Man's vanity is never the better or safer for his rivetting it
into the Scriptures, Nor are the Scriptures ever the less honorable for his
undervaluing them, or ever the less true for his contradicting them: Nor is God
ever the less in himself, or man ever the greater in himself for his vilifying
of God and magnifying of himself that so he might become equal with him. The
greatest change in the imagination, produces not the least change in the
nature of things; but that proceeding from a deeper root, must fetch its rise
from a stronger influence.

I have brought forth somewhat here for the good of some unto whom I wish well,
which though it intend kindness, may for its reward meet with hardship: Both
the root and the fruit may suffer undeservedly on each hand. Those who are
wedded to that which they understand not, will not be able to receive it; and
those who are loose from all bonds, can hardly be drawn to believe any yoke so
easy or necessary, as to be willing to put their necks under it.

What shall I say? When shall the work of vain man come to an end! When shall
his spirit be truly broken! His breakings hitherto, tend but to fasten him
more, and make him take deeper root. O how mad is man grown now adays through
the depth of his wisdom! What a strange peace, security and liberty has he
found out for himself! He has built up such a wall of defense now, as there is
no battering of. But if his eye be sick, If the light in him be darkness, how
thick that darkness is, and whither it will lead him, that which is sound and
perfect can alone discern; but for his part, he is not capable of perceiving
any thing truly in his distemper. Yet this calamity is common in this empty
state of man, He that is most distempered is most prone to judge, even the
greatest things, with the greatest confidence. Whom shall we find more
confident then him, who is most deeply, grossly and palpably deceived in his
very groundwork?

I have not here ventured upon a ^ain or over difficult task in the nature of
things, but only in reference to the condition of persons, which being not
universal, it may somewhere prove serviceable and b^neficial, which will be
recompense sufficient to this undertaking, and satisfaction enough to my spirit
at present in this respect.

Divine Essays.
I. Of Knowledge in General.
THere are several kinds of Knowledge, which may be distinguished according to
the Nature of the things which are to be known, according to the diversity of
the subject which is capable of knowledge, and according to the various ways of
knowing or receiving in of knowledge.

There is a natural knowledge, there is a spiritual knowledge, and there is a
divine knowledge; as there are natural things and spiritual things and divine
things to be known.

There is a knowledge of sense (if that may deserve the name of knowledge) in
common creatures, a knowledge of reason in the natural man, a knowledge of the
spirit in the spiritual man (for in the renewed man there is a renewed spirit,
which has a knowledge suitable to it self.) and a knowledge of God in the
Godhead: God having a knowledge in himself as well as a life, love, wisdom,
power, suitable to himself.

Again, there is a speculative knowledge, and an Experimental knowledge: a
knowledge by understanding, and a knowledge by experience: a knowledge by viewing
the thing, and a knowledge by trying the thing. This experimental knowledge is
the better kind of knowledge in this uncertain state wherein we are, but the
other is the better in its own nature. It is better by virtue of a clear
understanding to search into the nature of things, then to seek out an
experiment of them from sense, what can the judgment of sense add to the
understanding? or what a poor understanding is that which needs to be helped
by the judgment of sense? He who truly knows (who truly comprehends in his
understanding) needs not to experiment: He who goes about to experiment,
discovers the insufficiency of his understanding.

Now there is a double way of knowing in every kind, a double way of receiving
in all sorts of knowledge either of speculation or experience. The one is by
ascending, The other is by descending. There is arising up into the knowledge of
things, and there is a going down into the knowledge of things, according to the
state and degree of the person which seeks gains or exercises knowledge.

There is a knowing of God, Christ, and all spiritual things by natural things,
and there is a knowing of natural things by spiritual things. There is a
learning of God out of the Creatures and scriptures, and there is a learning of
the Creatures and scriptures out of God. There is a seeing and discovering of
God in the Creatures, a knowing of him as he appears there, as our eye can
discern him there, as our heart by experimenting can search him out there.
There is also a seeing and discovering of the Creature in God; its original,
its rise, its progress, its present station, motion, end, is there to be
discerned.

This is the excellent kind of knowledge indeed. This is true knowledge, This is
full knowledge, This is certain knowledge, This is perfect knowledge, This is
satisfactory knowledge. The other is weak, dark, deceitful etc. and yet that is
our only way of knowledge at this present: We have ladders let down to us to
ascend up into the Mount by, And so high as we get upon the rundles of those
ladders, so far we see into things in the Mount, into things that are above
both inrespect of there nature and situation: but we cannot get into the Mount
to look perfectly upon things there, or to look down from thence upon things
here below: and therefore we do but slightly, not thoroughly, know either the
one or the other.

Speculative knowledge is not to be wholly condemned, it having a necessary use
in this our present state, (for we have need of more knowledge in every kind
then we can possibly experiment) besides its nature which far exceleth the
other. There is an head in man, There is an eye in his understanding, which is
made to be espying out the nature of things. Yet speculative knowledge alone
without practice, without trial, without experience, is not altogether so safe
in this state of man: His eye being weak needs this further help, or he may
easily be deceived. His head and his heart must go together, yea and both must
be rightly guided, or he will be apt to mistake and miscary in every thing.

Miserable is the condition of man without knowledge, without that particular
knowledge which his estate and relation calls for. The wise man has his eyes
in his head, but the fool walks in darkness. The motions of the wise man are
understanding and orderly, in his own dispensation; He knows where he is, what
he does, whether his motions tend: but the fool runs on, either howling or
dancing, in the path of misery. The wise man has government of himself, and
gains by every thing: He gains instructions out of his losses, and makes use
of his oppertunities and advantages: He saileth on apace with a fair wind, and
makes the best of a contrary wind: But the fool knows neither how to bear a
cross, no nor yet to make use of a fair advantage. The wise man in every estate
condition and degree, is a kind of God for the fool to honor worship and
serve: And it is his greatest happiness so to do; for that is the only means to
preserve him from the undoing of himself, which his own folly leads him unto.
There is no valuing of knowledge in any kind, its price is so great.

And yet, in some sense, ignorance is better then knowledge. Man has still
eaten too much of the tree of knowledge, and he must vomit up all this fruit
again. It is good for man to have seasons of vanity pass over him. It is better
to be filled with wind, then to be quite empty: and yet again, It is better to
be emptied of that wind, then to remain full of it. Plainly thus, It is better
in reference to this present estate of man, to be full of knowledge or to be
filing with knowledge then to be empty or to be emptying: A state of utter
darkness, (to be without the light of God, without the light of the Creature;
without the light of reason, without the light of Religion) is extremely
tirrible to man: But yet in reference to a future estate, it is better to be
empty or to be emptying (to be casting into darkness or to be lying in
darkness) then to be full. That misery, seeming misery (in a sense true misery)
which leads to true happine^s, is a far better condition then that happiness,
seeming happiness (in a sense true happiness) which leads to true misery.

II. Of Scripture-Knowledge.
The Scriptures treat of two principles, and seeds from them, whose nature,
growth, course, and end is the sum of Scripture knowledge. But what was before
these, what shall be after these, nor what these themselves are in their root,
the Scripture undertaketh not to declare.

The roots or principles which the Scripture mentions, are God and the Devil.
God who is light and truth, and from and in whom is light and truth; and the
Devil who is darkness and a lie and from and in whom is darkness and a lie: He
is the father of it. A lie has its original from the Devil as its principal,
as truth has from God. From the one proceeds all that is good, from the
other all that is evil.

The seeds are the natures and virtues of each of these roots, which they sow
in one and the same subject, in in one and the same Earth, in one and the same
Adam. First God brings forth his Image, his light in him; then the Divil
draws his Image, his darkness over him.

And thus as it was at the first, so has it been in all dispensations since:
First God brings forth his light, and then the Divil draws his cloud over
it, wrapping it up in darkness. Thus every dispensation of light, either to the
natural seed or to the spiritual seed, which as yet has been brought forth,
has been overtaken and overcom by darkness.

Darkness brought forth light, or rather darkness was the womb out of which
light sprang and was brought forth: Light being brought forth excludes
darkness: Darkness, being excluded, grows angry and overcomes light: Light,
being overcome, becomes friends again with darkness. But where, what is that
light; where, what is that darkness, which cannot differ between themselves,
nor be overcom by each other*

The estate and condition of these two seeds, is all along Hierogliphically
expressed in Scripture, as in Cain and Abel, Isaac and Ishmael, Esai^ and
Jacob, the Jews and Gentiles, the Gentiles again a spiritual seed and the Jews
or natural seed: for none of these were the truth it self, but several shadows
and representations of it, under which the truth lay, and through which it did
sometimes a little start up and peep forth. Adam was not the humanity but an
Hierogliphick of it, his body was not the body nor his Spirit the Spirit, but
an Hierogliphick of each: and the poor weak shadow in coming forth is lost, but
the substance, being safe, recovereth its shadow again.

The great Lord has his stay, and his Comedies and Tragedies, with there
several Acts and Scenes. He brings forth his great principle of good and his
great principle of evil; and these have Powers and opperations and circuits
suitable to themselves, and suitable to him whose they are, and they act their
part in all their limits upon this stay. Now of this the Scriptures treat,
bringing forth first God, the principle of light, with his Creation, then
Satan, the principle of darkness with his destruction, and so the seed of both
and the contest of both to the end, with the several salvations and
destructions appertaining to each.

Now mark, God has two seeds, the natural the spiritual, the outward the
inward, the humanity the divinity. Both these were sown in Adam, Both these
were covered with darkness, Both these are recovered and restored by that which
is the substance of each, neither whereof was in Adam but only the Image, and
that a natural one too, for the spiritual was reserved for Christ in whom the
substance was to dwell. He was an heavenly man in his make and production, as
an Adam was an earthly.

This was again written over in Abraham, through whom God produces and
embraces both the seeds, both the natural and the spiritual, yet suffers
them both to go into their proper Egypts, to go into Captivity, to be slaves,
to be in bondage in the land of darkness, and thence again he redeemeth them by
his own outstretched Arm, by the substance of his own life and Power: out of
Egypt have I called my Son.

Answerably the Devil has two seeds (he has a spiritual and a fleshly seed,
as well as a spiritual and fleshly wickedness) which he has sown every where
throughout the whole Creation; and it is the meeting of these with the seeds of
God which makes such Earthquakes (their very natures opposing, clashing and
fighting like fire and water) and there will never be any quietness till both
be taken into their places.

These seeds, I mean each of darkness and each of light, (for there is the
outward and inward seed of both) are the one of them the wicked, the ungodly,
the sinners, the children of darkness, whose principle is darkness, whose
estate is darkness, whose course is darkness, and whose end is death and
destruction. And the other are holy, righteous, the children of light, whose
principle, estate, course, and end, is life and salvation. And this is it which
was pointed at in all the shadows which were chosen to signify it in the
Scriptures.

The different constitution and condition of these seeds is such, that the one
thriveth and flourishes in his sin and wickedness, the other faints and
almost perishes in his righteousness, only he has somewhat in hopes, somewhat
to hope for in the end (which to the other is dismal) Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright, the end of that man is peace.

There is one thing further which would be well observed, or it may occasion
great mistakes, which is this; God though he be light, yet he has his proper
darkness wherewith he covers himself ( he clouds himself with thick darkness)
and so he does also his seed: And the Devil though he be the principle of
darkness, yet he has also his light wherewith he clothes himself and his
offspring. But this darkness of God and his seed is light in the root, and the
light of the Divil and his offspring is darkness in the root.

There is a mighty mystery in this, in Gods excercising each of his seeds
toward salvation under that which cannot save them, and yet both think they
are in the direct and certain path of salvation under each. Thus did the Jews
or natural seed in their day, and thus did the Gentiles or spiritual seed in
their day. But the Lord breaks each of these ways of administration, and
brings about his salvation unto each in a way that they are not aware of.

The seed (whether or natural or spiritual) may be dashed and broken, in all
the paths of every administration wherein the spirit of man may be broken, and
yet come safe to harbor at last: for the life, which is in the seed or root, in
respect of all its shootings up through the natural spirit, and all the motions
opperations and several sorts of fruit which it bears there (whereby it
shines so gloriously in the view of man) may retire or be driven back into the
seed or root; yet, remaining there, it is safe in respect of the substance of
the promise, though it should lie equally open to the same loss with the spirit
of man, in all dispensations which depend upon the motions and exercise of
life. That promise which depends upon the nature of the thing, cannot be lost
where the nature remains: but all those promises which depend upon the
qualifications motions or opperations of the thing, must needs fail where those
qualifications, motions and operations cease. Thus there is none at a greater
loss then the seed, for there is none besides them have that to lose (None,
besides themselves, have that true life, that true sweetness and communion with
God to lose which they have) and yet none in their loss are in so great safety
and at so great certainty: for that which they lose (being substantial) is not
perfectly lost, but retired, shrunk back into its root, where it cannot but
strengthen it self, and so spring up again with advantage.

Now what children are we in understanding, all our knowledge being but about a
dispensation, nay but about the shadow of a dispensation; and yet how short are
we in that, how little of truth do we know there!

III. Of Radical or Original Knowledge.
THe Root, Spring, or Original of all things is perfect unity, and being
perfect unity is also perfect variety, comprehending all things in it self in
entire oneness, how vastly different or contrary soever they appear, when they
come forth out of it.

All the varieties and contrarieties in this world, came out of one common
mass: All the differences and distinctions of Nature, out of one common nature.
He who could look upon them there, how closely knit in oneness would he find
them, notwithstanding their great diversities and antipathies here? but if any
could look into the root, how much more one should he find them there!

In this root there are too other roots (as I may so say) two principles, two
seeds, two fountains of things, perfectly one there (yet even there, being and
having that which is the cause of all their distance and difference elsewhere)
and yet perfectly different, nay contrary in their springing forth, and in
their whole course from thence. The one is of life, the other of death; the one
of good, the other of evil; the one of darkness, the other of light; the one of
sweetness, the other of bitterness; so that from one spring come those two
Fountains, from the one whereof issue the fresh clear sweet living waters, from
the other the putrified muddy bitter dead waters.

The head of the one of these is called God, in which springs up life, the
power of life, the virtue of Creation, Preservation, Redemption, Restoration,
Salvation, etc. The head of the other is called Satan, because of its enmity to
this in its nature, productions and operations, it striving to swallow up and
destroy all the light, all the good, all the sweetness, all the happiness which
the other brings forth. Now both these as they have their rise, so they have
their strength from the root, from which if they were not continually fed, they
could not continue their virtues, or go through their operations: The power of
life failing in the one, and the power of death in the other, they would soon
grow weak.

Of such sprouting forth of different and contrary things from one and the same
root, we see emblems every where daily. How many contrary designs and parts do
flow from one and the same principle of wisdom in man, which are very evident
when he gives them a visible being and bringing forth in a Comedy or Tragedy.

This name God, Jehovah which gave being, Iah the preserver of breath, Adonai
the stay or pillar of all things, Zur the rock, and so all the other names of
God, are relative, referring to the Creature, or opening somewhat of him which
refers to the Creature, and is convenient and necessary for it, in its present
station and condition. They are not any of them proper, to the root and spring
of all things, originally; but only in reference to other things (for not that
knowledge which is most naked and natural, but that which is most useful to this
present state is alone dispensed) yet by this name GOD, the Scripture does not
only point at this springing head of Power, but at the root it self.

Now as God is a distinct root from Satan, so there is in him life, and no
death; light, and no darkness; truth, and no lie; good, and no evil: And such
are all his productions, effects and operations, such is all the seed which he
sows; and all the death and darkness which springs up in any, is from the
contrary power; it is from the enemies seed, and of the enemies sowing. So that
take God thus, there is no darkness, nothing but light in him; no hatred,
nothing but love in him, God is love. But now understand under this word God
the inmost, the utmost, the universal Root, the root of all roots, natures and
principles, not as distinct from any thing, but as comprehending every thing;
and then it includes death as much as life, darkness as much as light, etc. and
excludes light as much as darkness, life as much as death: Indeed there is
neither here (but both as much as one;) No light, No darkness; No life, no
death; No good, no evil; No love, no hatred, but only one thing which cannot be
named, which comprehends all these perfectly, and where they all are in such
a way as is suitable to the root, but not at all as they appear here.

But of what use is this knowledge now, or what certainty is there in it as yet?
It is of too deep a nature for our present constitution. We may make our selves
drunk with it, and thereby unfit for our present station, but we cannot soberly
comprehend and manage it. Such as think to digest it, and thereby to advance
themselves above the nature and state, not only of men, but of the highest
Christians, are they not in stead thereof thereby humbled, not only beneath
Christianity, but beneath manhood too? For my part I profess I would not
(though I fairly might) aspire beyond my present state: That knowledge which I
allow in my desires, is that alone which is proper for me where I am. If I were
a brute I would not torment and break that my portion of Being in pieces, by
aspiring after the knowledge of a man. Nor as I am, do I desire to make my self
miserable, by grasping at that which I cannot measure. Had I but a sufficient
light and guidance, in the path wherein I am set, it would be enough for me at
present, and I could pass on very comfortably with it.

Yet let me not injure these things, since they have been so freindly to me,
which I would not willingly do, though they had been mine enemies. I perceive
they did spring up in my spirit (with that kind of demonstration which they
brought along with them) as a necessary guard in some cases (and so they have
been of some kind of use to me, and may to others) more then to satisfy any
desire I had after them, or any delight I could take in them.

I shall conclude this, thus. This world is a Stage, where several things come
forth, appear, and act their parts. Thus we see them. But we see not what they
were before they were formed for this present act on this present stage, nor
what they now are in their principle. Therefore all our knowledge and experience
is vanity. Happy is he who can make the best of this present state of things
(since there is no possibility of proceeding further) without turmoiling
himself to form it into what it cannot be, or to discover that of it which was
never intended for, nor can be exposed to his eye.

IV. Of the Word, the Spirit and Faith under each Administration, both that of
the Law, and that of the Gospel, with an hint at their further tendency.
1. Of the Word.
IN the Word there are two things, the letter and the spirit, (besides a third
thing hidden, which is the root and substance of both.) The letter is the
outward part, the outward description of Truth, the shadow or shell which
points out and contains the spirit or kernel. The spirit is the inward part,
the truth it self, the substance of the shadow, the kernel within the shell.

This appears in each Dispensation, both of Law and Gospel; There was letter
and spirit in each: spirit in the Law, letter in the Gospel. The Gospel was
couched under the Law, and the Law is hid within the Gospel. So that as from
under the Law-dispensation the Gospel breaks forth and swalloweth up the Law,
so under the Gospel Dispensation the Law breaks out and becomes a vail over
the Gospel.

But here now is the difference between Law and Gospel; Though there was letter
and spirit in both, yet the letter was chiefly dispensed under the one, and the
spirit under the other. The letter was appointed for the litteral people, and
the spirit for the spiritual, and so they are managed. The litteral people
receive their impression from the letter of the Word, are brought forth by the
letter, and fed and maintained by the letter: and the spiritual people receive
their impression from the spirit of the Word, are brought forth by the spirit,
and fed and maintained by the spirit. So long as the letter of the Word lived
in the fleshly people, the fleshly people lived: so long as the spirit of the
Word lives in the spiritual people, the spiritual people live: (for these can
live no more then the former, any longer then they are fed from the root, This
dispensation and people may dye as well as the other.) Hence that ministration
is called the ministration of the letter, this of the spirit.

So that mark now, There is letter and spirit, life and death, justification
and condemnation in the Word, both in the Copy and in the Original: in Christ
which is the Word of God, and in the Scriptures which are the words of Christ:
in the heart of Christ, which is Gods Book where he has writ his Word; and in
the heart of man, which is Christ's Book where he has writ his Word. And both
these dispensations are equally from God and from Christ from first to last,
both in their causes and in their effects.

2. Of the Spirit.
The Spirit is that Substance which comprehends the Word, and is comprehended
in the Word. It is the Lord and Servant of Christ, who is the Word of God. It
is that which lives, dwells and reigns both in the flesh and spirit of Christ,
and in which they likewise reign. It is the liquor in Christ, which Christ as a
Vessel contains, and also the Vessel which contains Christ. It is both the
root and the fruit: The root from whence Christ grows, and the fruit which
Christ bears both in his life and death, from whence they both sprang, and
wherein they both meet.

The ministration of this is not yet made manifest. It was only pointed at in
the ministration of the Gospel, which did shadow out it, as the Law did shadow
out that ministration: or if you will, both the Law and the Gospel did shadow
this out in different respects and degrees, the one more grossly, the other more
refinedly; the one more darkly and remotely, the other more nearly and clearly.
The Law stood aloof at a great distance from it, yet spoke of it, and referred
unto it; the Gospel did as it were touch it, speaking the very name and
manifesting the very nature of it: Yet the very ministration of the Spirit in
that dispensation of the Gospel, if it be well looked into, will appear rather
a shadow then the thing it self, and every way more like a shadow then like the
thing it self.

Now who knows whether those things, which have been so contrary in all
dispensations hitherto, shall not here meet? Life and Death, Heaven and Hell,
which every where else are at such a distance, may here touch one another, and
agree very sweetly together, even so fully, that both those names and natures
whereby they did appear and were so various in all dispensations, may here be
drowned and vanish. Yet it is not by eithers real loss of any thing, whereby
and wherein they differed, that they become thus harmoniously united, but by
both their entering into a more perfect fullness. And he to whom this seems so
strange, and who is so much offended at it, let him fairly answer me this
following question.

Were not Hell and Heaven at union in their root before they were brought
forth? Were they not at rest and peace in the Power and Nature of God from
whence they were produced? Without controversy, what ever lay there, lay in
rest, and whatsoever is brought back thither, returns to rest. Now did the
Lord bring forth any thing which he cannot bring back again, and who can say he
will not? Surely every thing most naturally breaths after that condition of
rest and fullness which it can alone enjoy in his bosom. Most certain it is,
that the vast Spirit of the Lord takes in all things, howsoever it dispose of
them. Thence they came, thither they return, there they are, and doubtless
there they may be found in union and agreement, by him whose Spirit is quick
and piercing enough.

Happy is he who can read this truth in the Spirit of the Lord, but wretchedly
miserable is he who frames false imaginations in his own mind, by the vanity
of his own reason concerning it.

3. Of Faith.
Faith is a shadowy or substantial life, flowing from the Spirit, through the
Word, into the seed, seeking after, fastening upon and resting in the Spirit.
This is Faith.

First I say it is Life, It is a touch of life, it is a spring of life, it is
the choice of life which God brings forth, in his own, in his own seasons. We
may mistake in ascribing names to other things, whose nature and principle we
know not; but this we are taught by God, who knows things very well, to name
Faith. The life of the Law was obedience, a spirit of obedience, by this a man
was enabled to live in and according to the Law: but this life is faith, a
spirit of faith; He who believes is only able to enter into this life, and to
walk in it.

I call it shadowy or substantial, because it is either as it is looked upon.
Look upon it backward, and it is substantial; Look upon it forward, and it is
but shadowy. As the ministration of the Gospel was a ministration of the spirit
of that which was in the Law, so the life ministered under the Gospel is a
substantial life in compare with that: But look forward into the substance of
that which is yet behind, and here faith it self is but a shadow, This life
also is but a shadow. Alas, the life of Faith must vanish! Notwithstanding all
its glory, it must dye and lie in its grave like the Law.

Flowing from the Spirit, through the Word, into the seed.

The seed is the vessel, the only vessel, which contains this life. It is not
man that this life is sown in, but the seed, and the seed is sown in man.
Immortal life, eternal life is wrapped up in immortal seed, in eternal seed
(that is the immediate vessel,) and this is sown in the mortal spirit of man,
which by putting on mortality there, it changes into its own nature. Hence
they in whom the seed is sown, and who are changed by it, are called by that
name, they are called the seed.

This life flows from the Spirit into this seed. The Spirit which forms
this seed, breaths into it this breath of life. This seed is the spirits own
vessel, and this life is his own liquor wherewith he fills it. The Spirit
lies in the vessel, and is continually breathing in it, and that is the life
of it.

And it flows through the word. The seed is formed by the Word, it is
adminstred by the ministry of the Word. The Spirit begeteth by the Word, and
the Spirit breaths life through the Word into that which he has begotten,
even that life which is needful for it in any dispensation into which the
Spirit guides it. Wonderful true, most true is that assertion, that there is
no salvation but by the ministry of the Word. There is no salvation either in
the shadow or in the substance any otherwise. All the life and salvation of God
is conveyed to the Word Christ, and all the several dispensations of life and
salvation, in their several circuits, run from Christ through and by all the
several ministrations of his Word or Words in their several kinds.

Seeking after, fastening upon, and resting in the Spirit.

This is the nature of faith, it breaths in and from, and after the spirit. The
spirit breaths in it, it breaths from the spirit, it breaths after the spirit
and it finds rest in fetching full soops of breath in the spirit.

It seeks. So soon as ever it is born it finds it self weak, it finds it self a
babe, a child, and it breaths after its father, after union with its father,
after the help strength and care of its father, after food and all manner of
provision which it needs, from its father. There is no life of a more perfect
kind, and yet no life more indigent when it is first brought for^^ or more
dependent all along: and it has a wonderful strong sense of this, which
causes it to breath mightily unto its root for sap, supply and succor.

Nor does it only seek, but so fast as it finds, it fastens upon him. It most
naturally knows him, and where ever it meets with him, it clingeth
presently to him. What ever it finds of God it gathers in, where ever it finds
God it winds it self into him. This is the whole work of faith, to wind God
into it, and to wind it self into God: to receive in the dropings of God, and
to melt it self and drop into God.

And so far as it finds and fastens, it has rest. It is restless in respect of
what it has not found, in respect of what it is not yet one with; but so far
as it is rouled into and has received in the center, so far as it is sucked
into and has sucked in the root, it finds great quiet content and
satisfaction.

V. Some few Observations touching the Principles of the Ranters.
AS I have applied my self in general to weigh and understand all things
relating unto Religion, so more particularly the nature, rise, strain, and
course of these principles; both because they proceeded from persons formerly
of eminent profession, and not barely from them, but from them in a broken
estate, both which circumstances may challenge from every serious Spirit a more
selemn consideration. Now these four things I have took notice of in them from
the beginning.

1. Their want of a bottom: These principles want a foundation of truth in the
understandings of these persons, insomuch that though the things themselves
might possibly be true, yet they cannot be true as they are apprehended or held
forth by them. As for instance, Suppose that this be truth, That Light and
Darkness, Good and Evil, are all one. Now though they in speaking this may
utter a speech which may be truth, yet the manner of their speaking and
practicing of it, does manifest that they do not understand this truth; but as
it is in them, as it is held forth and made use of by them, it is a lie.

For if they saw the true unity of light and darkness in the root, they would
also see its difference: for true unity does not confound, but comprehend
distinction; It is not an enemy unto, but the spring of all variety and
contrariety, from whence they came, and where alone they appear in their
substantial fullness. Yea they would not only acknowledge that distinction, but
they would also know and observe the distinction which wisdom has set up here
between them in his bringing of them forth: If they had the true light in them,
they would know that it were proper and good for them in this present state, to
choose the good, and refuse the evil: That every created eye has need of some
created light to see by; And while they are in this present way of appearance,
they would suit themselves unto it. But alas, their practice in these
particulars does too plainly evidence that they have only got some words (some
notions or apprehensions) by the end without a true understanding of them.

This eye of our reason, This eye of our mind can never see things of this
nature. He who has another eye, an eye full enough, large enough, and fully
opened, he may well venture to view these things: but this present eye should
only be employed about such objects as it is fitted to see. Reason was
appointed to see and distinguish the things of man, or such common things of
God as he thinks fit to propose to it; but not to pierce into the secrets of
his Nature and Essence: This God has shut up from man, and his eye cannot
search it out. Man with his eye of reason cannot possibly search out what God
has hidden from him, (He that made the eye, cannot he hide from the eye?) it
is well if he can receive and make use of what God reveals to him. Be wise
unto sobriety, was an injunction laid upon them who had the advantage of a
greater light to search into the secrets of God by.

Only one word more concerning this. God has separated the light from the
darkness, and what God has parted let no man join, indeed no man can. Man may
unite them in his fond fancy, but that will vanish, and man will not be able to
make it good: but God will be able to make good that foundation of difference,
and that difference thereupon which he has put between them, which is so firm
and strong that they cannot meet together, unite together or communicate
together within those bounds, What communion has light with darkness?

2. Their contrariness to the excellency of nature, either common or renewed.
These principles (with the practices which arise from them) are not only
contrary to the life and purity of Christ, but also to all that is lovely in
the common nature of man: for they do not leave a man fairly open free and
unbiassed toward all things, as they seem to import, but they fast bind up all
the influences even of common sweetness goodness and righteousness, and also
open the floodgates of all manner of unrighteousness, and wickedness. I profess
seriously, If I knew this most infallibly, that all things were alike, even in
that very sense which is by some apprehended, yet if I found such a nature in
me as to be and do according to the tenor hereof, I could not but loath my
self and pant after deliverance from such a kind of being.

There are two things excellent in the nature of man in this his present state.
The one is, to know that which is above him, To acknowledge his Lord and fear
him: The other is to walk righteously, lovingly, and sweetly toward his fellow
creatures. This was writ in the heart of man naturally, It was writ over again
in that dispensation to the Jews, and yet again by Christ. We feel we are men
and not God, flesh and not Spirit, and we are to reverence that which is above
us, that which we our selves are not, but live from, and yet further want the
supply of: yea although we lose the sense of this, yet that does not take away
that obligation which arises not from our sense, but from our nature and
state. We also know that we should deal justly, mercifully, sweetly and
tenderly with our fellow creatures. Let us say and think what we please, yet we
would be dealt so with our selves, and do not esteem the contrary equal with
it. Alas how do we delude our selves by cherishing principles in our minds
which the very secrets of our hearts, judgments and consciences cannot but
disown! And are they so lovely as they are accounted? Can those principles be
very good which shut up or banish, not only a new but the old common excellency
of Nature, and open and let loose all the filth and abomination of it? Surely
man is forward enough of himself to evil and unrighteousness, as also backward
enough to that which is good and just, he need not thus egg himself on to the
one, and exclude himself from the other, by poisoning his judgment (already too
much corrupt) with such corrupting principles.

3. Their destructiveness to the present state of mankind. They overthrow the
foundation of all sweetness, security or comfortable converse. This necessarily
arises from the former, for in that they strip a man of all those seeds of
ingenuity and civil honesty which are yet left remaining in his nature, or any
way repaired by outward art, or any inclination to or power of religion, and
introduce in their stead seeds of all manner of corruption, they make him fit
only for perverseness and mischief incurable and unavoydable. As for instance,
He whose very principles allow him to, and justify him in lying as well as
speaking truth, defrauding as well as dealing uprightly, He that can without
any scruple rob me of my name, estate, wife, etc. believing in his very soul,
and conscience that he does therein as well as if he did the contrary, or did
forbear so to do, which way can I converse with him, or secure my self from
him? This world is bad enough as it is, but certainly did but these principles
overspread it, it would be far worse. It would be a very Hell in respect of
what it now is. It would be such a seat of confusion, oppression, and misery,
as would make them themselves (from whom these principles sprang, and in whom
they do most fully reign) perfectly weary of it. (For such miserable principles
are they, that they can only harm them in whom they take place, and others
through them, but can in no wise secure, no not so much as them themselves who
prostitute all their honor and excellency to entertain them.)

This is most certain, There is no truth nor righteousness upon the face of
this Earth. Man is so selfish, blind and corrupt in his very root (which all
the art of common Nature or Religion can neither rectify nor sway down) that
he cannot be true or just either to his neighbor or himself. But though there
is no truth of righteousness, yet there is a shadow of righteousness, whereby
the present state of things subsists, from whence that peace, sweetness,
safety, and enjoyment which man has, flows. Now to break down this shadow,
by the substance of that truth which man wants, would be excellent service: but
to beat it down by a lie, by confusion, by darkness, to thrust out this seeming
righteousness by real filthiness and abomination, this would both bring
desolation upon the present seeming happiness of man, and plunge him into a far
deeper misery then that wherein he yet is. He that will ascend, let him first
descend; He that will through down righteousness, let him first pursue, attain
and bring righteousness. He that has and can at pleasure fulfill the Law, may
challenge some liberty in undervaluing it; but it very ill beseems him to
make light of it, who is yet in the strength and power of his nature and
condition far beneath it.

4. Their dangerousness in case of mistake. Man is in a weak state, comes
forth with a weak eye, and has but a weak sight and judgment of things. How
many sorts of men do, some or other of them every day, discover themselves
deceived in their apprehensions, deceived in their principles, deceived in
their practices? Thou who art of this judgment, how many do thou apprehend
deceived? how often have thou thy self been deceived before thou arivedst here?
Now suppose thou also should be deceived as well as others, and here again as
well as formerly in other things, and that there should at last prove both good
and evil, Light and Darkness, Hell and Heaven, the children of Light, and the
children of Darkness, etc. what a condition were thou in? Thou may say
rashly, Thou must take it as it falls, but are thou sure that understandingly
thou can be content to do so? Alas, the Lord with his engines of misery will
be too hard for thee! Thou also wilt be made (with all sinners) to repent the
stopping thy ears at the voice of Wisdom, and harkening to the enchantments of
thine own seducing spirit, which has led thee like a fool to the correction of
the stocks, for alas thou knew not that it was for thy life!

The testimonies which Christ gave concerning these things were not light, nor
upon light terms. He dealt fairly and ^lainly, speaking what he knew, whose
knowledge was neither small nor uncertain: and will thou undertake, upon a
strong apprehension of reason, to overthrow that divine light which shone in
him?

The danger of these persons must needs be great: for they do not only practice
all manner of things which God, Christ and Nature condemns, but they do it as
good, and they teach others to do so. They call (and that with a loud voice, in
the sight of the Sun) evil good, and good evil, darkness light, and light
darkness, confounding them together and equalizing them both, laughing out of
countenance all the wisdom of God in all his dispensations, who has
professedly put a difference between them.

Now if these men be in the right, they will have no great advantage, for
others will be as safe as they: but doubtless, if they be in the wrong their
danger cannot but be exceeding great.

God has baffled the reason of man in all its undertakings, yea and he
delights to make the wisdom of it appear folly. All the Imaginations of man
hitherto have fallen, and can these stand? My Soul in the inmost judgment of
it, upon the deepest observation, search, trial, sense and experience, says;
they cannot, but that there must needs be a future estate of things wherein all
shall be set to rights, wherein righteousness which has here been always
oppressed, shall be rewarded, and iniquity which has as yet flourished shall
pine in pain and misery: as also, That the present life and happyness of man
consists in union, and communion with light, in the several kinds and degrees
of it, proportionable to his estate, and in a separation from darkness in the
several kinds and degrees of it.

My advice therefore to all persons (for their own good and safety) is, not to
run away with notions and apprehensions of things, but first to measure them:
And he that is not able to measure them, let him not receive them; but let a
man only receive what he is able to measure. What the eye of the senses can
truly judge of, they may acknowledge; and thus may the eye of reason do also: and
as for the eye of the spirit, though it be cleerer and stronger then either of
the other, yet it is not safe for it to proceed further then so: It will be as
dangerous for it to receive beyond what it can understandingly judge, as it is
for the eye either of sense or reason. Now tell me, He that in sensible things
shall conclude all one, and not understanding himself shall venture to eat or
drink poison in stead of good, and proper nourishment; or He that in things of
reason shall do the like in their kind, what palpable and irrecoverable dangers
does he incur hereby? Nor is the hazard or damage less in things of a spiritual
nature and concernment. Let him therefore that is in this present state of
weakness, in danger of miscariage in his apprehensions and motions, and liable
to misery thereby, (I say in pity, love, and tenderness to him) Let him take
heed, and not make his eye useless by entertaining such a beam as will exclude,
or such a mote as will interrupt the truth and cleerness of his sight.

VI. Of the Various false New-births and the true one, which are distinguished
by their root and nature.
JOHN 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of
the Spirit, is Spirit.


THere are two ways of distinguishing the things of God; The one by the root
from which they spring, The other is by the nature which they receive into
themselves from their root. All the Religion of man, all the life that man is
capable of, comes from a fleshly root: and when it is sprung in him, it is
still but fleshly in it self or in its own nature. The truth of God, the true
nature of God springs only from the spirit of the Lord, and remains spirit
wheresoever it springs, transforming and making that also spiritual which is
truly united to it. More fully thus;

There are two seeds which spring up in this world, The natural and the
spiritual, the earthly and the heavenly, the seed of this outward world or
nature, which seed is Adam, the seed of another world, of a more inward world
or nature, which seed is Christ. Proportionably, there are two Mothers, Wombs,
or Roots, in whom these seeds are begotten, wherein these seeds are conceived,
and from which they spring, which are Hagar and Sarah, the Jerusalem below and
the Jerusalem above, Nature, and Grace, or the spirit of this world, and the
Spirit which is of God. In these the seeds are hid, and out of these they
arise; the one from the one, the other from the other. The fleshly seed comes
from the fleshly mother, out of the fleshly womb, from the root of flesh: The
spiritual seed comes from the womb, and out of the root of the spirit. Nor do
they only proceed from the root, but they also partake of the nature of the
root, each do of that root from which they spring: so that that which springs
from the Earth, from the flesh, from the root of this common nature, is of the
Earth, is of the flesh, is of this common nature; and that which springs from
the root of the Spirit of God, is spirit with that spirit. Yet more largely;

Every thing is and acts according to its root. The whole nature, course and
end of every thing is answerable to the nature of its root. According as the
root is from which the seed of the tree springs (for the tree grows up from a
seed, and that seed comes from a root) such is the nature of the tree, such is
the estate and condition of the tree, such is the fruit of the tree, and such
will be the end of the tree. This is a general truth, but particularly in this
place applied to Religion, All things in Religion are according to the root
from which they spring, All things in Religion may grow upon any tre^ (whether
natural, artificial or spiritual) but that which distinguishes them in their
root. Now there are two great roots (as there are two great conditions, two
great courses, two kinds of fruit, and two great ends of things, so there are
two great Originals of things,) Nature and Grace, Flesh and Spirit, God and
Man: There is the earthly and the heavenly root, the sinful and the holy root,
the humane and the divine root. These roots as they are in us have each of them
their own rise, their own nature, their own properties, their own fruit, their
own course, their own end. The fleshly root in us has a fleshly rise, a
fleshly nature, fleshly properties, is in a fleshly estate and condition, runs
a fleshly course, brings forth fleshly fruit, and tends to a fleshly end, viz.
to corruption: The spiritual root in us has a spiritual rise, a spiritual
nature, spiritual properties, is in a spiritual estate and condition, brings
forth spiritual fruit, and tends to a spiritual end; He that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. This is that which puts the great
difference between things, making the one happy in their misery, and the other
miserable in their happiness, namely the difference of their roots: The high,
the flourishing estate of some, in all manner of knowledge, in all manner of
enjoyments comes to nothing; the low, barren, desolate estate of others is very
precious, because of their different roots: Babel is unlovely in her greatest
luster and glory, even when she is built very high, and adorned with the
greatest spiritual riches, magnificence and beauty; but Sion is lovely in her
greatest ruins and desolations, even in her very dust, and all upon this
ground, because of their several natures which they have from and which are fed
by their several roots in all their changes: It is the root of the flesh from
which Babel springs, and by which she is exalted and adorned in her greatest
seemingly spiritual glory; it is the root of the spirit which begets, brings
forth, and feeds Sion even in her lowest ebb and diminution. So that mark now,
you shall find the same things in both: All that you can find in Sion you may
find in Babylon; there is not any knowledge, there is not any practice which
the spirit of man cannot take up, nay and perhaps go through with better then
the seed; but yet there is a vast difference, they are still of a different
nature, which difference flows from the difference of the root. Therefore if
a man will indeed know his estate and condition, it is not to be done so much
by considering of any thing that is in him, or of any thing that flows from
him barely in it self, as to search out thereby and therein the root from which
it proceeds. Not so much to conclude, I am safe because I repent or believe,
but to find out the true root from whence these flow, and to seek for the true
nature in the things themselves.

To make this to be more manifest, I shall instance in some things of the
greatest consequence, and show that the distinction among them does arise from
the nature of their root, as particularly in these, 1. In Regeneration, 2. In
Knowledge, 3. In Repentance, 4. In Faith, 5. In Love, 6. In Experience, 7. In
Liberty. All which may grow from each, from the root of man's nature dressed and
purified, and so be fleshly, or from a new nature from the new creation of God
in Christ, and so be spiritual.

1. For Regeneration. You will say, for a man to be born again, this is the
greatest evidence of life that can be: yea but Regeneration it self is
according to the nature of the root. Man's spirit may enter into the womb of
flesh, and there be born again, so says Christ here (speaking of regeneration,
speaking of the second birth) that which is born of the flesh is flesh. A man
may be new born in Religion by the flesh, that is, by the use of his own wisdom
and reason, of serving and considering the things that are discovered by God in
his dispensations, especially if they be held out very clearly and miraculously
as the case was here: Any man who had been ingenious might have acknowledged
what Nicodemus did here, That Christ was a teacher come from God, and so
consequently that there was just ground to receive his doctrine and believe in
him. Now that regeneration which arises hence, which is from flesh, which is
from the use of any wisdom, reason, understanding or power in man, it is
according to this root, it is a change of flesh from flesh into flesh, it is
all along but a fleshly change, it is not the change of a man's spirit into a
new nature, but only a change of the shape and form of it: The man indeed seems
mightily changed unto himself, newborn, new-made, he is not what he was, but a
new thing, has new thoughts of God, new desires toward God, new hopes, a new
life and conversation, and so it is with him in a kind, in a sense he is not
what he was, he is new; but all this newness is but the newness of the flesh,
it is but the putting on a new garment, a new dress on the old man, on the old
wisdom, reason, understanding, ingenuity and integrity, which belongs to the
nature of Adam, and may easily be found in that nature, where it is any thing
awakened and polished.

But now that regeneration which is from God, that man who is brought forth
again in the womb of his spirit, that man who has a new root from the seed of
his life, this change is truly spiritual, this man is truly spirit: cast this
man into what shape and form you will, he is still spirit. The other man's
Religion consists in his form, (which the sweetness and ingenuity of his
earthly principle feeds it self in, and exercises it self about) so that take
away his form and you take away his Religion; but this man's Religion consists
in the nature of his spirit, in the nature of that root from which his spirit
came, and which it is one with.

2. As touching Knowledge. Knowledge is the next thing to the new birth: when a
man is new born in any kind, he is still brought forth into a new light; in
which he is to live, according to which he is to move and act, and by which he
is to be perfected. Now the spirit of man may be brought forth in any kind of
knowledge; light of every sort is surable to his spirit; and according to the
breaking of it forth, still he can take it in. Indeed what can more fully
distinguish the Children of light, then light; and yet what light cannot the
spirit of man, the Child of darkness transform himself into? what truth, what
mystery can be revealed, which the spirit of man cannot suck in? Though I had
the gift of prophecy, says the Apostle, and understood all mysteries, and all
knowledge, etc. and wanted love, implying the possibility of such a thing. There
is a rationality in all the things of God, which the reason of man may reach,
especially if it be assisted by God, and yet that man not have a divine root in
himself, for want of which his knowledge cannot be called truly divine, though
it be from above. The things themselves may be from above, the discovery of
them to him may be from above, yea he may receive divine help in the receiving
of them, and yet that in him which receives them may be but flesh, and may
receive but the flesh of them. Man receives but the rationality, but the
outward nature* but the external knowledge of the things of God, not the inward
substance. So that all his knowledge in heavenly things, wherewith he abounds, is
but fleshly; it is not true knowledge, it is not the knowledge of the truth, it
is not true light, it is not the light of the Lord, it is not the light of a
spirit lighted from the Spirit of the Lord; but a light of man, or if you will,
a fleshly light of God, at which man has lighted his fleshly spirit. All the
light which man's spirit is capable of in the things of God, does not argue
life, does not argue truth to accompany it, because it may be borne of the
flesh, and so be fleshly; nay indeed is, and cannot but be so: All his knowledge
of God, of Christ, of Sin, Death, Hell, of life, salvation and happiness, and
the way to each, etc. be it never so clear and never so full in the heart, yet
it is all but fleshly, because it is in a fleshly spirit, proceeding from a
fleshly root, and can give forth it self, but according to its own nature, and
can be received in, but according to the capacity of that which receives it.
As man who receives these things into himself, springs from a root of flesh
and is flesh, so that which he receives of the things of God, is but fleshly:
He himself under all his spiritual changes (as he accounts them) and with all
his spiritual notions, is but flesh.

But now he which is spirit, all the knowledge which he has is spiritual; the
least degree of his light is spiritual: He that is born of the spirit is
brought forth into the true light, into the light of the spirit, where he sees
and discerns the things of God in their own true nature. He knows the true
God, and his very Son Jesus Christ, He knows the true Death, the true Life,
the true Resurrection and Glory of the Son, yea he learneth and knows, in his
own order and place, all the truths of God, not as they are held forth by each
man, but as they are in Jesus. Let knowledge come never so fleshlily clothed to
him, he thrusts off all that is flesh of it, and receives in nothing but
spirit: whereas the other, let knowledge come never so spiritually to him,
receives in and can receive in only the flesh of it.

3. For Repentance, which is a dying unto sin, which is natural unto him that
is newborn and brought into the light. This the spirit of man can do too, and
cannot but do; Every change in him from every kind and degree of corruption
(whereof there is daily occasion ministered unto him) causes repentance. Man's
natural spirit, opened to see it self, cannot but repent, it cannot but make
him loath himself, his own nature, his own state, his own course, his own end.
What man, had he the view of himself, of his spirit, could forbear abhorring
the nature and state of it? There is that in the nature of man which cannot but
turn from that corruption which he has contracted, with all the concomitants
and effects of it: so that were but the nature of man awakened, though there
were neither Heaven to reward nor Hell to punish, he could not but loath sin,
though this is also true, that now by the power of his corruption it is become
a new nature to him, and so he loves it, and would not be rid of it: yet there
is the relic of somewhat at the bottom of it, which is his first and truest
nature, which has a contrariety in it hereunto, and which upon occasion of
being stirred at any time, discovers that contrariety. But for all that, the
spirit of man does only repent fleshlily, I say this Repentance let it arise
never so high, and be heightened by never so many fresh discoveries of God and
spiritual considerations, yet still it is but fleshly: for that which the light
of God discovers and stirs in the nature of man, is but of the nature of man.

But now, That Repentance which arises from a true root, from a renewed
spirit, from a spirit changed into the nature of the seed which is sown in it,
this repentance be it never so low, let it be never so thickly, deeply and
darkly covered with a seeming approbation and justification of sin, yet the
thing it self, the repentance it self is spiritual, It coming from a spiritual
root must needs be spiritual, notwithstanding its contrary black appearance, as
the other notwithstanding all its light, brightness and glory, is but carnal.

4. For Faith, which is the new life. Man's spirit does naturally believe
(though his Faith is but occasionlly drawn forth*) Seeing his danger, his
misery, he cannot but lean upon that which is held out to him as his proper
rescue, releif and support. Let God in Christ be discovered to be the only
fortress, man cannot but run thither. And yet his Faith and all his motions in
this kind having but flesh, having but self, having but his own nature (viz.
the nature of the first Adam) for their root, what can they be but fleshly, but
of his own nature, but of the nature of the first Adam? Nicodemus here could
not but run to Christ, acknowledge Christ, believe on Christ, but what says
Christ to him? Ah poor Nicodemus, that which is born of the flesh is flesh.

To open this a little further, because it is the main thing whereupon all
depends, If either the nature or object of faith be mistaken, the miscarriage
is most certain, therefore there is need of great wariness here; Now to make
this truth asserted here, appear the more evident, I shall add this
consideration following.

The nature of man came from the nature of God, (If you should stumble at this
expression, and say it came from his Will, yet sure you will not deny his will
to be his nature:) And as there was at first, so there is still a naturalness
between God and man, though not so open and manifest. God does naturally take
care of man, and man does naturally depend upon his God. Were the heart of God
but opened, we should see there that from which the nature of man did flow, and
his love unto man and care of him even in his broken estate; and were the heart
of man but opened, we should read there dependence and confidence upon his God.
It is his very nature, though at present he be exceedingly turned out of it by
an heap of corruption; but let the light and discoveries of God break in upon
him, they stir up this again in him presently: only indeed his corruption is so
strong that he cannot come off cleverly in any motion of this kind, but his
heart and nature stands toward it. Now is not this evident, That whatever is
in the nature of man, may be drawn forth, and that what is thus drawn forth
from the Nature of man, is but natural or fleshly? It is natural to man to look
out for help, and as natural to him to trust that which is discovered to him as
proper and willing to help him: And this faith, though it be awakened, and
stirred, nay as it were begotten in him by divine means, yet that does not
argue it to be divine. That which the spirit of the Lord by his warmth and
quickening virtue awakeneth in and draws out of the fleshly root
(notwithstanding his divine breathings and influences upon it) does not
thereupon become Divine; though it is easy for weak man, who is not acquainted
with such kind of things, without much questioning to account it so.

But now, That faith which proceeds from a new nature, from a new birth from
God, John 1.12.13. from a spiritual root, that must needs be spiritual. I shall
not need to insist upon the rest, I shall therefore only mention them.

5. For Love. There is a love in the nature of man, which does naturally flow
forth toward that which is lovely to the eye of his nature: Now God and his
Christ, having all the excellency in them that is taking to the eye and heart
of man, and much more, upon the discovery of this unto man, how can man choose
but love them! yet this arising from the nature of man, upon such a discovery
as his nature is capable of admitting, is but according to the root, it is but
natural, it is but fleshly. But that love which proceeds from a new life,
that love is of a new nature, even of the nature of that spirit out of which it
shoots.

6. For Experience. Man may have many experiences in a natural way of religion
and devotion, or in any dispensation wherein he is placed; Experiences of God,
experiences of his own heart, experiences of the nature of things, (the people
of the Jews had many experiences of Gods owning them, and care of them, etc.)
And yet these also are according to the root. Those experiences which the
spirit of man, the nature of man, the understanding of man gathers and
comprehends, they are but experiences of man, they are but experiences in and
according to the light and nature of man: Those experiences alone which are
gathered by the nature and observation of the new life, they only testify the
truth of, and they alone are useful to that life.

7. And lastly, For Liberty. True liberty is a very sweet effect of the light
of the Gospel. The spirit of man in this present state of nature, is commonly
bound up in darkness (every man's darkness is his prison) whom light does set
free. Now as man's spirit may receive the light of the Gospel (after a manner the
spirit of man may receive that light which is held forth in the dispensation of
the Gospel) so man's spirit may come forth into liberty, into great liberty, he
may feel himself free from all his bonds, yea this freedom may be so large and
clear to him that he may be able to say in his heart, all things are lawful for
me: and yet all this may be but the liberty of man's spirit, and another that
seems to be in all manner of bonds, may have the true freedom, for the one is
true, though but in its birth or seed, and the other is not true, though in its
greatest growth and flourishing.

The substance of all that truth is in God, whereof in man there is but the
weak dark shadow: He therefore that is begotten by God (he that flows from the
generative virtue of his divine nature) is begotten in that substance; but he
which is begoten by man (or that which is begotten in man by the purest and
exactest strain of the human spirit, either his own or any others, though with
the greatest furtherances and assistances even from above) is begotten but in
some part or other of the shadow, which when the substance appears, cannot but
vanish, pass away, and prove a lie so far as it was taken for the truth; for
the purest extract that can be raised, even by God himself, out of the spirit
of man, is not the thing, but the shadow of it. But now there is the truth in
the seed in weakness, as well as the truth in growth. The greatest perfection
of the spirit of man is but a lie, so far as it takes upon it to be the truth;
for it is but a fleshly image of truth, it is not truth it self: All the
Repentance, Faith, Love, etc. which the spirit of man can possibly be raised
unto by any thing that can work upon his spirit, is but a shadow of that
Repentance, faith, love etc. which is in the nature of God and flows from the
nature of God (for there is in God a turning from that which he calls to our
spirits to turn from which is Repentance, and adherence to and confidence in
that which he calls to us to cast our selves upon, which is faith) but is not
the thing it self. But now the seed, and that which is in it and comes from
it, even in its greatest weakness, is truth: That Repentance, that Faith, that
Love, etc. that flows from this nature, from this life, is of this nature, is
of this life. The meanest the lowest thing that is born of the spirit is
spirit, even in its lowest state, in its lowest kind and degree of motions; and
the greatest the highest thing that is born of the flesh, even in its greatest
height, in the utmost degree of all its spiritual exaltation, exercise and
motion, is but flesh. One man may run with much quickness and cleerness through
all dispensations, and be wonderfully raised, and yet remain but flesh before,
in, and after all; Another may be in the lowest form of the lowest
dispensation, and yet be spirit there.

It is true these things forementioned are all of them effects (or at least
concomitants) of the Gospel. Man, dark man, hears no news of a new birth, of
the knowledge of God, of Repentance, Faith, etc. But yet where the Gospel
comes, these things so far as they are in the nature of man, are awakened and
heightened, Partly by Satan thereby to keep out the truth (for hereby he
cozeneth and deceives men, making them believe they are new men, whereas they
are new only in respect of what they outwardly were, viz. in respect of the
form or shape wherein their spirit was, but not in respect of their inward
nature) and partly by God, to make a proof or trial of the spirit of man
throughout: At first God tried him in his whole or sound, and now he tries him
in his broken estate, in all the several changes he can undergo there:
Therefore does the Lord not only draw forth what is in him, but also add
thereunto by gifts and assistances from above, that at length he may give forth
a complete experiment of man, what he is or what he can come to. And although
these experiments be not of use to the nature and eye of the Lord, to further
his sight or knowledge; yet there is a nature and eye to which they are very
useful, yea necessary, to which nature and eye the Lord is engaged by his
nature, to make them manifest in such a way, manner, season and proportion as
his nature and theirs require.

For the better illustration yet a little further, both of this truth in
general and of these particular instances, Take notice of this threefold
distinction of the spirit of man, or carefully observe, and distinguish the
spirit of man in this threefold estate or condition. First, in his natural
growth. Secondly, in his Transplantation. Thirdly, in his spiritual Renovation.

1. There is the spirit of man in its natural way of growth. The spirit of man
naturally inclines toward excellency: There is indeed a bulk of corruption
which hangs about him and turns him aside, but his own spirit disrelisheth
it, and he wishes he were freed from it, and made to be in himself that which
is naturally excellent. This is the heart of every man by nature: He would
serve God, he would enjoy God, he would be just and righteous to men; It is the
corruption which hangs about his nature, and is grown so strong and prevalent
that it is now become his nature, which makes him otherwise, but in his root,
in his principle, he is not so: and he thirsterh to be delivered from this
bondage of corruption which thus turns him aside from himself. (The natural
spirit of man, which is the principle part of the Creation, cannot be excluded
from groaning with the rest of the Creation under that load and burden of
vanity and corruption which lies chiefly upon it: in it self therefore it is
no friend thereunto, but unto that which is suitable to its own nature.)

So that now whatsoever carries a stamp of excellency upon it (as all the ways
of righteousness toward man, and all the ways and Institutions of God
concerning his Worship do) man cannot but aspire after and endeavor to conform
himself unto: For though man cannot see the particular Wisdom of God in his
dispensations and institutions, yet withal he cannot but see that he wants
his light and guidance, and that it is proper for him to observe and obey his
pleasure and commands, without his particular understanding the reason of them.

Hence it comes to pass that man springs up, and flourishes in any way of
Religion wherein he is set. It is so natural to him to love God, to trust God,
to seek after and follow his directions, and man is so sensible of the reality
of his spirit herein, that there is no beating him out of his apprehensions
concerning the relation between God and him, or concerning the truths of those
ways wherein he worships and serves him. He finds that he does naturally
incline to God, and desire the knowledge of his ways, and he cannot but believe
that God does as naturally incline to him and guide him in his ways. (It is
true, There is that in the present nature of man which hates God; but this is
also as true, There is that in the nature of man which lov^^^ that root of
excellency in God from which it came at first, and which is still its life,
hope, desire, and perfection.)

And though man naturally fall into that way and form of Religion in which he
is educated, yet so far as any thing can be held out to his understanding and
reason, either further in, or different from, what he has received, he cannot
but endeavor ingeniously to weigh it, and be ready to give up himself to be
changed by it, so far as it approves it self weighty. So far as any one falls
short of this, he falls short of being a man, and his own spirit will justly
condemn him therein.

Now how many changes by this means may man be brought into in Religion! His
eye and understanding is so shallow, that ever and anon different discoveries
may be made unto him both concerning outward worship, yea and also concerning
the spiritual nature, exercises and practices of Religion. His old way, his old
apprehensions may be made appear to him to have been but vanity, and somewhat
more new and more seemingly substantial may be represented to him. Poor
weak-spirited man is fit only to be baffled and made a fool of: Fain he would
betake himself somewhere and fix, and so he may for a time, but before he is
aware somewhat stronger will shake it, somewhat cleerer will dispose it; which
if he does but open the eye of his nature and reason, he cannot but let in; and
if he do not, he is but a brute and not a man, and maintains his own standing
brutishly, not rationally; which though it may occasion some brutish ease to
him at present, yet will prove his loss at the upshot. But that man who is
truly a man, being industrious to search out the mind and will of the Lord, and
quick to take in that light and these discoveries which in various kinds and
degrees of rays are darted forth, cannot choose but undergo many changes, both
according to the diversity of these discoveries and according to the difference
of his own capacity, both which daily alter. Man is still growing and his light
in every kind continually changed, how then can he himself escape changes! And
that man which is truly ingenious (giving every thing scope in his spirit
according to the nature and virtue of it, searching into the Scriptures,
praying for the help of God; and embracing every beam of light so far as he can
find it to be so) how high may he grow in Religion, and yet the root of man's
nature, may feed him in all these desires and in all these endeavors! We
mistake when we think man's nature inclines him only to corruption; No, there
is a root in him that inclines him to Reason, to Righteousness, etc. which did
he give scope to, the Lord would bless in its way (though this were no step or
degree toward the new life:) The image of God in man is broken, but not
annihilated. There is still a true representation of God in him, though in much
darkness and confusion: The image of God may still be found in man though under
an huge heap of rubbish: and if God at any time stir this, it cannot but appear
more, and act toward God and after righteousness and excellency; yea if the
Lord dung and water it much it will shoot forth very far, and grow very large
and high in knowledge, faith and obedience due to God either under the Law, or
under the Gospel.

2. There is the spirit of man transplanted by virtue of a dispensation from
God. There is not only the spirit of man growing, as well as he can, on his old
broken stock from his old decayed root: but there is also the spirit of man
taken out of the old stock and grafted into a new Olive Tree, by the power and
virtue of a dispensation, in so much as he los^th the scent of his old
corruption, and tastes of the sweetness and fatness of this new root. Yea he
has by this means a new Spirit, a new Life, a new Power; This or that
particular dispensation of God seizing upon him, by the virtue which it has in
it and carries with it, makes him new in the world, yea and new in himself:
so that by the influence of that dispensation, yea and according to the outward
measure of it, he may be a new Tree and bring forth new fruit unto God. We have
two great instances of this, the one in that national people of the Jews, the
other in the converted Gentiles.

The Jews, they were transplanted from among the rest of the Nations into
Christ who was their Olive Tree, ( Romans 11.17.24.) out of which they grew: They
had a Life within, and a light without beyond the rest of the world: They had
the mind of God, the guidance of God, the protection of God, the instructions
of God, etc. and so they might well go further in the knowledge and practice of
Religion then other Nations could.

After them the Gentiles, some of the Gentiles, some of all Nations among the
Gentiles were transplanted in their stead, yea and were put more within the
root, receiving a stronger influence from it then the Jews did: They had a
further degree of light, life, power, etc. held forth and administered to them,
whereby they might proceed much further then ever the Jews could. Their state,
kind and degree of growth in Religion, was very great, above the Jews, which
did arise from the advantage of their dispensation.

1. They had thereby a deeper discovery of light then the Jews: they had a
deeper, more inward and spiritual opening of the things of God in them and upon
them, then ever was dispensed to the Jews: Those things which were dark and
mysterious in those discoveries of God to the Jews, were manifest and plain in
the light held out to them.

2. They had a stronger life. As that which God held forth to them was spirit,
so that which God brought forth in them was spirit (for so it was in compare
with that which was held forth to the Jews, and that which in was brought
forth in the Jews.) They had a life them (in and by virtue of that their
dispensation) fit to receive that strength of life which God held out to them.
All the life of the Jews was but death, to that life which the Gentiles had by
the Gospel.

3. They had a more abundant power. There was a power which did overshadow and
accompany that outward people of the Jews, The outward power of the Lord (as I
may so say) did great outward things for them: But now, There was an inward
power of life dispensed to the Gentiles, so that they found the very power of
the life of the Lord dwelling in them, and the Spirit of the Lord (the very
power of the spirit of the Lord) dwelling in that life. Nothing was too hard
for that power to do, which hovered about the Jews; Nothing was too hard for
that power to do which dwelt in the believing Gentiles, but a believing
disciple might be able to do all things through Christ feeding his spirit with
life within, in the dispensation of the Gospel.

4. They had a greater union with Christ, and a greater presence of Christ
among them. Christ was more in them, Christ was more with them; They were more
in Christ, they were more with Christ then the Jews were. It was the same root
into which both were received by its opening to each, but the dispensation or
manner of receipt was far different. It was the outward part which opened to
receive the Jews, It was the outward part into which they were received: It
was the inward part which opened to receive the Gentiles, It was the inward
part into which the Gentiles were received. Though this also be true, that the
Believers among the Jews were received into the inner part, and those which
believed not among the Gentiles were received but into the outward part.

The Jews had a kind of of union with Christ, a presence of Christ, a
participation of Christ, as is evident by the Ark among them, and by the Manna
and Rock in the wilderness which accompanied them, which Manna was Christ, and
which Rock was Christ, ( They did eat of that spiritual meat, and drink of that
spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.3.4.) They had also a light, a life and pover in the
Law leading them to Christ, All their sacrifices and ceremonies taught them
Christ, and therein any that were any way skillful could not choose but read the
Messiah. But now in the Gospel there is a cleerer manifestation, a fuller
union, a richer life, a more mighty power, a more inward and divine light, a
light of the Spirit of the Lord, and a presence of the Spirit in that light.

Yet this also may be sown and grow up in the spirit of man, where having not
depth enough of earth for it to sink into and be nourished, it must needs
wither and dye. The light of God sown in the Jews cannot live there, for alas
it is but the spirit of man there in which it is sown, and that cannot feed the
mighty life and spirit of the Lord; It naturally receives in but what is
suitable to it self, and if any thing more be forced as it were upon it, so that
it cannot but admit it, yet upon advantage of the disappearing of that power or
of the increase of its own strength, it soon thrusts it out again: And the
light of God sown in the Gentiles cannot live then neither, for that is but the
spirit of man also; And though the spirit of man be raised a little higher by
an higher light and communication of God in Christ, and thereby become much
more changed (even into a spiritually glorious estate and condition) yet
remaining still himself at bottom, he will spue up all again at last and return
unto himself. This new people of God, the Gentiles, do as naturally slide back
from their life, from their God, from their Christ, as ever the Jews did, so
that this can be the standing people no more then the other. It requires great
cost to bring either of these peoples to any thing, but with much ease at any
time, they either of them slide back from that which they were woond up unto,
by the mighty power and presence of the Spirit of the Lord.

So that mark now, This converted Gentile, This transplanted Gentile must needs
fall from the truth. He is not entered deep enough into the root, nor has not
depth enough in him to receive the root, so that this present station of his in
the root with the present union and communion between them by virtue of the
present dispensation (by which he is as it were woond up out of himself and his
own nature into this) must needs vanish in time. The ground which is not
prepared by the spirit and nature of the Lord (and so made good in it self)
cannot always retain and give nourishment to the seed of God, but must one
time or other cast it up again: The person who is thus enlightened, enlivened,
how far soever in this way he be assisted and owned, though he taste of the
heavenly gift, and of the powers ^f tbe world to come, and be made partaker of
the Holy Ghost, etc. yet for all that cannot but fall away. That which is Adam
at bottom, will return to his own principle in the conclusion, how far soever
he be exalted beyond it at present, by virtue of the most lively dispensation
whatsoever.

3. There is the spirit of man renewed in God through Christ, the spirit of man
new made in his own nature by the nature of another root, the spirit of man new
begotten, new born of water and the spirit, the spirit of man truly converted
and changed into the nature, virtue, life and power of the Kingdom by the seed
and leaven of the Kingdom: and this spirit which is thus born of God, is so
united to the Lord as to become one with him, not in this or that outward
respect, but in his own inmost life and nature. This alone is the truth: This
is the true birth, The union of this spirit is the true union, when the spirit
of a man is so united to the Lord as to become one with him in his own nature;
not in the life or power of a present dispensation (which to day is and to
morrow vanishes) but in the true nature of his own spirit and life (which
abides for ever.) Now whatsoever flows, whatsoever grows up from this spirit,
is truth: All the repentance, faith, love, etc. which issue hence are true, of
the true kind, having the true stamp and image of Christ upon them. Here you
may find the true death of Christ and the true life of Christ, the true
understanding of Christ, the true faith of Christ, etc. whereas that which is
so only in a dispensation, whether of Law or Gospel, though it may be so in its
kind and may serve the present turn, yet it is not the abiding truth.

Man's nature, man's life, man's power (even that which Adam had from God and
which is the image of God) is but fleshly. His inclination and natural ability
to believe, to love, to obey, it is but fleshly. The first man is of the earth
earthly, take him with all his qualifications and endowments: That light and
knowledge of God which he had, with his capacity of receiving in more, was but
earthly: Adam, whom God dashed in pieces, was but the earthen vessel of the
Potter. Yea in every dispensation since, all that is of man there, is flesh:
All that is stirred up in man is flesh: That power of believing, of loving and
obeying which was raked up in the ruins of man's nature, being at any time
again rouzed, refreshed and assisted by any light or power from God, in the
midst of all its lively motions and operations, is still but flesh.

But yet there is spirit as well as flesh, and there is a spiritual birth as
well as a fleshly birth, and that which is begotten and born of the spirit is
spirit, as well as that which is born of the flesh is flesh. God does not only
try the spirit of man in his several dispensations, but he does also here and
there sprinkle the seed of his one spirit: He does beget and bring forth Isaac,
the seed of promise, his own son, under the Law, under the Gospel, as well as
Ishmael. Now it is the spirit which begets Isaac, which sows the seed of God
in the womb of Sarah: and that which is begotten and born of the spirit is
Isaac that which springs up from his own sowing out of the w^mb of his own
spirit, is his own seed. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh: and that
which is born of the spirit, is spirit.

Therefore Sirs look to your root. What I have said unto you hitherto, I say
unto you still, Look to your Foundations, If your root be flesh, all your glory
must down: All your spiritual apprehensions and hopes will vanish and leave you
in the suds, if they be but fleshly in their root: If your Foundation be in the
sand, the higher your building in Religion is, the greater will the fall
thereof be. That which is exalted nearest to Heaven in its present growth and
luster, if it prove not right, shall be thrown down to Hell with the greatest
indignation, and sink into the sharpest wrath and misery there. The easiest
part of Hell is uneasy enough, but the darkest chambers of it are reserved for
the deepest Hypocrites, which they without all controversy are, who hold forth
the highest resemblance of the life, liberty and purity of the Spirit of the
Lord, and yet have not the true nature of it in them, but in whom all this
springs from a fleshly Foundation.

VII. Of the true Nature and Virtue of the Kingdom of GOD.
1 COR. 4.20. For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.


THere have always been great disputes, about the nature and truth of Religion,
between the Disciples thereof, and the Pretenders to it. Every one will have
their apprehensions, their light, their way, their practice to be the truth.
Yea many times that which is indeed truth runs low, and that which is but
vanity, swells and makes a great show, appearing as very high, pure and
spiritual. That which is empty makes a great sound, drawing the multitudes
after it; and that which is substantial is cast aside, as being in no wise
likely to be that life and substance, which all pretend to seek after.

This Dispute is very hot now upon the face of the Earth. What sort of
Religious persons do not really believe, and (in some way or other) contend
that they are in the truth; and that the Religion of others, so far as it
differs from theirs, is at least erroneous?

This is no new thing, for thus it was at the appearing of Christ in the flesh,
between the Samaritans and the Jews, and also among the several sorts and s^cts
of the Jews. Yea likewise in the Apostles times, There were those that were
puffed up, who made slight of all that the Apostles taught, and would undertake
to deliver that which was more substantial, more pure, more high, more
spiritual: They would teach the truth, the substance of that, whereof that
which the Apostles taught was but a shadow.

Now the Apostle shows the way which he would take to discover the rottenness
and deceit of these persons, verse. 19. He would apply himself to know not their
speech, but their power: He would not regard the beauty and glory of their
speech or of the things spoken, which is exceedingly taking to a fleshly eye;
but the virtue, the life, the spirit of what was spoken: He would search into
the nature, into the root, into the virtue, into the truth of the thing, and so
would he prize it in himself, and discover it to others as he found it there,
and not have any esteem of it because of its flourishes, or its seemingly pure
and spiritual luster. And he gives the reason of this his intended course or
manner of proceeding in these words, For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but
in power. The Kingdom of God consists in the one, and not in the other. All
this great appearance of Glory, of Spirituality, of Life, of Liberty, etc. may
be without the Kingdom, therefore what should I regard them for? to what end
should I look after them? This is the way to deceive my self with an
appearance, with a flourish, in stead of truth. But where ever the true power
is, to be sure there is the Kingdom. Therefore I will lay aside all
consideration of the other, and mind how much of that is in them.

Toward opening of the phrases, three things would be enquired into, namely,
First, What is meant by Kingdom? Secondly, What by Word? Thirdly, What by Power?

1. What is meant by Kingdom?

By the Kingdom of God, is meant the new nature, the new life, yea and also
that new inheritance, unto which this nature and life leads. There is a new
nature descending from God, this new nature leads a new life here in this
world, and both this nature and life has a promise of a new inheritance in the
other world. Or if ye will, if ye think that may be plainer to you, by Kingdom
is meant Religion, true Religion, the Religion which God teaches his seed, the
Religion which God writes in the nature of his seed (for there is a Religion
also which God writes in the nature of man and teaches man, but that is not
the Kingdom.) In every dispensation that Truth, that Virtue, that Light, that
Life, which comes down upon the seed, springs up in the seed and goes along
with the seed, is the Kingdom. It is that breath of God from which the new
nature or principle came, in which the new nature lives, and by which it is
perfected. This it is most properly, but in a larger sense it denotes every
thing that belongs to the Kingdom, and that not improperly neither, for every
thing belonging to the Kingdom has the nature of the Kingdom in it; and having
the nature, why may it not partake of the name? The Kingdom of Israel took in
every thing in their dispensation, and the Kingdom of God takes in every
thing, in the great dispensation of his life unto his people, through the Lord
Jesus christ.

This phrase Kingdom is of very large and full significancy, noting out not
only the nature and substance of the thing together with the extent and limits
of it, but also the greatness of it, the riches of it, the glory of it, the
perfection of it, the presence of God with it, its presence and power with God,
etc.

2. What is meant by Word?

By Word is to be understood any outward form of doctrine, any speech, notion
or apprehension whereby Religion (in any part of it) is either conceived or
expressed: As, the doctrine of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward
God, the doctrine of self-denial, or going out of a man's self, the Doctrine of
obedience to the inward spirit or outward commands of the Word, the Doctrine of
the death of Christ, of the Resurrection of Christ, etc. Word is the outward
truth (if I may so speak) it is the pipe or vessel whereby life is held out to
man, or whereby it is taken in by man. It was in such Doctrines as these
forementioned wherein the spirit of life did run (as in so many veins) in the
Apostles times. But yet the truth of Religion ( the Kingdom of God) consists
not in any of these; These do not bring in the Kingdom, but the Kingdom will of
it self bring forth these, where it is.

The Kingdom of God, says this same Apostle in another place, is
Righteousness, and Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. But it is not the word of
any of these, it is not a glorious description or apprehension of
righteousness, or peace or joy in the spirit, it lies not in mighty elevations
or ravishments of heart through the contemplation of these, this is the outward
Court which is given to the Heathenish spirit of man, which has this bestowed
upon him for the reward of his pains in these things. But the Kingdom of God is
not in word. The outward truths of the Gospel (in the most pure, naked,
spiritual acception of them) are not the Kingdom, and he that receives them
only, receives not the Kingdom: Man may receive every truth of the Kingdom,
Man may fall into any way (nay into every way) of Religion, and yet fall short
of the Kingdom.

3. What is meant by Power?

By power is meant, the inward virtue, the vigor, the spirit which lies in the
nature of Religion. In every life there is a virtue or power wherein it
consists: No life lies in the outwardness of its form or shape, but in the
inwardness of its nature: The life of man consists not in outward knowledge,
in an outward form of reason, but in the inward virtue and spirit of reason.
Thus it is in the life of Religion, There is an inward virtue, an inward
spirit, an inward power in the nature of it, whereby it changes the vessel
whereinto it comes, subjecting the rational part to it self and advancing it in
it self, as the rational part does the brutish. So that as in a rational man,
all the faculties of his mind and members of his body are subject to his
reason: so in the spiritual man, not only the members of the body and
faculties of the mind, but the very spirit of reason it self is subject to
this new spirit or principle of life. There is this virtue, this life, this
spirit, in every thing of Religion, in all the Truths, in all the Ordinances,
Institutions and paths of the Kingdom, and this only is Religion. It is not the
knowledge of all the things of God, (alas the profane spirit of man under a
form of holiness may be very exact in them!) but the nature, the virtue of the
things themselves, which is preserved entire for the pure; into it no unclean
thing can enter: So that where there is the least true power there must needs
be true Religion: but there may be all the outward form or fabric, and yet no
true Religion at all. There may be all the truths of the Gospel, all the
Ordinances of the Gospel, all the ways of the Gospel, and the spirit of man
walking very zealously in all these, and yet this is no part of the kingdom:
for the Kingdom consists not in the outward letter of the Light, Life or
Liberty of the Gospel, nor in every power and virtue of it, but in the inward
spirit of it, and in that power and virtue which is peculiar to its own nature.
To illustrate this a little further; Take notice of a threefold power in
reference hereunto.

1. There may be an outward power concurring with the thing, as the power of
working miracles, the gift of speaking with tongues, of healing, etc. This is
demonstrative in its kind and according to its nature, for else the Lord would
not have made use of it for that end; but yet it is not the power here spoken
of, not the power which the Apostle here resolved to know. 2. There may be an
inward power forming of the thing, which may be either the Spirit of the Lord,
or the spirit of the Creature, working by and according to its creaturely
imagination. By imagination I mean the reason or understanding of man, which
though it be no imaginer, but a certain knower within its own bounds; yet in
things of this nature, in the things of God, in the things of the kingdom, it
is no knower at all, but a mere imaginer. Now this inward power of reason or
imagination will make strange fabrics in the mind of man, especially where it
has any superior principle to set it on work, or engines to move it, or oil to
set it on going. This power, this virtue being inward, is also of a more inward
satisfaction to a man then the former. By the former a man is as it were
compelled to believe, yet perhaps not at all satisfied thereby in the nature of
the thing: but by this a man is led into Faith, Love, Obedience, and so into
every thing that is thus formed in him. The things which the fancy or reason of
man (for here the reason of man is but fancy) after its manner comprehends,
are as it were made natural to the man. Now though this be a great power, and
can make mighty changes, and do mighty things in the spirit of a man, yea and
works very like the truth, insomuch as that which is mere man can very
hardly, if at all, distinguish it from the truth, yet this is not the truth
neither, this is not the power which the Apostle here speaks of. 3. There is
an inward power or virtue in the thing, whereby it is what it is, and whereby
it does what it does: whereby it is what it most naturally is, and produces
its own most natural effects. There is a true virtue in truth, an inward power
in the Death and Resurrection of Christ, an inward power in faith, in love, and
in the spirit of obedience, which lies in the nature of it, which it
disperseth and leaveneth the lump with where it is sown in truth. Now this is
it the Apostle here means, He will know this power, he will distinguish by this
virtue, the nature and truth of the thing it self. From whence this may be
observed,
Observe. That true Religion consists not in notion, not in apprehension, not in
expression, but in the true Nature, Virtue, Life and Power of the thing it
self. The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.

Let a man have the cleerest apprehension of the truths of God, and the
cleerest expression of them that may be, yet this is not Religion. If a man
have all knowledge, with all the effects of Faith, Love, Zeal, Obedience, etc.
which this knowledge can produce in him, yet this is not Religion. The knowledge
of self-denial, of resignation to the will of God, with all the self-denial and
resignation which this knowledge can produce; The knowledge of the Death of
Christ and of the Life of Christ, with all the effects there of in the spirit
of a man, neither is this Religion.

Reas. The reason whereof is this, because all outwardness is but a garment,
wherewith Religion may be clothed or not clothed according to the pleasure of
God. Now ye know a garment neither is the thing, nor a certain evidence of the
thing. All outward buildings which the spirit of the Lord rears, the spirit of
the Lord may also leave, and the spirit of man, of Antichrist, of Satan, may
enter into. The Lord has not yet built his everlasting Tabernacle or Temple,
and therefore those he does set up (being but shadows) his spirit may as well
leave, as enter into. So that whatsoever may come into apprehension, whatsoever
may be brought forth in notion or expression, is not the thing; at best it can
be but a true garment, but a true appearance, but a true house for the thing to
be clothed with, appear and abide in while the Lord pleases.

But now where there is the nature, where there is the life, where there is the
virtue, where there is the power, there must needs be the thing. Where there is
the life of a man, there must needs be a man: where there is the virtue of a
renewed nature, there must needs be a renewed nature: where there is the power
of Religion, the power of the Kingdom, there must needs be Religion, there must
needs be the Kingdom: for this is from it, this is ^n it, yea this is it. What
is the virtue and power of God, but God? what is the power and virtue of any
thing, but the thing? The virtue of Religion, the power of the Kingdom, that is
it in which the very spirit of it is, lives, goes forth, and resideth.

Quest. But what is this same nature, life, power or virtue of Religion,
wherein Religion consists? This is very necessary to be well considered; for
there is a nature, life, virtue or power in the Religion of man. That which
here the Apostle calls word, has that in it which man calls power. Let a
man receive any apprehension into his mind fully, let him but receive it
seriously as the truth of God, it comes with a great deal of power, it
brings virtue with it to make changes in him, changes in his spirit, changes
in his understanding, changes in his will, changes in his conversation: And yet
this is not the power which the Apostle here looks after, all this is with
him but word. The greatest inwardness of man, is but outwardness with the
spirit of the Lord. What then is this same power here, or what is the nature of
this power, of this virtue?

Answ. To this question I shall return this threefold description by way of
answer.

1. For the general nature of it, it is divinely spiritual. It is not a birth
from the spirit of man, no nor yet from the spirit of Satan, but from the
spirit of the Lord. There is the true nature, life and power of God in it. It
is the seed of God, and it brings forth the true nature of God. The Spirit of
the Lord begets that which is spirit. The spirit of the Lord brings forth
a truly spiritual Religion in the spirit of man, where he sows his seed.

2. As touching the common properties of it, It is both killing and quickening,
and that both in ones self and also toward others. In every truth of the
Kingdom, in every thing that belongs to the Kingdom, there is that virtue which
continually kills and quickens where ever it comes. It kills the spirit of man,
and it quickens the spirit of man. It lays flat all the corruption, yea all
the life and glory of the creature, where ever it appears. It is like a fire,
It burns up all the life of every thing it comes near, and it brings along with
it that life which alone can live in that fire. I know man has his several
ways of killing and quickening by his notions, but it does not do the thing in
truth: for under all the seeming deaths of the creature, the creature is still
alive; and under all the seemingly renewed life's of the creature, the creature
is still dead in its root and principle, yea and also in all its motions and
operations.

3. For the peculiar nature of it, That is suitable to every particular truth,
to every particular thing of the Kingdom: to every particular truth we receive
from God; to every particular thing, portion or member of life which is formed
in us. Thus the several truths of the Gospel have their own particular
natures, The death of Christ its, the resurrection of Christ its, etc. So
likewise the several tempers and graces, in the spirits of disciples, have
their particular natures, self-denial its, faith its, love its, and so the rest
theirs, whereby they are distinct from one another. They all agree in their
common nature and properties, and yet have also a distinct nature and
properties of their own, suitable to that whereof they are formed, and to that
peculiar end and operation for which they are formed.

Use 1. Observe the difference between the Religion of man and of God. Man
receives his virtue, his strength in Religion, from the outward notion, The
power which is found in him issues thence: but in the Religion of God, the
strength arises (yea and the notion it self too) from the seed. The seed
springing up in them in whom it is sown, discovers its own name, teaching
them how to call it, by manifesting it self in them what it is. The new Adam
knows how to name every new creature, at the first sight, by his knowledge of
its nature.

2. See how easy it is for Religion to slip in or out of any thing or person.
This life, this nature, this virtue may creep in or out at pleasure. The life
may fill, appear and live in that in us one day, which the flesh may fill,
appear and live in, the next. The spirit of the Lord may rear up and discover
himself in that Temple to day, which Antichrist may take possession of to
morrow. Religion, I mean the life of it, consists in the breath of God: not in
any outward form whatsoever, but in the breath of God there, which when God
once withdraws from any thing, there is no longer the true nature of Religion
there to be found; and ever after it is only fit to be a receptacle for the
unclean spirit of man, which must have some outward court, some appearances of
the holy nature and institutions of God to place it self in. But the true
nature and use of the thing is then lost, that speech referring to the natural
state of the creature, is here true also, Thou withdrawest thy breath, they
perish.

3. Take notice of the proper way of discerning the truth and growth of
Religion. It is not by having the outward notion, it is not by growing in the
outward notion of any thing, as of Faith, Love, Self-denial, Resignation to
Gods will, etc. but by the virtue and growth of the nature of the thing it
self. The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.

VIII. Of the weakness, uncertainty and invalidity of the Flesh, in reference
to the things of God.
JOHN 6.63. The Flesh profits nothing.


THe whole Verse runs thus, It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh
profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they
are Life.

In the ministrations of God, in the things held forth by Christ there is Flesh
and Spirit. Man, who himself is but flesh, he eyes the flesh, thinking to drink
in light, life and happiness thence, but that lies not where man looks for it,
viz. in the flesh, in the outward reason and understanding of the thing; but in
the spirit of it, in the spiritual nature and virtue of it. It is the spirit of
the truth that quickens, not the Flesh of it: Christ's words in his Light, in
his Spirit, are Life and Spirit; in the light of man, to the ear of man, to the
understanding of man, they are but flesh.

Flesh is the principle of Nature, the Root of the first Adam, and the Garment
about the second Adam. Spirit is the principle of Grace, the Root of the second
Adam, the new principle of life sown in and renewing the old earth of God.
Flesh denotes weakness, outwardness, proneness to pollution and corruption:
Spirit denotes strength, inwardness, purity. That which is born after the
flesh, dies; even Christ himself so born dies; That which is born after the
spirit, lives; even the weakest creature so born lives.

The flesh profits nothing.

There is a fleshly principle and there is a fleshly object, neither of which
are of any advantage, of any true profit to the end here spoken. The flesh in
man is not a profitable principle, the Flesh of Christ is not a profitable
object. The eye of the flesh is not a profitable eye, the sight of the flesh is
not a profitable sight, the things so seen (though otherwise never so excellent
in their own light, in their own nature, yet here) are of no use, no benefit at
all. The fleshly object cannot feed the spiritual principle, nor can the
fleshly principle feed on the spiritual object.

The flesh is the natural understanding of man, take it either with all outward
helps of art or, of more immediate revelations from God, both which may very
much advance it: This is the principle or eye of flesh. The object of this eye
is all things so far as they are liable to it, even the truths of God
themselves; the outward nature of them, the outward reason of them is flesh.
(Flesh is Gods eye, an eye of his making, and therefore it can be no
disparagement to God to have it see the things of God in its own Religion.) Now
this natural understanding, this fleshly principle, the eye of man is incapable
of receiving any thing that is spiritual from all the outward teachings of God;
nor can the truths of God, the true nature of the things of God enter into man
any such way as he looks for them. The Kingdom of God comes not by
observation, The spirit of the Lord enters not into a man at the eye of his
spirit. Man indeed may receive the outwardness of God, the outwardness of his
Light, the outwardness of his Life, the outward Gifts of Faith, of Love, etc.
Faith of his own element, faith suitable to his own nature (yet do not boast, O
man, for who has received any such thing now?) but he cannot receive the
truth, he cannot receive the new life, the seed of the kingdom is sown and
grows up man knows not how. Indeed after the Kingdom has entered into man,
and overcome him, and new-molded him, then he also can receive the truth and
answer the touches of it, though this is not so properly called a motion of
his, as of the life in him. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ in me,
says the Apostle.

So that this Scripture teaches man in all his highest strains, Let him climb
as high as he can with all the revelations and discoveries of God to him, Let
him know what he can of Christ, receive what he can from Christ, act what he
can toward Christ; All this is to no purpose, it is of no use, it is of no
profit. It is true, It is of use in its kind: It is an excellent kind of
operation in this broken state of man, and the Lord will make excellent use of
it to his end: but to the end proposed by God, and the end which man aims at
therein, it is of no value. It will not reach that eternal life which man
aims at.

Observe me equally, I say it is profitable in its kind and in its way, and
shall have its reward: but it has nothing to do with the substance, or with
that reward which belongs to the substance, both in respect of its nature and
of all the motions of it.

In every dispensation these things are profitable, In the dispensation of the
Law to the Jews, In the dispensation of the Gospel by Christ, In any
dispensation now (in this thick cloudy darkness, which man feels not because he
wants senses) such kind of motions are of use here, and shall have their reward
hereafter; for God will be just to the nature of man, giving it what it
deserves: but it has nothing to do with that reward which belongs to the new
life and the motions of it.

Great is the mystery of the nature of man, exceedingly hidden from man are the
workings of that wisdom and righteousness which is therein, in ways of
Religion or devotion toward God. The great principle of the life of it was
sown and broken in Adam: yet among these broken relics there is a continual
motion, progress and regress, especially where there comes forth any thing with
life and power to quicken and stir them up. (I do not mean life and power in an
extraordinary way, though that also has been and may again be, but in such a
way as is ordinary to and in the common state of man.)

To make this the better evident even to the eye of man (which may see the
outward part of this, as well as of other truths) I shall instance in some few
very eminent particulars, all which he cannot but acknowledge if he know but
himself, or have but had experience of himself herein. But he that is in the
dark, and knows not neither the life of Christ on the one hand, nor of his
own nature on the other, may very easily mistake the one for the other, and
confidently bolster up himself in vanity.

1. There is in man a strong desire after God, fain would he know him, fain
would he enjoy him, fain would he worship and serve him. If he knew which way
to please God, he would lay out himself to the utmost, he would spare no cost,
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
etc. Micah 6.6. Man in his very frame was a vessel fitted for God, fitted to be
a living house for him, and cannot but most naturally long for his proper
inhabitant: He was made to serve, worship and honor God (other creatures have
neither such a capacity nor such an inclination) and he can never be well till
he come to the through use and exercise of this his nature.

2. There is also in him a strong sense of his own weak state. He knows that
he cannot come near God; that he cannot converse with God, that he cannot enjoy
God in this state and capacity wherein now he is. He knows that he cannot
learn the knowledge of God, unless God condescend to teach him in a way suitable
to his present estate. Man is such an intelligent vessel, as that he has a
sense of his own broken condition. Man after his many shaterings yet has so
much understanding left him, as in part to espy out his own brutishness in the
things of God. He sees, he feels his darkness, and that he cannot reach that
light wherein his life lies.

3. There is a great breathing in his spirit after the teachings of God, fain
would he hear the true voice, fain would he be led by God into light and into
life. O how he pants, O how he breaths after God, after the living God! A
formal dead knowledge of God will not serve the living nature of man: but as the
life sown in him is true life in its kind, so it must have true life to feed
upon. Yet all this kind of life is death, the whole strength of the natural
life is dead before that which is spiritual. Those objects which are living
objects, those motions which are living motions, that principle which is a
living principle in the region of man, are all dead in the light and Kingdom of
God. So that man lives and moves truly in his way, but not in the truth: that
which is life, that which is truth with him, is not so before God, nor before
that eye which is lighted by God in the truth.

Man, The flesh, The wisdom of the creature, will enter into any way either of
life or death that the Lord shall prescribe, he will come within the lists of
the Law, and all that the Lord commands him there, will he do: He will come
within the lists of the Gospel, and live upon and obey God through Christ. It
is natural to man, as to feel the want of Gods teachings and to desire them, so
to follow them. Though this is also true that there is a corrupt principle (or
corruption hanging about his natural principle) which makes him juggle, so
that he does not walk evenly with God in any path. Yet this is also as true
that there is a natural principle which inclines him to seek God, and to be
subject to him in every way he shall please to prescribe, though through its
own weakness, and the corruption that hangs about it, it can rise to no great
height. It does rise indeed often very high in man's esteem (insomuch as he
accounts his devotion very high, pure and spiritual) but it is not so in the
true Light and judgment of God.

Yea, 5thly, The spirit of man will sow all his life and his death so often as
he finds any flaw in it. If this or that present strain of Religion appear
faulty he will throw it away: and if the next prove faulty likewise he will
throw away that again. The flesh seeking that which is substance, cannot but
part with that which upon search it finds not to be substance. This is little
thought of, how eagerly the spirit of man will into the fire again and again
that he may be purified, how industriously he will seek out the cross of
Christ, and pray to God to crucify him upon it, that so he may dye the Death
of Christ and live the Life of Christ. So far as the path of Christ is visibly
excellent to man's eye, and necessary to the end he aims at, the nature of man
(so far as it is it self) cannot but pursue it.

Yet all this profits nothing. All this desire after God, all this sense of
himself and his own condition, all this breathing of his after the true
teachings, all this seeking of life and death, and all this giving up both of
life and death, that it may become a new seed, losing its old nature, form,
shape and corruption, All these motions of flesh, all these motions of man's
spirit profit nothing. It is true, All these are very excellent and very
profitable in their own place and station, but here in this place, in reference
to this end, they profit nothing.

For first, These are not of the right kind. What ever of these come from man,
or grow up in the mere nature of man, are not the truth. This is not the right
seed, nor is this the right earth wherein the right seed is sown. This is but
the nature, but the wisdom, but the righteousness of the first Adam: nay
although it were stirred up by the spirit of the Lord in man, nay though
breathed again from Heaven, yet it would be no other. This is not the nature,
not the life, not the breath of the seed: The son-like spirit and motions are
only sown and grow up only in the son. The true desire after God, the true
waiting for him, the true repentance, faith, love, etc. grow only in him who is
begotten from above in a new nature. The Lord sows the life of his own
spirit, only in the flesh of his holy Child Jesus, and thence alone does the
true nature and motions spring up, and there alone are they to be sound.

Secondly, They are not true in their kind; They are not in man, so as man
takes them to be; They are corrupted, they are not pure. Man does not so truly
love and desire God, as he seems to himself to do: He would not be so ready
to hear his voice, as he thinks he should be. It is the son only that has the
spirit of obedience; man is not pure, is not upright, no not in his own kind
and way of obedience; Neither is man's ear open to hear God; It is the son alone
whose ear God has bored, it is his ear which he has opened to hear as the
learned. Man has but a bad ear at best, and yet (as bad as it is) it is not
opened.

Therefore all Gods charges against man will be very clear, when the nature and
course of man is made manifest. God charge him chiefly with two things, with
want of power and with want of will. He cannot come to God though he would, No
man can come to me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him: He would
not come to God though he could, Ye will not come to me that ye might have life.

There are three great exceptions against man in all he is and does, all which
are comprised in this phrase flesh, which he that is able to consider the
nature and course of man, may easily observe.

1. There is commonly a corruption, a core of rottenness in his spirit and in
all his motions. He does not know himself, he is not so honest or upright as he
takes himself to be, nor his actions so just and honorable. He is not truly
religious or just, I do not mean spiritually, but in his own kind. He does not
love God, he does not desire to obey God, he would not be Good if he would;
That which is in kind of this nature, is so corrupted that God cannot own it
for the thing that man would have it go for and thinks it to be, O that there
were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, etc. Man deceives
himself, there is not such an honest obedient heart in him toward God as he
thinks for. Of all things man is apt to bless himself in the integrity of his
heart; though he is weak, yet his heart is upright, and though he cannot attain
to be what he would, yet he has a true desire in him to walk with God: but God
will one day show him that his heart was never right with him, and that he
cannot truly desire to walk with him. And man if he could possibly observe and
discern himself, might at some times descry this naughtiness and corruption of
his heart in these two particulars. The one whereof is in that he does not like
to have it discovered, but justify himself against all the discoveries of God.
Man does not like that light that searches too far into his hidden iniquity. O
how difficult it is to bring a conviction close to the heart of any man! All
will confess sin in general, but their peculiar way of wickedness, either in
their worshipping of God or in their course and conversations, they cannot
endure to have touched: There they stand upon their guard, This is not Pride,
this is not Covetousness, this is not Hypocrisy, this is not the persecuting
of Christ, this is not Idolatry, but the right way of worshipping God. O read
thine own heart and tremble, in that 2 Chap. of Jeremy, especially verse. 23.25.
and 34.35. Man purifieth his heart by his principles, of light and knowledge, he
squares his worship, life and conversation to his light and measure by the
Word; thus he painteth his Sepulcher, not discerning the rottenness and
corruption that is still within, notwithstanding all this appearing truth and
integrity.

The other is, in that let God set him right in any dispensation, he presently
and most naturally turns from it. He is woond up by God against the hair, but
he sinketh down again of himself. He is very difficultly brought to a state of
rectitude in any kind, but so far as he is, he very suddenly apostacizeth from.
This also is abundantly set forth, Ier. 2. verse. 2.3, etc.

2. There is always a weakness attending him. If there be not a corruption, yet
certainly there is a weakness both in his spirit and motions. If he be in any
kind set right at any time, yet his nature is frail. If there be Religion, if
there be righteousness in him of any true stamp under any dispensation, yet it
is very poor, weak and low. This ye may see plainly in that people of God the
Jews, Look upon their Religion, their Faith, their Love, there Obedience, etc.
see what it was. It was wrought in them with much difficulty, They were hardly
drawn to it: What ado ^ad God to bring them to any thing! He used many
instructions, many miracles, many corrections, much patience, or else he had
destroyed them many a time in the furnace, and had never brought them forth. And
yet what were they when they were brought forth? Alas a poor frail vessel; a
vessel long in making, and yet when made, very brittle* How soon after every
right constitution and reformation did they backslide and corrupt themselves!
which plainly evidences the frailty of their state. They sung his praise, they
soon forgot his work: so weak is man that though he be raised and set up upon
his legs, yet he is not able to stand so.

3. There is in man a continual progress toward destruction. That which is
corrupt, God destroys; and that which is frail and weak, dies of it self:
yea its own frail nature inclines it to that corruption which hasteneth its
death. Nothing can act above its nature. Adam when he fell, showed the weakness
of his nature, The Prince of this World came and found somewhat in him to
fasten upon. Frailty is a property of the flesh. Weakness is as proper to the
earthly image, as strength to the heavenly. The seed of strength grows up
through weakness unto perfection, and the seed of weakness grows down from
strength (from all the strength wherein it is set and which is set about it)
into its own imperfection.

For a close of this, I shall lay down these eight Conclusions following
(arising partly, if not wholly from what has been already asserted in this and
the two preceding Chapters) which may both help further to illustrate it, as
also to fence it from such corrupt consequences as man's flesh may be apt to
draw from some parts of it (singly considered by themselves) to its own
prejudice*

The Conclusions or Positions are these.

1. There is in the spirit of man a natural inclination toward Religion. Man's
very nature teaches him his own weakness, his want of God, his dependence upon
him, his ignorance of him, etc. and so puts him upon seeking after him,
praying to him, relying upon him, etc. Or thus.

There are some relics of the Image of God in man, (which though not
unbroken, yet) are not quite rased out of his nature, whereby he is inclined to
aim at and seek after that which is naturally excellent, the sum whereof may be
reduced to these two heads, viz. To acknowledge and worship God, and to be just
and merciful to the creature, whereof his neighbor man is the principal part.
So that all that can be done in this kind, even to the utmost degree, man's
nature inclines him to pursue, though not perfectly but only in a broken
manner, according to his broken state.

2. These relics of the Image of God in man are more lively and active, when
God by any light of his shines upon them, or by any life from himself
quickneth them. A dispensation of Gods according to the Law, much more a
dispensation according to the Gospel raises up this broken shadow man, making
him appear as it were a new thing, by stirring, drawing forth and advancing
that in him which before lay hid and as it were dead. (For man, though he be
dead in respect of spiritual life, yea and in respect of the true and pure
nature of his own life; yet there is still a life in him, which he having
changed the name of (and it also being changed in its appearance unto him)
thinks to be very pure: and it may go for life according to the present rate
of naming things.)

3. There is an owning of man by God thus far, there is a blessing of God
attending him so far as he thus is and acts. This is righteous, this is good in
man, that though he be broken, weak and corrupt, yet to cherish those withered
seeds of natural goodness and excellency which still have a being in him
though they have lost their beauty: And the Lord will own man so far as he does
thus, for he shall not lose his reward, though this kind of reward be as it were
of debt, and not of grace. For this reward is due from the nature of God to the
nature of the creature, which though it fall short of what it was and of what
it should do, yet is still to be owned in what it is and does righteously
(though after a broken manner) in this its broken state. Or thus:

This broken Image of God, this nature, these motions are excellent in their
kind. It is the duty and excellency of man, thus to be and thus to act: And
were man's nature and motions more perfect and accurate herein, he could not but
be happy and blessed in his kind and degree.

4. Yet this nature and all these motions are not of the true kind, not of that
kind spoken of in the Scripture, not of that kind to which the life and
blessedness promised there appertains: But that life and inheritance belongs
to the new seed, who are born, not of the nature of the earthly Adam, but of
the nature of the Son, who is the Lord from Heaven; and such are all the powers
in their spirits, and all the motions of their spirits. From this nature they
know God, they desire God, they believe, love, pray, wait, hope, etc. and their
knowledge, desire, faith, love, etc. is of this nature.

Again, 5. Though this nature, and these motions be excellent in their kind,
yet they are no furtherance or advantage in reference to the grace of God or
life of Christ, which are not dispensed according to any excellencies of
nature, or any thing that the creature is, does, or can do. Though God who is
perfectly good and just, cannot but honor and reward every degree of goodness
and justice according to its kind, yet this reward does not at all belong to
the righteousness and excellency of nature, namely to be any furtherance to
this other kind of life and righteousness by Christ; nay the excellency and
righteousness of nature is more opposite to the Law of this life and its
dispensation, then the unrighteousness thereof. He who is any way clothed
upon, is more unfit for the immediate putting on of a new garment, then he who
is stark naked.

Nay 6. The motions of man's spirit in Religion and civil righteousness, having
such an apparent excellency in them, stand more in the way of true life, then
open wickedness does. The way to life is not by any of this, but by being
broken to all this; by being stripped of all this excellency, of all this
righteousness, of all this life, which is the hardest piece of work, for him
who is most richly clothed. O how difficult, yea impossible is it for him, who
is rich in this kind, to enter into the kingdom of Heaven!

7. Yet this is not to be thrown away for nothing, but only in subordination to
a better life. Man is not to forbear worshipping of God and acting of common
righteousness, and to run into all manner of profaneness and wickedness, that
he might be nearer the Kingdom: but to see the emptiness of them, in all his
attainment and exercise thereof. And he who is thus in his spirit, is poorer,
is more stripped in the midst of all his exercising of Religion and
Righteousness, then he who is given up or gives himself up to all manner of
irreligion and wickedness.

8. And lastly. Hence it may appear that God will be just in condemning every
man, because there is that seed of Righteousness in his nature whereby he might
be better and do better, (yea and would be so, did he not choke it) whereby he
might walk more entirely with God in every dispensation: for what God
dispenceth to man, he so dispenceth as that man may receive his light and walk
with him by virtue of that grace and power of the Lord which comes along with
the dispensation. For God deals not with man in his dispensations, according
to what he was in Adam, but according to what he now is in his broken state:
And so he will judge them, the Heathen by that law of the light of nature which
is yet written in their hearts, the Jews by the light of that law which was
dispensed to them by the hand of Moses, and Christians by that light of the
Gospel which was dispensed to them by Christ and his Apostles.

But though God is and will be just in judging every man, yet every man is
unjust in condemning another, because he has the same seed of unrighteousness
and corruption with his brother, which would lead him aside as it does his
brother, were he every way in his case. So that a man in condemning another
condemns himself, though he does not see it.

IX. Of the Certainty of Christ in his knowledge concerning the things of God,
and particularly of his well-grounded testimony concerning the way to life, and
consequently of the certainty of the knowledge and testimony of his seed, in
their generations, they being of the same nature and Life with him.
JOHN 12.50. And I know that his Commandment is life everlasting.


EVery man desires everlasting life, but no man knows the way to it, and alas
who can guide him? Who knows any thing almost in spiritual matters? but as
for this great thing, viz. Wherein everlasting life consists, or which is the
way to that everlasting life which God has held out, and promised to his seed,
O how deep and hidden is it!

Yet he that has the light of God he knows. He that is enlightened by God, he
may see God and the way to him, and he may light others out of their darkness,
as Christ says ver. 46. I am come a light into the World, that whosoever
b^leeveth on me should not abide in darkness. He that has the seed and
principle of the life in him, he may understand the touch of that life, he may
know the commands of it: and he may speak them here in this world, and tell the
world that he does know what he speaket^ though the world never was, nor never
will be able understandingly to receive this testimony, either from Christ or
from any of his seed. But the ignorance and darkness of man concerning the
light and knowledge of God, do not make them the more uncertain in that spirit
where they truly reside, but they do know the truth and the life, though man
cannot know that they know it, And I know that his Commandment is life
everlasting.

Several things here would be considered to make way to that observation which
arises from hence.

1. What this Commandment of the Father is.

Ans. The great Commandment of God is to believe on his Son, or if ye will, on
him through his Son. It is of this Christ is speaking ver. 44. Jesus cried and
said, He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me.

Man's bottom is rotten, therefore God advises him to quit it and fasten upon
the Rock, for all such and such only shall be saved.

That which God points man to in all his dispensations, yea that which his very
nature is pointed to, is life. There is a Command of God in the nature of man,
to the nature of man, to seek after life, after everlasting life. There was in
the very nature of Adam a desire of a more excellent state and enjoyment of God
then that wherein he was brought forth: and it was not ill in Adam to obey
this, only he should have stayed there the pleasure of the Lord, and have
waited upon his will and guidance for a remove. And this Command, though it was
more full and complete in Adam, yet it is also still written in the nature and
heart of every man in its degree, and when God pleases to awaken the heart of
any man in this respect, he can make it appear and act very livelily there.

There is also a Command concerning the way to life. Man's darkness and
impotency is also written both in his nature and in his present state, and
there may be also found in the nature and state of man, by him that has a
quick eye, a command to repent and believe. That natural light which is in man
shows him so much of himself and so much of his God, as may justly incline him
to turn from the one and to look toward the other. Thus much of the Gospel
(for so it is in a sense, and therefore may bear that name) is written in man's
nature, though the thing it self, the Gospel it self, the new nature it self,
repentance and faith it self, are the seed of Christ, the seed of Christ's
sowing, the seed that springs from the Root of his nature; and that repentance
and Faith which arises thence is not written in the nature of man. Now mark,
In that dispensation of the Gospel by Christ (either as it was at first given
out, or as it has been in any degree renewed since) God does both open those
lights and commands which are in the nature of man (for God takes into and
brings forth, in that dispensation, such things as were sown in the nature of
man) and also lets out a further light and adds further commands proper to that
dispensation. So that this is the commandment of God two ways.

First, It is the commandment of God to the new nature: there is a law of life
teaching and commanding to that the truth. Its nature teaches it to believe,
for faith springs up in its nature: And its nature teaches it to repent; its
nature teaches it to loath this present state of man, yea the very excellency
of man's nature.

Secondly, There is a commandment of God to the old nature both to do it after
its kind, to repent, believe, and obey according to the law of its life; (for
man, who came from God and his Christ, is to worship and serve God and his
Christ, in his capacity:) and there is also a command to this old nature of man
to look up for a new seed, for the seed of a new life, that so he may do it in
truth. Man is to live holily and righteously according to the law of his
shadowy nature and being, and also to pant after the substance; though that
panting from and according to that nature which is peculiar to the seed, man is
not capable of in himself. So that this is his Commandment, this is Gods great
commandment to both the seeds, to the natural and to the spiritual, to the seed
of Adam and to the seed of Christ; namely, that they pant after and cleave unto
him through his Son.

2. What is the everlasting life which is wrapped up in this commandment?

Ans. It is a Life of a different nature, of a more inward nature, of a more
settled and abiding nature then the life of the nature of man in it self is
capable of. It is the Life which man's life is but a shadow of, and which man's
life was broken to make way for. It is the Life which was promised long ago to
the seed, even from the beginning, and is reserved for their enjoyment at the
end. It is a Life promised to an incorruptible nature; and as the nature to
which it is promised, so the life also which is promised is not capable of
corruption, as both the nature and life of man is. It is a Life that passes
not away, but purifieth, perfecteth and preserves the vessel wherein it is
sown. It is a Life which both indures in it self and leads to that blessed
enjoyment of life, in which the seed (and the spirit of man in and through the
seed) shall settle and abide for ever. All Adams nature, all Adams excellency,
all Adams life, all Adams enjoyment, content and blessedness thereby, how soon
did it fade! but this Nature, this Life, this Principle, with all the glory and
blessedness to which it tends, shall abide for ever. This life was not written
in Adams nature, or in the command to his nature; but in the command to Christ's
nature, and to man through that nature. The nature of Adam was led aside from
the commandment to death, but the nature of Christ is led and is guided safely
through this Commandment to life, even to that life which alone can satisfy
the desire and thirst of his nature; even this Life everlasting which is here
mentioned.

3. What this same knowledge of Christ here is?

Ans. This knowledge of Christ is the comprehension of his own nature, or his
comprehending of the thing in his own nature. It is the seeing of it with his
own eye, the measuring it in his own understanding. As man measures natural
things (within his reach) by his natural understanding: so Christ measures
spiritual things* in spiritual light, with his spiritual understanding; and
what he finds proportionable to the measure of his spirit which is truth, he
knows to be truth. As man, what he truly measures in the true light of
reason, with a truly rational understanding, he knows to be truth there: So
what Christ measures after his way in this his spiritual Region, he knows to
be truth here. Christ the true nature, with the true eye, saw the true thing in
the true light, so that his light, his knowledge is truth, I know, etc. Man
proposes unto himself vain ways, and Satan invents many Devices for him, but
God who is truth speaks truth and proposes only truth unto him. He proposes
the letter of truth not only by Moses, but by the meanest of his Prophets; but
by Christ the spirit thereof, The words which I speak unto you they are spirit
and they are Life. Christ as he is the truth in an especial manner, so he has
an especial ministration of it, which he began in his own person, and carried
on in his disciples and Apostles: And both he and they had an especial knowledge
of the truth that dwelt in them, and which they were chosen out for the service
and Ministration of. Christ lay in the bosom of the Father before he came into
this world; There he saw things, There he saw this Life and the way to it: And
when that knowledge which he had in him before, springs up here in him in this
World, he knows what it is; He is sure it is that truth which he beheld in
God in the days of old, and which now he receives quick, lively, pure and
clear from the Spirit of God, in this his new state and station. And I know
that his Commandment is Life everlasting. Let this seem what it will to you,
let it seem never so contrary to the will of God, never so contrary to that
dispensation of his by Moses; Let it seem never so strange to all the people of
God upon the face of the earth, yet I know that it is the truth, I know that it
is the true and the only way to life, even to that Life which was promised to
the nature of the seed, and which the nature of man also so much desires. I
know that life is wrapped up in this Commandment; and that they that receive
it, receive Life; and that they that follow and obey it in truth (in the true
nature, life and spirit of it) cannot miss of life, of Life everlasting, And I
know that his Commandment is Life everlasting.

4. What kind of Faith is this, what kind of believing is this, which contains
everlasting life in it, which draws everlasting life along with it?

Ans. 1. It is the belief of the spirit of man: for that is it which is
exhorted to believe, and that is it which is to be saved. The Son comes not to
save himself, but to seek and save lost man. It is for him he brings forth
and lays down his own Life: but yet that way whereby he saves him, is by that
Faith which he receives and acts from the nature of the Son in him.

2. Though it be by man's spirit or nature believing in the Son, whereby he
comes to be saved; yet this Faith with all the motions of it are comprehended
and acted in the holy Spirit. Every motion of man that tends to life, is
performed in the spirit of God. As every thing that is spiritual, comes alone
from the Spirit: so it only lives and moves, and acts aright in the Spirit. All
the repentance, mourning, joy, hope, prayer, etc. that are Spiritual, as they
spring from the spirit, so they grow up and come forth in the spirit, praying
always in the holy Ghost.

3. It is from a new Root. The faith that saves is from the new birth. The
faith that saves this old nature, springs from a new nature. He that is not new
Born, has not an eye to see Life, nor an heart to desire it, nor a foot to
walk in the way of it. So that though I said in the first place, it is the
belief of the man, yet that is not primarily and most properly true; for it is
the belief of the new Life in the man (which also needs salvation in this
state, wherein it is bred and brought up here in this world:) from whence it
entering into, springing up in, taking possession of, and leavening the man, it
becomes his also. It purges out the old nature of the man, and infuseth this
new, insomuch as this is now become the nature and life of the man also. So
that not only now* Christ in the man believes, but the man also believes in
and through Christ which dwells in him, and has changed him into and
communicated unto him his own nature.

The way being thus cleared, the Observation it self will now appear more
manifest, which is this.

Obser. That Christ held out from true light, from certain knowledge, that
believing is the way to Life. Christ did not guess at it (or imagine it
strongly) as we do at most of the things we speak of, but he knew that his
Commandment is life everlasting.

The certainty of Christ in the things of God, arises from this four fold
ground. First, From his own nature, Secondly, From his union with the Spirit,
Thirdly, From his Life, and Fourthly, from his Light. Each of these contribute
much toward, but all of them together can make up no less then an absolute
infallibility.

1. From his own nature. The nature of Christ is Divine; He is not of this
Earth, but from above. He is begotten by God in his own spirit, He is the truly
natural Son of God. Now this nature cannot be deceived, because as it flows
from truth alone, so it is purely truth in it self, and knows not how to
entertain or admit of any thing but truth. Its nature is perfectly shut up
against every lie and deceit, it naturally turns from it and thrusts it
away: Its nature has nothing in it, to receive any thing of that nature, and
therefore cannot receive it. Now he which is naturally true and cannot take in
a lie, surely he cannot possibly bring forth a lie. Hence arises the certainty
of all the senses of Christ, and of all the motions of Christ, Namely from
their nature: They are of a true, of a perfect kind, and cannot but act truly
according to their kind.

2. From his union with the Spirit. His nature is not only excellent, right,
and of a perfect kind; but it is also in union with the original from whence it
sprang. Adam might be in union with the root of the flesh (but if he were, yet
that root will not preserve its offspring, therefore he fell:) But Christ's
nature is in union with the root of the Spirit, therefore he cannot miscarry;
both because that root cannot but preserve its seed, and because that nature
cannot but be sucking nourishment from the root. (There is no nature might in
reason be more independent, in respect of its own excellency and fullness, and
yet no nature is more dependent, which arises from its constitution, and is
its wisdom and safety.) There is absolute certainty in the root, and there is
no less certainty in Christ: for the very same certainty, which is in the
nature of the root, springs up in him; yea his nature, being in union with
the root, has also communion with it, insomuch as he enjoys the truth there
in the time of his light, and is comprehended by it in the time of his darkness.

3. From his Life. Christ has a Life in him suitable to his nature: A true
Life, a Spiritual Life, a Divine Life. His Spirit, as it has the nature, so
also it has the Life of the Spirit of God. All his motions spring from his own
life, and so cannot but be as certain unto him in his kind (yea much more, his
life being of a more certain kind) as our motions which spring in us from our
life, are to us in our kind. We are not certain about the things of God,
because our life is not of the same nature with the things of God: but he is
very certain, because his is. Our knowledge at best is but revealed, it is but
given in to our life: but his knowledge is natural, it flows from his life.
Hence it is that every thing, every motion unto him is so pleasant and
satisfactory, namely because it is so natural, because it flows from such a
power of life. Man attains his skill and understanding in divine things by the
sweat of his brows, by the labor and toil of his spirit, and it troubles him
much to bring it forth, to defend and manage it: Yea his own heart and Soul (if
it be a little awakened and enlarged) cannot but find fault with it: but
Christ's skill and understanding springs up in him, and flows forth from him, and
both in its springing up and flowing forth, answers the truth, largeness and
capacity of his nature.

4. From his Light. He has a proper light to see the things of God with; He
has the same light with God. As he lives in the same Country, breaths in the
same air, has the same nature, spirit and life: so he has the same light. He
is called the light, Ioh. 1.7. John came for a witness, to bear witness of the
light. He himself was not that light, but to bear witness of that light, verse
8. That was the true light, verse 9. The light of men and Angels was a true
shadow, The light of the Prophets was a true Testimony: but he is the
substance; He is that true light, which all other lights did but shadow out and
testify concerning. There is an eye proper to every kind of things that is to
be seen, an eye in every nature suitable to the nature of those things which it
is to behold; and there is also a light proper to every eye. Now Christ having
both the eye and the light, how can he choose but see certainly? Gather up these
together.

He that has a true nature, which has a true eye in it; He who is in union
with the spirit of God, which is truth, and who himself is truth in him; He
that has the true life in him for his motions to spring from, the true life to
guide his eye with; And lastly, He that has the true light to see in, how can
he choose but be certain in what he thus views?

And so his seed, having the same nature with him, the same Spirit, the same
Life, the same Light; how can they miss of the same certainty? They cannot but
be guided naturally unto the same things, and upon the same terms of
infallibility.

But now man, Adam take him at his best, who never had this nature, but was
from the beginning the earthly man; who never was in this kind of union with
the spirit; who never had this life or light in him; how can he understand
these kind of things! He may desire to be like God (from a sight of the
excellency of his nature; being and life) and fumble about the things of God,
but he cannot possibly pierce into them. He may gather many apprehensions into
his mind, and approach in his way of reasoning to a certainty, but he cannot
reach the truth. He cannot know eternal Life, it is beyond the capacity of his
nature: He may perhaps reason that there must needs be an eternal Life, and a
way unto it; but he cannot possibly conceive what that eternal Life is, nor
tread the path that leads to it. But the Son or any of the seed cannot miss of
it; for it is written in their nature: That Spirit, that Life, that Light which
guides to it, descends of it self upon them, and springs up of it self in them.

Use 1. Take heed of contradicting Christ in this Testimony of his, which he
gives out upon knowledge. Christ ^^me from God, from the light of God, bringing
the light of God with him; He tells you the truth here, the true state of
things, as he saw and knows them to be with God. And this is his Testimony,
that the present state and course of things tends to a future, that at the last
day Life and Death shall be dispensed, and that the only way to life then, is
by believing now. Christ testified truly and wisely, He understood what he
said, He spoke upon ground, He spoke what he saw by the light and in the bosom
of God: Will thou from thine own head, from a strong fancy or reasoning in
thine own mind, contradict this, and say, There is no such thing?

1. This is very unworthy. If thou will overthrow the Testimony of Christ, do
it fairly, do it by that which is equal to it, by a light of as deep a nature
as his. If thou can not speak upon as good grounds as he, do not undertake to
contradict him.

2. It is very unsafe. Suppose (before the Lord) Christ's should prove a truth,
and thine a conceit, what will become of thee? It is not the strength of thy
apprehension which will then bear thee out. The market is yet open for thee,
wherein thou may buy wine and milk without money, and without price: but by
this means thou make thy self incapable of making use of thy present
opportunity.

Use 2. Ye who find a need of eternal Life, and a desire after it; Consider the
ground of this truth, and so far as it will carry weight, receive it. Receive
it into your natural man, and look up to God to sow a new nature in you, that
so it may give new life to your spirits. Nay by receiving it, it may become a
seed: The light we let into our understandings if it be of a spiritual nature,
is of power to change our understnadings, into spirituality. We little think
what life is wrapped up in the outward seed of the word (as it seems to us)
when God engrafts it into the spirit: Receive with meekness the engrafted word,
which is able to save your Souls. A principle of spiritual darkness, let in by
the ear into the heart, what strange changes does it make there? and why may
not a principle of light be let in the same way, and do as much?

Christ came to save the world, verse 47. He spoke these words to save, he gave
out this testimony to save, and for this end might he also leave it in writing:
And who knows but in the hearing of this sound, Christ may work that faith in
him who hears, which may save him? It is not worth the being busied about
this world, though a man were sure to obtain it: but it were worth the being
busied here, though a man were sure to lose his labor: for it is noble and
excellent to pursue that which is excellent, though one should miss of it.

X. Of the Liberty of the Kingdom, which was outward and shadowy in that
dispensation of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles, but inward and
substantial in the true seed, both before, then, and after that dispensation,
yea and for ever: which Liberty, although it be very large, yet is limited by
the Law of its own Life and Nature.
GAL. 5.13. For, brethren, ye have been called unto Liberty; only use not
Liberty for an occasion to the Flesh, but by love serve one another.


LIberty is the right temper and posture of the new life, whereby it both is
and enjoys it self. It is the breaking all bonds asunder and setting of the
heir free. It is the investing him with his inheritance, and the leaving of him
to the direction and dispose of his own understanding and will, which (he being
grown up in the Lord) are of sufficient light, wisdom and strength to guide him
in the Lord. There is in it (or by it) the removal of all Tutors, of all
Governors, of all Laws, of all kind of discipline in every kind, which was
proper for his nurture and education when his life ran low, but is now no way
convenient when he is come to his full age and growth. Now it is necessary for
his life to be free in its nature, circuits and motions. He being grown up, his
life being come to it self, it is requisite it should have the honor of
disposing of it self, of becoming a rule and guide to it self; nay if it be
truly strong and complete in its nature, it can need no rule, no bonds, no
bounds but it self, but its own nature. So that this is Liberty, when the
nature of a thing is not circumscribed by any Laws or limits whatsoever, but it
has its full scope to the utmost for the exercise of its nature, This I say is
Liberty, full Liberty, complete Liberty, perfect Liberty.

There is no such Liberty in this Life or flowing from this Life, as the
corrupt nature of man seeks, namely a Liberty to satisfy the corruption of his
nature, and that this should not be sin, nor subject to the lash or censure of
any Law, nor able to bring any death or danger upon him: But this Liberty is
pure and holy, like the nature and life from which it flows, and has in it
that which answers every Law of righteousness in every kind. There is no
Liberty here not to love God, or to neglect any Duty of Love, Holiness and
Obedience which his nature and will calls for; no Liberty to be unrighteous or
unmerciful either to man or to the meanest creature: but the Liberty of this
life is perfectly holy, sweet and just. It is a Liberty from all manner of
corruption and unrighteousness, and a Liberty unto all purity and
righteousness. It is a Liberty like that which is in the Nature of God, who can
do nothing that is evil, nor neglect the doing of any thing that is good.

Gods Liberty lies in two things. First, He is free only to his own nature,
nothing can incline him any way, but his own nature, but his own understanding
and will which is from and according to his nature, or which is his nature.
Secondly, In his own nature is comprehended the accurateness and perfection of
all that righteousness, holiness and sweetness, which any dispensed Law darkly
shadows out. So that by the presence, by the purity of the substance he is
freed from the shadow. Now the Liberty of the Seed is a true copy of this: As
their nature is a true extract from the Nature of God, so is their Liberty from
his Liberty. Their nature being thus, in, with and from God, holiness and
righteousness being their very nature, it must needs be the Liberty of their
nature thus to be and thus to act. For Liberty of the nature, is suitable to the
nature, not contrary to it. All the Liberty which crosses the nature and truth
of Life, is but a false appearance (how specious soever) but is not true
Liberty. If a man had his reason at perfect Liberty, he could do nothing that
were irrational, nor neglect the doing of any thing that were rational: So is
it in this Life, its Liberty lies in being free in its own state, nature and
course; Not in being free to, but in being free from all impurity of flesh and
spirit. It is the Liberty of the Lord to be free from sin, weakness and folly:
Not in that he can do the same things which sinners do, and not sin; but his
Nature, Life and Spirit will not permit any such motions to have any place in
him. He is free from the root which bears such fruit. And when his seed are
redeemed, they shall perfectly know and enjoy this Liberty with him; for
neither their spirit nor their flesh shall return any more to folly.

There is a threefold Liberty which are wrapped up within one an other. A
Liberty of the nature of the creature, A Liberty of the nature of man, and A
Liberty of the nature of the new man, which being grown unto perfection,
restores the Liberty of man and of the creature, bringing it forth a new in it
self. Adam by his fall, brought both himself and the Creation into bondage with
him; into which bondage the Son enters (or in this depraved and lost Earth the
seed of Life is sown) who by breaking through these bonds (which it does by the
power of its Life; for though this life may submit unto, yet it is impossible
it should be held down by the Law or the curse) redeemeth both Adam and the
Creation. This leaven entering both into the man and into the creature, spreads
both over the man and over the creature, and by breaking its own bonds, breaks
the bonds both of man and the creature; and by challenging, assuming and
possessing its own Life and Liberty, brings man and the creature into Life
and Liberty: so that though their Life and Liberty is utterly lost in
themselves, yet it is found again in Christ, and found more pure, more perfect,
more stable there, then ever it was in them. (Happy is that man, happy is that
creature which can find the way to true loss, to true bonds; but that is as
impossible to man, to the creature, as it is to it to save it self.)

And this is calling into Liberty, ( Brethren, ye have been called unto
Liberty) namely the breaking forth of this life in the man, which wrapping the
man up in it self, and bringing the man forth again with it self, makes him
both taste of a new nature and of his own nature anew. I confess calling here
in this place, may denote that invitation and inlet into the visible state of
the Gospel (which then was usual) which in comparison of the state of the Law,
was a state of great Liberty; though in respect of true through Liberty it be a
state of great bondage, and the spirit of life in the seed did groan under it
for want of freedom, as well as it did in the Saints of old under the yoke of
the Law. But calling into Liberty, in the true nature of it, is the advancing
of the new nature (which nature is sown here in bonds) into the possession and
enjoyment of it self, and the redeeming of the nature of that man in whom the
new nature is sown, out of the bonds either of its own corruption or of any
dispensation of God, wherewith it is exercised in this its corrupt and enslaved
estate. So that in this Liberty, First, There is a free spirit or nature
begotten and brought forth. Secondly, There is a spreading of this over the
man, conveying into him or taking him into the same free nature. Thirdly, There
is the advancing of both into a free state, and the bringing forth of the
creature in and with them both.

Now perhaps some may yet in truth of spirit desire to hear somewhat more
particularly and distinctly concerning this Liberty, that they might have a
more distinct and demonstrative view of some things which have been already
glanced at; for whose satisfaction, First, I shall touch a little at man's
slavery, and then propose to consideration the principal parts of this freedom.

Man's slavery consists chiefly in these three things.

1. He is enslaved to himself, or to the Law of sin and death which dwells in
him, which is now become himself. His understanding is a slave to dark and
corrupt princples, his will to vain and destructive desires. That little reason
that is yet remaining in his understanding and will, is a slave and subject to
the Law and curse of that corruption which dwells in him. 2. He is enslaved to
Satan; He rules him at pleasure. This world, the whole state of this world, the
whole frame and motions of man's spirit, all the powers and operations of his
nature, lie in that wicked one, and are disposed of by him. So that man cannot
see the true light, not of reason, because the God of this world blinds his
eyes* nor can he observe or obey what he does discern of good (further then God
winds him up and assists him by some power, which sometimes he lets forth upon
him in a dispensation, which for that season refreshes the ingenuity and
integrity of his nature, setting it on work for God and toward good, but
otherwise the spirit of man stands at a distance from that light of Holiness
and Righteousness that shines upon him in any of the dispensations of God)
because Satan binds his heart, his hands, his feet, his whole man. So that
there is no true liberty in the freest nature or clearest reason, ( Satan does
but cozen a man in making him believe, either that he can or will dispose of
himself according to the light of reason:) but only in those whom God by his
wisdom, love and pleasure turns from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God. 3. He is enslaved to Laws, Ordinances and Observations, either
such as were written in his own nature (which yet have a dark being and
residence there, and which God can stir up at any time for any end or design of
his) or such as are dispensed to him in such or such a state. Thus God has
pleased to use many ways for the exercise of man in his present broken
condition. Thus the Jews were exercised with several Laws and kinds of
Discipline, and so also the Gentiles or believing Christians after them: The
former of these was a state of great slavery, and the latter was not a
thoroughly free state, though it might very well be accounted free in compare
with the former. There was indeed a true taste of the truth in that State, but
the State it self was not the truth (but only a more complete shadow then the
Law) and therefore must vanish and give way whenever the truth appears. This
is the sum or main of the slavery of man, whereunto the several inferior
parcels of it may be referred.
Now the freedom of the seed, and of Man and the creature in, with and through
the seed, lies chiefly in three things also. To let pass freedom from
corruption and vanity, which though it be wonderfully excellent, and not to be
found in the air where we breath, yet that may so easily be supposed and is so
fully comprehended in the other, as I cannot but omit it: Therefore to let that
pass, I say freedom consists in these three things.

1. In a disobligation from all Laws of an inferior nature. That man cannot be
free who is in subjection to any laws or ordinances of an inferior nature,
spirit, or principle then his own life is. The Lord has given laws and
ordinances to man in his several states and conditions, all which the life
advanced to its own proportion of liberty in Christ is free from. They who are
truly dead with Christ, are freed by that their death, from their former
husband the law. The life which was married to it died and has been laid in
the grave, and there is no marrying or giving in marriage any more (even in
this sense) in the grave or after the Resurrection. The life having dyed in
that state and dispensation wherein it was brought forth and placed, that it
might fulfill it and dye; and having slain the man also with it, yea the very
root and spirit of his life: If either or both rise up any more, they rise up
free: They can rise no more under the law of that dispensation, to which they
were slain.

So that the life in liberty is as it were a Lord over all the dispensations of
God; which as they are of an inferior nature to this life, so it is their
proper place to be in subjection to it. He in whom the life lives and reigns,
may in or out at pleasure, use them or leave them, as the light and pleasure of
the nature of this life directs him. He may take any of them, and seem bound
under them, though in himself he is still free: he may leave them off again,
and manifest his own freedom, when he sees his time. All things are lawful for
me, says the Apostle, but all things are not expedient: as if he had said, I
can do any thing, I can use any thing, but yet withal I know my time: My
spirit which knows the greatness, the largenes of my liberty, knows also
how to manage it. And he shows as much in his practice, for though at one time
he could shave himself and enter into the Temple in a way of legal
purification, yet at another time when certain crept in to espy out his
Liberty, he would not give place by subjection, no not for an hour, but would
maintain his Liberty in the very face of them. He could make use of
circumcision himself by virtue of this Liberty (for he circumcised Timothy)
though he tells the Galathians, that if they were circumcised, Christ would
profit them nothing.

Nor is this Liberty restrained to the life in it self, but sinks with the life
into the man. All things were made for man, (All Creatures, all Ordinances, all
Laws, all Institutions, and Commandments,) not man for them, as Christ says
particularly concerning the Sabbath, The Sabbath was made for man, not man for
the Sabbath; and when man comes to his right place, he shall be above them all,
and they shall all be subservient to him, for whose service, use and discipline
they were made. It is true, Man in his present estate is a servant under them
and enslaved by them; yea the life it self, though by the right of its own
nature it be far more free, yet for a season it may lie under greater bonds,
then man in his condition of slavery has yet tasted: but when the Son grows
up to his freedom, he becomes free indeed; yea, and that man whom he makes
free, is free also. But it is a great vanity for any to dream of, and to think
to make use of and live according to this freedom, before it be truly brought
forth in them. It is not by having the clear notions and apprehensions of
Liberty, or by taking scope to themselves according to these notions, that men
become free: but it is by the nature, growth, and advancement of the true life
in them, from and according to the true light and Power of the Spirit of the
Lord. The former is but poor man's aspiring into a state into which he is not
rightly led, which tends to greater bonds: The other is a fair passage through
and from under bonds, to which, that person who is once set free by the truth,
shall never be reduced; For the Lord will maintain that Liberty, unto which his
own Spirit, Life and Power exalts. This is the First thing wherein Liberty
consists, a disobligation from all Laws and Ordinances inferior to the nature
or life which is bound by them.

2. Liberty consists in an exemption from all powers of a Superior nature. If
Satan may be supposed to be stronger then the life (as he is, compared with the
life in its weakness, though he that then stands by the life and takes care of
it, is stronger then Satan,) yet the life shall be free from him: The life
which deserves to be called free, must be out of the reach or fear of his
claws. The life is not free which Satan may interrupt, or at least not while he
may interrupt it. Satan must down when the life springs up. God will trample
down Satan before the presence of the life, nay under the feet both of man, and
the creature, when the life appears in them. The God of peace will tread down
the troublesome spirit of Satan, under the spirits yea and under the flesh too
of all his Saints, in the day of their freedom. Nay the very Power of God, so
far as it was dreadful to Christ and to his Saints (for they have always
complained of that, as the most terrible thing which they have had to deal
with, and indeed it is that that chiefly afflicts and slays them in the
hour of their sickness and death, though all the time of their life it was
their chief support) I say this power they must be secured from too in the day
of their Liberty. God will not now interpose any more with his exercises, as he
formerly did in his time of nurturing the life; but henceforth there issues
nothing from him, but what answers the nature and desire of the life.

3. Liberty lies (and that most of all) in the cleerness, strength and
perfection of life: in the temper of the spirit: in the nature, life and growth
of the spirit. If the spirit were never so free from all Laws on the one hand,
and from all powers on the other hand, yet if it failed of cleerness, strength
or perfection of life, it could not be perfectly at liberty. If it want either
light or strength of life to move with, it cannot but fall short in its
motions; and though it were never so free in other respects, yet it would still
be bound up in the darkness, weakness and imperfection of its own nature. If
man's reason were free from all Laws and bonds whatsoever, yet if it were not
full in its own nature, if it wanted either light or strength in its kind, man
could not be free either in the exercise or enjoyment of his natural principle:
And this holds also in the spiritual principle, Its Liberty lies in the
perfection of its nature; therefore though he may have a taste of it before,
yet he cannot be fully free, until he be brought forth in perfection. There
must be a clear spirit within, a clear course and passage for the spirit, clear
light about the spirit, and full strength and vigor in the spirit, or there
cannot be a through freedom. If the spirit have any clouds, any darkness about
it self, it is not free: If there be any rubs in its way it cannot walk freely
(therefore God promises to this life an high way, a plain path in the day of
its redemption and freedom, as Isai. 35.8.) If its light be not very full and
clear, and its strength absolutely perfect in reference to its own nature and
state, it will want of its Liberty, it will not be able to come forth or walk
in perfect freedom. So that that Liberty which is perfect and complete, must be
of a perfect seed, from a perfect root, perfectly grown up and situated in the
life and Spirit of the Lord; from which alone it proceeds and grows up, and
in which alone it can live and be enjoyed.

It has been and still is a great question, how far those that are in Christ
are freed from the Law; and whether their sins be against the Law or no, or
only against Christ who is their Life and Law? In relation whereunto (since it
falls so fairly in my way) I shall lay down three Conclusions, which may
occasion the clearing of it in part, and the further better right understanding
of this Liberty: wherewith I intend to conclude the point, only adding somewhat
concerning the abuse (which it is very liable unto, as every other spiritual
thing also is, in the way that hitherto it has broke forth and appeared) and
right use of Liberty, from the following words. The Conclusions are these.

1. He that is in Christ cannot sin against the Law, because he is not under
it, and therefore cannot be bound by it, nor be engaged to give any account
unto it. He is under another husband, and therefore free from this, as the
Apostle reasons, Romans 7. But yet mark, As Christ himself in his fleshly state
was under the Law (who was the forerunner and pattern:) so all his seed in
their fleshly state are under the Law likewise. They may have sometimes a sight
of life and a taste of liberty; but until they have followed Christ into his
grave, and are become dead with him, yea and risen with him too, they shall not
enjoy it. While the life lives in the flesh, it lives under the Law: when the
life comes to live in the spirit alone, it shall be perfectly freed from the
Law.

This is most certain, The life of its own nature is not under the Law, nor can
its nature (to speak properly) be subjected to the Law, though it may act a
part of subjection for a season: yet in the acting of that part, the sparklings
of a diviner life and Law (which swallow up this weak life with the whole Law
of it) cannot but now and then appear, as they did in Christ, in the time of
his subjection and servitude. But the man in which the life inhabits, and
through which the life acts, is weak, and has only a promise of strength and
of redemption with the life, after his death and resurrection with it, but has
not any full sense or participation of it, but is to remain under bondage, and
to travail up and down in the wilderness of this worldly state with the life
until then. And though in the Apostles times the Lord did let out both this
life and this liberty, into the humane nature in his Saints, to give a little
glimps what they were; yet they were let forth but weakly, and they were soon
clapped in again, and the old husband (the Law) returns and takes universal
possession again, though under the name of the life and Liberty of the Gospel.

This then is the sum. To all men whatsoever, until they be swallowed up into
the spirit of Christ, the law is still a Schoolmaster: and they may find, if
they observe themselves, the Law of nature or the Law of good and evil, which
is written in their hearts by nature, and further revived by acquired knowledge
(whether from the light springing up in man, and so received thence, or from
the light held forth in the Scriptures) continually instructing and discipling
of them. As a Schoolmaster it exercises them as its Disciples and Scholars.
Yea in the very times of the Apostles, though they had attained a strain of
freedom which was not attained before, yet they were not altogether free; but
groaned under bondage and panted after Liberty.

2. He that is in Christ cannot do that which the Law judges to be sin. He
cannot act against the righteousness that is in the Law. He can no more live to
sin, then he can live to the Law. He has as little to do with any thing which
the Law judges evil, as with the Law it self. He can give no offense to any
that have any true light in them, for he can do nothing against any true light
in any kind. This is the nature of truth; It longs for, it seeks after, it
knows, it embraces both its own image and its own substance: Truth in the
image longs after the substance, Truth in the substance comprehends,
acknowledges and embraces the image. The righteousness which is in Christ and
his seed, in its nature, motions and actions, comprehends the righteousness
of the Law. Indeed it cannot be comprehended by it, but it comprehends it; and
the righteousness of the Law knows it and gives way to it. It has more in
it, a far higher kind of righteousness then the Law calls for, but it has
that also. Every spiritual motion is beyond the nature and excellency of the
Law, but yet it has all that excellency that the Law can possibly expect or
exact, and therefore cannot offend against the life or truth of the Law. The
life and righteousness that is in Christ, most naturally cherishes the life
and righteousness that is in the Law, which they who taste of the truth as it
is in Jesus, are taught to understand.

3. If he could possibly do that which the Law judges to be sin, yet his sin
would not be directly against the Law (for the Law cannot judge him as a sinner,
who is not under it) but against his own life; which is a greater offense, and
has more of the nature of sin in it, then if it were against the Law. He that
is in Christ has a new life in him which is sown in his spirit, and his spirit
with that life is transplanted into Christ, who is his Lord and Lawgiver: And
what he now is, he is in Christ; and what he now does, he does unto Christ, and
is not now any longer under that dispensation of the Law, in which he was
before his transplantation: so that he is not henceforth so much as in a
capacity of sinning against it.

This then is the sum. They that are in Christ, (in his Spirit, dead and risen
with him, who are entered into and swallowed up in the newness, Virtue, Life and
Power of his Death and Resurrection) are not subject to the Law of any
dispensation (though they can also fulfill any, yea and are to fulfill the Law of
every dispensation:) but only to the Law of pure nature. Nor can they properly
be said to be subject to that, for of it self it flows from their nature, and
that in a way of subjection to them, so that they may be rather said to be
Lords over it. All the dispensations of God with all the Laws of them, flow
from that life which is in Christ and his seed, from which life they come, in
which life they are comprehended, to which life they are inferior and owe
subjection: And though the Lord exercise his Son under them for a season, so
that they are above and he below, they Lords and he a Servant under them; yet
when the heir is grown up to his age, understanding and liberty, it cannot but
be otherwise. And this is the right and proper state and posture of things
(whereas all things are now out of order, the first last, and the last first)
when every inferior nature is comprehended in and subject unto the superior:
When the sensitive part is subject to the rational, the rational to the
spiritual, the spiritual to the divine: The creature to man, man to Christ,
Christ to God.

And when this is effectually sprung up, brought forth, and perfected, then
comes the Kingdom, the universal Kingdom, the Kingdom both of God, of Christ,
and of man. Then God shall reign, when he has pitched his Tabernacle, built up
his Temple, erected his Throne and Kingdom wherein he will reign: When he has
taught his Son and his creature perfect subjection to himself, then will he
reign in them both. Then Christ shall reign; When he is become perfectly
subject, when he has thoroughly learned obedience by the things that he has
suffered, and has given up his life to the will of the Father, and lain in the
grave during his pleasure, Then will the Lord at length raise him up to the
Crown, give him the Kingdom, set him at his own right hand, and he shall reign
henceforth in God and with God. Yea, When man has learned this lesson from
Christ, and has laid down his life also and buried it in the grave of Christ,
and there let it lie the time of Christ's pleasure, Then will Christ also at
last raise him up in his own life (even as God raised up Christ in his life)
and he shall reign in Christ, and with Christ in God for ever and ever. And now
tell me, ye that have skill, which is the most Honorable of these, Gods
reigning in Christ and in man, Christ's reigning in God and in man, or man's
reigning in God and in Christ. Surely God will manifest his skill in imparting
himself wholly and fully to his Christ, and Christ will show the same skill
(and will not fall short in it) of conveying all to man that God imparts to
him. If the whole river cannot run entirely and perfectly every where, it will
not be satisfied in it self; it will not be able to satisfy the desire of its
nature, which is, after this manner, to empty it self. The Lord will sow
liberally, that he may reap liberally; Nor is it any dishonor to him, for us
to see, acknowledge and hold forth the greatness, Excellency and Majesty of him
in his seed. Hitherto the Worshipping even of God by the mouths and in the
spirits of most men, has been Idolatry: but hereafter ye shall see man
worshipped without Idolatry. When the Lord clotheth the flesh of his seed with
his own Spirit, the spirit of man so soon as ever he beholds it, shall fall
down before it: Yea all the Angels of God shall worship him. The meanest Life
of Christ in the lowest of his seed (if any thing here may be termed mean or
low) shall deserve the greatest worship of the highest Angels.

Only use not Liberty for an occasion to the flesh.
The flesh will be entering into all the spiritual things of God, but it is only
into the flesh of them, and to serve the flesh by them.

This they who are the seed, in the true nature, cannot do: and they who are
advanced to be a type or representation of the seed in any dispensation (and so
have a taste of the nature, life and liberty of the seed) are carefully to
avoid the doing of it, in that dispensation wherein they are placed by the
spirit of the Lord. The spirit of life in the seed cannot do thus (This is
clean contrary to the nature of that life;) nor the humane spirit neither so
far as it dwells in, and is comprehended by that life. But that which is but
spirit in a type, or by virtue of a dispensation, but is still flesh at root in
its own in most nature, is very prone to do thus; yea as also the flesh which
hangs about that which is spirit in truth, both which prejudice themselves very
much there, and therefore should endeavor, watch and pray that they might
avoid it.

Only use not Liberty for an occasion, etc.
Ye may use all your Liberty, only do not abuse it. If it be in any kind an
occasion or advantage to the flesh, ye abuse it. If ye manage it so as to
satisfy any desire, any delight of the flesh, this is not true Liberty rightly
made use of, but the Liberty of the Gospel injured.

The Liberty of the Gospel, it sets free the spirit, but it is a yoke of
bondage to the flesh, it binds up the man wonderful-strait in all his nature
and motions, letting him not one whit-further loose, then he is new made in
this new life.

That Liberty therefore which feeds and satisfies the flesh, which gives scope
to the carnal spirit of man, is not the truth. And if there be any light which
the spirit of man has by the Revelation of the Gospel, whereby he apprehends
and practices such liberty, he understands not that light, he abuses that
light.

More particularly, There are three main ways of abusing this liberty, or the
flesh is very apt to take occasion by this liberty to corrupt it self and
prejudice the life of its spirit, chiefly in these three respects: In reference
to its Temper, in reference to its Rest, in reference to its Motions. What the
spirit slays by true spiritual Liberty, the flesh getting into the outside of
it quickens: and what the spirit thereby quickens, the flesh thereby slays.

1. The flesh is apt to take occasion by Gospel-Liberty, to corrupt it self in
its Temper, to begin to lift up it self as if it were something. The flesh,
when its own nakedness is discovered to it, and when it is cast into grievous
bonds, feeling the fetters and shakles of sin, death and misery about it, it is
mightily ashamed: but when it feels these fallen off, and in stead thereof it
finds it self clothed with the life and liberty of the spirit, it begins to
prick up its ears again, and look upon it self as somebody. O how low were the
people of the Jews, both in the eye of the world and in their own thoughts,
before the Lord clothed and adorned them: but afterward, how loftily did they
look upon the rest of the world and scorn them even as dogs? Neither were the
converted Gentiles altogether free from this snare, but they were apt likewise
to boast not only over the rest of the world, but over the Jews also, Romans 11.

2. The flesh will also take advantage hereby to corrupt it self in its Rest.
There is a rest for the people of God, a rest from all the toilsome motions of
the humane spirit: which the flesh will lay hold on to neglect what it should
do, and the doing whereof does not contradict or interrupt this rest, but
flows from it. The flesh by this liberty will be apt to think it is become
its own, and may neglect any duties or ordinances (duties of love and service,
ordinances of worship, etc.) as it shall think good: whereas the flesh has no
more liherty in this respect, then as it is drenched into and truly led by the
spirit. The spirit of the Lord is free; and so far as our spirit, yea and as
our flesh also, is taken into the spirit of the Lord, it partaketh of this
freedom. But the flesh, which is in part thus advanced, must know its place and
distance; It must know as well how to descend, stand and walk in its present
place, relation and order, as to ascend and maintain fellowship with the Lord.
But this the flesh, till it be thoroughly mortified, cannot learn to do, but
will be continually seeking its own honor and ease, and abusing all the light,
life and liberty of the spirit: therefore the Lord has great reason to keep
the flesh very short, even in his choicest ones.

3. The flesh will also think it has liberty to do what it pleases, and so
will make use of this liberty to glut it self with all manner of vanity and
sensuality. The flesh which naturally longs to take its fill of the delights
of the flesh, does as naturally incline to take all advantages, and will not
stick to bend aside the very light, life, and liberty of the spirit thereunto.
O what draughts of vanity will it now swill down, when once it feels it self
fenced from the fear of that danger which was its only curb. Now will every
fleshly spirit take its swindg, according to its temper and inclination, some
in more gross and sensual, some in more refined and spiritual pollutions.

Thus that wherein the breath, life and spirit of the Gospel lies (An holy
Temper, an holy Rest, and holy Motions) the flesh gets into and corrupts,
and thereby eats out all the excellency and vigor of life which was let out
in the dispensation, destroys that precious savor and leaven which it had
from the life, conceives with some new seed of spiritual filthiness, and at
last brings forth a more unclean filthy birth of the flesh, then its womb was
capable of before.

But by love serve one another.
Man would have liberty to reign, He would have every thing serve him: He
makes use of his Light, his Life, his Liberty to serve himself; and to make
every thing else serve him. But the life in Christ and his seed, which flows
from the Love of the Father and dwells in love, delights to serve. It will
be serviceable to every thing, but especially to that nature which is the same
with it self. This nature teaches it not only self-love, which every nature
teaches, but also to love its neighbor here, as it self.

Christ though he was a King and had a Kingdom, yet he came not here to reign,
but to serve: And all his seed who partake of the same life, follow him (who is
their guide) in the same steps. As they have the same nature of love with him;
so the same nature guides them to the same service of love.

The love that is in Christ, and the love that is in the Saints, makes their
humane spirit, with all the life, liberties and enjoyment of it, which it
either has in it self or receives by the Gospel, to serve both the life of
their own spirits and the life in one another, and that under all the
weaknesses in which it is sown or can grow up. It is more pleasant and natural
to Christ and his seed, to deny their Liberty and enter into bonds for the
advantage of others, then to enjoy it for their own satisfaction. The Liberty
of their natures, the Liberty of their spirits they cannot lose, and as for the
Liberty of any outward practice, it is not of so much value as to be maintained
to another prejudice. Liberty can exercise and enjoy it self as much in the
forbearance, as in the use: nay it is direct bondage not to be able to wave it
in such a case. He is a slave, he is in bonds, he has not a large and free
spirit, who can only reign, but cannot serve; who cannot deny himself with the
same ease and content wherewith he observes himself. He is bound up in his
Nature, he is restrained in his Liberty; He is free but in part, he has not
arrived at the complete temper of the life, for the life can do both, and has
a time and season for both.

XI. Of the low Ebb, which the Lord Christ was brought to, by his Death and
Sufferings.
PSALM. 22.6. But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of
the people.


THis is the state and condition of Christ in the time of his Death. This is
his dying sense, or his sense when he is dying, of his own state and posture
therein. In the midst of his life, while the Power of God rested in him and the
Glory of God shone upon him, he was a God and no man: He was one with the
Father; one in substance, one in life, one in motion, operation and enjoyment.
But now in the season of his Death, in the time of his desertion and affliction
(while that life fails and gives up the ghost, for want of the presence and
influence of God, and by the power and force of the enemy) as he was before
lifted up far above the state of man, so now he falls far beneath it, I am a
worm and no man. That excellency which is in man, (that excellency which may
yet be found in man even in his broken state,) Christ is stripped of when his
own life dies, so that in truth he is not a man, not so much as a man. This is
not an hyperbolical or passionate expression, but the expression of a true
sense from a true understanding. Which will appear more clearly, if we consider
these things which are most eminent in man, as his Beauty, his Majesty, his
Wisdom, his Strength, his Intercourse with God; all which Christ was stripped
of in the time of his Death, in all which respects he was more like to a worm
then a man.

1. For the Beauty of man. Man is evidently the most lovely, the most comely
piece, of the whole Creation. He is as it were the extract, the quintescence of
the Creation exactly formed. As Christ is exactly formed to be the beloved of
God: so Man is exactly formed to be the beloved of Christ. And as the Godhead
pleases it self in the beauty and loveliness of Christ: so Christ (and in him
the Godhead) pleases himself in the loveliness of man. God says to Christ and
Christ says to man, Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee. Long
before this world was both the delight of God and of Christ was in and about
man: Before the mountains were settled, etc. While as yet he had not made the
Earth nor the fields, etc. Then was I by him: Rejoicing in the habitable parts
of his Earth, and my delights were with the sons of men. Prove. 8.25, 26. and
30, 31.

2. There is a Majesty in man. God who appointed man to be his Vicegerent, set
a stamp of his own Majesty upon him. And this is yet to be seen in man, there
are the relics of it yet in his nature, and a sense thereof in the nature of
the Creatures. There is a stamp of subjection upon all the creatures, and a
stamp of dominion and Majesty in man.

3. There is Wisdom in man, Man is as it were the head of the wisdom of the
Creation. Man has a light in him beyond the Creature, whereby he can
comprehend it, manage it and make it to serve him. He has a great root and
principle of wisdom in him, whereby he knows both God, himself and the
creature, and can effect strange things. He can foresee and provide for good
and against evil: He can search out what he wants, yea and make use of what he
finds. Look upon the wisdom which man yet has, and ye shall find, that he is
as it were a God and lives like a God, in compare with the rest of the
Creation.

4. Man has Strength too, Strength suitable to his estate. Take him with that
addition which his wisdom adds to his strength, and he can do great things.
Take him with his engines and he is stronger then any other part of the
Creation, nay then all the rest of the Creation put together. What can he not
do? what can he not suffer? The Spirit of a man will bear his infirmities. All
the infirmities which ordinarily befall man, nay all the infirmities proper to
man, there is strength in the spirit of man to graple with. Indeed when God
does break man, when God does wound him, then he grows weak: but otherwise
man has a great deal of strength yet remaining. The Egyptians are men and not
God, and their Horses flesh and not spirit; when the Lord shall stretch out his
hand, both he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down,
and they all shall fail together. O what a weak thing is man in the midst of
all his strength, when God comes to deal with him! But set God aside, and who
knows his strength? What buildings would man raise, what defenses would he
make for himself, what would he be, what would he do, what would he suffer, did
not the Lord provide a worm to gnaw at the Root of his spirit?

5. Man has a kind of intercourse with God. He is yet nearer to God, and has
yet more converse with him, then the residue of the Creation. His relation is
of it self closer, and his Communion more intimate. God speaks more directly
to him, provideth more directly for him (Gods voice to and care over things is
in a great degree in reference to him and for his sake:) And he knows God,
loves God, trusts in God, calls upon God, in another way and after another
manner, then the rest of the Creatures can. There is yet a touch left, there
yet remains a wild portraict of the glorious work of God upon man. This is, in
part, a taste of the excellency of man; this is his nature, this is his life,
this is his estate still in some degree, though fallen exceedingly short of its
own glory, truth and fullness.

But now, The life of Christ is far beyond the life of man. He exceeds man,
further then man does the creatures.

The Beauty of Christ wonderfully exceeds the beauty of man. Christ's beauty is
of a deeper, a purer, a more inward nature: The very rays and luster of the
inward spirit of the divinity dwell in him, and shine from his face. There is
wonderful beauty in the nature, visage, and in all the motions of the life and
spirit of Christ: His faith, his love, his sweetness, meekness, patience, etc.
O how resplendent! All that is beautiful in man, he has in him after a much
more lovely manner, and a peculiar beauty of his own besides.

And so his Majesty is also far greater. Man in all his Majesty, cannot but
admire at (and bow before) the Majesty of Christ in his person, words and
gestures. He appeared like one of another region, He spoke with another manner
of spirit, and in such a way as was suitable to the Majesty of his own spirit,
He taught as one having authority. And though he was exceeding full of love and
tenderness, yet his Majesty kept his disciples so in awe, that they durst not
ask him any question but very humbly and with great fear and reverence.

The Wisdom also of Christ did far transcend the wisdom of Man. The root
thereof was of a better kind, planted in better earth, deeper rooted, more
carefully attended, and of a better growth. Christ was able (by the skill and
virtue of his nature) to contrive spiritual designs, to manage spiritual
affairs, to provide for spiritual good and against spiritual evil: yea far
more skillful was he in his spiritual estate then man in his natural. A very
wise and understanding shepherd, able to walk himself and guide all his sheep
through all danger, distractions, oppositions, intricacies and deaths into the
full truth and substance of life.

And the Strength of Christ is great too. What cannot Christ do? what cannot
Christ suffer? The Life of Christ can better dye its death, then man can his.
It can go through weakness better. It can endure to be far more weak, and in
that weakness dye a far more bitter death. It can run through all conditions,
all duties, all afflictions, all dispensations with ease and delight, I know
how to want, says Paul, and how to abound, yea I can do all things through
Christ strengthening me. And in another place he instanceth in the worst and
hardest things, expressing at what an height he felt his life able to maintain
it self in the very midst of them: Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake:
for when I am weak, then am I strong. 2 Cor. 12.10.

Lastly, Christ's intercourse with God, how sweet, how full is it! He is ever
conversing with God, God is ever conversing with him. He eyeth God in every
thing: in all spiritual motions, in all natural motions. In spiritual motions
he has to do with nothing but him; in natural motions he has to do with him
chiefly. He is the chief thing which God eyeth, and God is the chief thing
which he eyeth in every thing. I have set the Lord always before me: because he
is at my right hand, I shall not be moved, Psalm. 16.8. Mark, There is a mutual
conjunction, a natural union between God and Christ (for this posture of each
here flows from it and points at it) they place themselves by one another,
they mind one another, they stand by and to one another. Christ seteth God
before him, and God places himself by Christ, stands at his right hand, and
this is their mutual content, delight and safety. They are well, secure, and
perfectly at hearts-ease while they are together. All misery from the beginning
to the end, arises from their separation and distance, and will soon vanish
when the whole course of that is perfectly over.

Thus Christ is in his life: But now in the death of Christ it is far
otherwise. Christ in his death falls not only beneath this Glory, but also
beneath the glory of man. God when he breaks Christ, breaks him more
terribly then he has yet broken man; leaves not so much excellency in him, as
he has yet left in man; but he beholds himself (and who ever can look upon
him shall find him) more in the condition of a worm then a man.

There is no more beauty in him, then in a worm: no more majesty in him, then
in a worm: no more wisdom or strength in him, then in a worm. He has lost all
his light and all his strength in the things of God. He knows not how to
believe, hope, pray or do any thing which requires life and assistance from
God: and yet his nature cannot but do these things in a very vehement manner,
though not after the same rate of understanding and life which he possessed
before, nor with the aid of so powerful an influence. But in what ever he is or
does, or what ever befalls him, God regards him not, God takes no more notice of
him then of a worm. Christ who served God with the strength of his life all the
days of his life, what a stranger is God unto him in the time of his death.
Call he may again and again in his extremity for relief, for support, for
somewhat to stay his fainting spirit; but no news, no return, no regard from
God, no more then the worm has that crauls upon the ground: My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? why so far from helping me, and from the words of my
roaring? O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in the
night, and there is no silence to me, Psalm. 22.1, 2. I am a worm and no man.

A reproach of men. That is somewhat more. Man is pitied by man in his broken
estate, but Christ is reproached. To have been high and then to fall low, is a
matter of reproach, especially where a further ascent was spoken of and
asserted. Christ and the people of God talk of neerness to God, and further
advancement by God, yea of perfection in God: therefore when they are thus
forsaken (as they are really and perfectly forsaken in that fleshly
dispensation, wherein they are at first brought forth, and for a season
assisted and owned) and their life broken and slain, they become a grievous
reproach. Man cannot forbear upbraiding Christ, when he beholds him dying.
When man feels his own life, which Christ so disdained and still testified
against, I say, when man feels this so far above the Life of Christ, (as it
appears to be and indeed is when Christ is dying) he cannot but reproach
Christ. Christ is such a proper object of scorn to the spirit of man, in the
time of his death, as cannot but draw forth scorn from him. For man to see and
feel himself alive and free from that death wherewith he was threatened, and
the death to fall upon Christ who threatened it, even such a death as concludes
his death for ever to man's eye, and secures man from all that danger which
might accrue to him from the Power of Christ's Life, and which man might stand
in some fear of, this cannot but stir in man the spirit of derision, and cause
him in his very heart to reproach Christ. A reproach of men.

And despised of the people. Christ in his death is not only a reproach to man,
but to the very people of God also. The fleshly people of God cannot but then
despise this life. As they cannot but in some degree honor it, when they see
the sweet and powerful shining forth of it: ( Never man spoke like this man. He
has done all things well, etc.) So they cannot but despise it, when they see
it declining. Such is the temper of fleshly Israel, and such the way of Christ's
appearing, that the truth and glory of his life is more hidden from them then
from the world, and their despite of him in his death is greater. O how they
please themselves in their fleshly zeal and devotion, when they find the spirit
and life of Christ dying in and passing through his flesh.

All they that see me, laugh me to scorn.
There is nothing feels greater contempt, nor more universal, then Christ in
his death. The eye of man universally contemns him, yea the whole heart of
man laughs at him with the greatest derision and disdain that can be. High,
low, rich, poor, Jew, Gentile, and every sort and sect among each, loath Christ
in this state, He is now become the abhoring of all flesh. They jeer at him,
they trample upon him with the greatest laughter and scorn, and without the
least regret. They spit in his face, they buffet him, they shoot out the lip,
they shake the head, He is a worm and no man with them too.

He trusted on the Lord, that he would deliver him.

This is one expression of the great contumely in their spirits. This is the
man that trusted on God for deliverance. This is that great and glorious life
which came from God, which so depended upon God, which was so sure to be
secured by God. The wisdom of man should fall, the strength of man should fall,
but he should be preserved and delivered by God. He would not walk in the way
of man, nor he should not come to the end of man. God loatheth man, in the
midst of all his wisdom, righteousness and excellency; but this is the beloved
of God, the delight of God. Behold now what he is! Behold now where he is! Now
let God arise and save his choice one, his beloved one! He trusted on the Lord,
that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, if he delight in him.

O foolish man! Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into
his Glory? If Christ will reap the great Glory and riches of the increase of
his life, ought he not to reduce it into a seed, and to sow that seed in a womb
of death suitable to the nature of it? O vain man, never wast thou more
deceived! Thou seem to have the foundations of thy life secured, while
Christ is dying; but discernest not how the foundations of thy death, and of
his Life and Glory, are hereby laid.

Use. Observe the difference between Christ and the people of God in the time
of their life, and in the time of their death. Christ dyed, and the People of
God must dye too. They that have life from Christ, must dye with Christ. As
Christ laid down that life, which he received from the Father, in his flesh: so
must the People of God also lay down or sacrifice that life which they receive
from Christ. Every Disciple of Christ's must taste of his cup, drink of his
baptism. They that have lived with him, and tasted the strength and glory of
his life, must also drink of the bitterness of his death: for that is their way
to enter into glory, as well as his. The same life in them, as it tends to the
same end, so it requires the same passage. And how lovely soever they were in
their life, how great soever the majesty, wisdom and strength of their life,
how sweet and familiar soever their converse with God, etc. yet all these will
run low enough in the time of their death. They will be weak enough, and
foolish enough, and blind enough, not being able either to choose the good or
refuse the evil. O how glorious is a Christian in the time of his life! how he
flourishes with leaves and with fruits of several kinds! But he is bare enough
of all in his death: Then he can be nothing, then he can appear nothing; Then
he can do nothing; Then he can bear nothing; He knows not how to subsist, nor
which way to turn him. But of this more under the next Head.

XII. Of the low Estate, which the Seed of Christ are reduced unto, by their
Death and Sufferings.
PROVE. 30.2. Surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man.


THis is the voice of them, in whom the life of God is sown in their broken
state. When that life springs up growing and flourishing in them, then they
are exalted far beyond man; then they have a deeper understanding, and fuller
enjoyment then man is capable of: That life, that glory which then shines in
them, man cannot but vail unto. But according to their exaltation, is their
humiliation; for when that life is shattered, they fall far beneath man: They
have not that wisdom, that strength, that righteousness, that excellency which
is in man. Surely, I more brutish then man, and have not the understanding of
man.

Man is very brutish, man is very shallow. He is brutish in his desires and
affections, shallow in his comprehension. Very little knowledge, very little
understanding has man; so little it is, that it can hardly distinguish him
from the brutes; yea he is so brutish (or rather worse) that he does not follow
the guidance of that little he has. Man, that excellent Image of the Almighty,
is become like the perishing beasts: His knowledge, his affections, his motions,
his course, his end, are just like theirs, as is observed by the wise Searcher
into the nature of things, Eccles. 3.18, 19. Man is not at all like God or like
himself, he has not a quick understanding or sense in the ways or things of
God, but in his springing up, growth, progress, and behavior in the world, as
also in his passage again out of the world, is just like a brute.

But the child, the heir in his broken state, falls beneath this brutish state
of man. Man falls below the creature, (man loses that sense and knowledge in
his kind, which the very creatures retain in their kind: The Ox knows his
Owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, etc.) and the life in the seed falls below
man. Great is the death of the common creature; Greater is the death of man;
but O how deep, how deadly is the death of the seed! How deep in their grave!
How low do they sink into the bowels of the great Abyss!

All things which the Lord has as yet brought forth, he causes to pass
through the jaws of death: And their death is proportionable to the condition
and degree of their life. None tasted of such a life as Christ; None also of
such a death, save his seed, who drink of his Cup, and are baptized with his
Baptism.

O how low was Christ brought in his broken state, when he was forsaken of his
God! He was not inapprehensive himself of it (what ever we now judge it) when he
cried out, I am a worm and no man. I am not a man, I have not the knowledge of a
man, the life of a man, the excellency of a man, the defense of a man: I can
find nothing fit to compare my meanness and misery unto, but the most
contemptible of the creatures, a worm, which has no understanding, no
excellency, no ability, no manner of loveliness in it.

Now the servant is no better then his Master; The members have the same
nature, course and condition with the head. The life in them must be broken,
They must be brought low, They must also be stripped of God: and then the
vessel which was exalted hereby, will feel pain, shame and misery. Then they
will become more brutish then man, and want that common understanding of man,
the greatest tincture and excellency whereof they now so much despise. Well may
they now flourish and be brisk over man; but seasons of death will overtake
them, and then their spirits will be flat and low enough.

This condition of theirs is made up of these three things, A thoroughly broken
state in it self, A through sense of it in themselves, and a through sight and
contempt of it by the world.

1. A thoroughly broken state in it self. As the life and nature of Christ and
his seed is true and through: so is also their breaking. There is a double
breaking of them: A breaking of the liquor, and a breaking of the vessel. There
is a breaking of the seed or inward life, or of the heavenly part; and there is
a breaking of the outward nature, or earthly part wherein it was sown, and
which was transformed and made happy by it. There is nothing of the new life,
no nor yet any thing of the old nature left whole, when this death is
perfected. This quick spirit, This quickened nature, each are become nothing in
themselves, but only (like a lump of dead clay) fit to be made any thing, by
any thing which has skill and virtue to form. This poor Land, which was once
the pleasant habitation of God, is made empty, desolate and ruined. This is the
true state of Christ and his seed in their death. And though man seem to
himself both to desire and in some measure to attain this condition, yet he is
as far off from the true nature of either, as he is from the true knowledge of
himself.

Man would fain be broken. There is an apprehension upon him, that the way to
life is through death, (for this which he possesses, he may see, he may feel,
and so may easily be convinced that it is not life,) and therefore he cannot
but long and earnestly desire to pass through it, that so he may come at life.
But this Baptism none can baptize himself with; He alone can do it, who
baptized Christ. It is the Life alone which is capable of this breaking, (for
the outward vessel belonging to the seed, or in which the seed is sown, has
its capacity in and from the Life,) and he alone can break it, who formed it.
The Lord alone can build, and the Lord alone can destroy this kind of fabric.
This wise and accurate destruction requires the same skill and virtue, which
issued out and built up the nature and Life of Christ and his seed. The Prince
of darkness can never attain so much as to administer any degree of this death,
further then he is enabled, instructed and assisted thereunto from the root of
all things: (whose wisdom, skill and power goes along perfectly in every
thing, though it be not comprehended in or apprehended by any thing.) Now as
all death and brokenness has affliction and misery in it, so this beyond all:
And as man will aspire after this death, so he will fancy that he has this
kind of misery upon him; but yet in the midst of all his pangs; he knows not
what belongs to it.

There are three great scenes in the death of Christ (in each of which there
are many various strains, steps, and degrees) all which man can imitate very
accurately, but cannot reach to the truth of any of them.

1. There is the death of corruption. The life and spirit of Christ comes
forth with power against the corruption of man's nature, and with the sword of
God slays it: in so much as he, in whom the life of Christ is truly sown and
springs up, shall find himself dying unto his sinful nature daily. This is
one scene. 2. There is the death of the excellency of man's nature. Sin must dye
and righteousness must live, yea and then righteouseness must dye also. When
the life of Christ at first breaks forth in man, O, says he, that this filthy
nature might be destroyed, and that I might be brought forth in holiness and
righteousness! but little does he then think, that all this holiness and
righteousness must come to judgment and dye also. The Spirit of the Lord can
judge and find fault with the very nature and life of the Image of God, not as
it is now corrupted, but as it was at first planted in the first Adam. The same
God which sindeth fault with the first Covenant, can also find fault with the
first creature, as it was brought forth under that covenant, and can so judge
it unto death and destruction. 3. There is the death of the Son; even of all
the excellency of his life and nature, as it was brought forth in the flesh.
Eternal life, in the life thus received, dies. Christ, thus alive, dies even
to the nature of this his life, and to the spirit from whom he received it. The
Spirit, who gave him this life, and who kept this life pure in him, he slays
it: yea Christ himself offers up this life, without spot to God, through the
eternal Spirit. These are the three parts or stages of death, which God
mentioned at the beginning upon man's fall, namely, The death of the Serpent,
the death of man, and the death of the Son.
Now there are counterfeits of all these. Many seem to be dead to their
corruptions, who are not: and many seem to be dead to the excellency of nature,
when it is but by the skill, life and excellency of nature that they attain
this seeming death: Many also seem to drink very deep into the death of the
Son, who never yet tasted of that life of his which is to dye. This is the
first thing whereof this condition consists, viz. A thoroughly broken state in
it self.

2. To this there is added in the second place, a through sense of it in
themselves. They are not only broken, but they feel themselves broken: They are
not only stripped and left naked, but they feel both their stripping and
nakedness. In other cases a man may be poor and miserable, yea blind and naked,
and yet take himself to be rich and happy, etc. but it is not so here. This
kind of breaking is lively and of quick sense in the spirits of them that are
broken. This is such a death as he thoroughly feels, who dies. Christ felt
himself to be a worm, and the seed of Christ feel their brutishness and want of
understanding. Adam was cast into a deep sleep, while Eve was formed out of
him: but Christ is awake, and by the quickness of his awakened spirit forms his
Church, and the vigor of that life in his Church suffers in its death.

3. There is also a through sight and contempt of it by the world, and of them
because of it. God carries on the death of Christ and his seed openly in the
eye of the world. As God kindles and sets up this lamp in the view of the
world, so he puts it out also in their view. The symptoms of this death,
the symptoms of this breaking, are so visible and manifest, that it cannot be
hid. That life, that power, that activity, that stirring of God in their
spirits, words, behavior, whole course, etc. is put out and gone. They as
manifestly appear (all this season) in the world without it, as formerly they
did with it.

And the world now despises them. That, which gained esteem and glory from the
world, being gone, they cannot but despise them; and so much the more, by how
much they began to honor them. There is such a luster and glory in the life of
Christ, when at any time it discovers it self within man's center, as man cannot
but acknowledge and subject himself with all his life and excellency before: but
when man sees all this fallen and himself still standing where he was; This
which made such an appearance above him, being fallen beneath him, Christ being
dead and he alive; how can he now but despise this appearance of the life and
luster of Christ, and so much the more because of its former glory? The
exceeding low fall of the highest glory, is most contemptible. Never man spoke
as Christ spoke, and never man did as Christ did, even to the eye and in the
sense of the world; He has done all things well, etc. What Power and Authority
did he bear in the very spirits and consciences of his greatest adversaries?
How did he every where so take with the people, that his malicious and unjust
enemies durst never meddle with him? But in his death, in his broken state, he
lost all. He was not only a worm and no man (when he was forsaken of his God)
in the truth of his estate and condition, but he also felt it: and he did not
only feel it himself, but his enemies saw it too, yea it was palpable to the
common eye of the people, and to all that beheld him; All that see me laugh me
to scorn, they shoo^ the lip, they shake the head, saying, He trusted in God th
the would deliver him, etc. Is this the man that had so much interest in God?
Is this the man in whom the Power of God did so appear, and who could do such
mighty things by the Power and Virtue of God? Is his Doctrine and Miracles, his
great Union and Communion come to this? They shake their heads (as at a deceit,
as at a delusion, as at a piece of vanity) they mock, they spit upon him, they
buffet him, etc. They crown him in derision. They reproach, yea they abhor in
their spirits, the very power of his life, in the day of his death.

Use. Behold, O Christians, the death of the life of Christ! behold the Baptism
of Christ, the miserable passage to the Crown. If ye will become Christ's, ye
must dye not only to the corruption and shame, but also to all the glory and
excellency of this world, and yet not stop there neither. The life of Christ
will put out the life of all other things; and when it has done so, there is a
death for it too. The Spirit of Christ in the seed, must pass through its own
blood into the holy of holies.

Alas, Sirs! If there were nothing to pass through, but a death to this world,
what an easy matter were it (comparatively) to be a Christian? What an easy
matter were it, to despise and trample upon this world, by virtue of such an
excellent life in the Spirit? To have that spirit in the seed broken, which
delights or may delight in the world, it is bitter indeed to man, but alas that
bitterness is nothing, in compare with that bitterness which arises from the
breaking of the new life in the new spirit. Would ye know what this is? Why
measure it by this: by the sweetness of this life. Do ye know how sweet it is
to taste the true nature of the Life of God! to enjoy and live upon the breath
of his Spirit! to walk in the light and love of the Lord! If ye truly know
these things (the true sweetness of them) then ye may be able to give a guess
at what it is to have them broken.

But as there have been counterfeit Images all along of the Life of Christ, so
are there also of his Death. O what pains do several sorts of men take to find
out this Death, yea and to meet with the anguish of it! but all to no purpose:
for the Lord alone can light, and the Lord alone can extinguish this Lamp. I
kill and I make alive, This holds true every where, but here most especially.
The Lord alone can bring forth the next strain of life, and the Lord alone can
bring into this narrow passage of death.

XIII. The Course and End of Man.
DEUTERONOMY. 31.29. For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt your
selves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you: and evil will
befall you in the latter days, because ye will do evil in the sight of the
Lord, to provoke him to anger through the works of your hands.


THis people (who were the choice of God, among whom the seed of life was sown)
was a type of the spirit of man, truly representing his nature and state, more
especially in these five particulars following.

1. In his difficulty to be woond up to the mind and will of God in any
dispensation. There was a great deal of work with this people to bring them to
any pass; Continual Instructions, continual Corrections, a mighty current of
Power and Providence did God both put forth and maintain, to cause them to
believe and obey, both in Egypt and in the Wilderness: and yet it proved a very
difficult task to wind them up to either.

Thus it is with the spirit of man. God is at a very great expense to bring him
to any thing. He is fain to let forth of his own Spirit, of his own Light, of
his own Power, and batter him out of all his fleshly holds, before he can bring
him to submit to him and walk with him in any of his dispensations.

2. In his sudden backsliding. This people did naturally fall from God: They
were hardly drawn up, but did slide down of themselves. What a work had God
with them to make them believe and wait upon him? what a many wonderful Works
did he show, to draw them up to trust him, to follow him, to love him? etc. but
alas, how soon did they forget his Works, and retire back into the fleshly
principle and course of the Heathen, and this both in Egypt and in the
Wilderness, and also in Canaan!

Thus it is also with the spirit of man. Let God never so powerfully convince
and engage him in the light and life of his spirit, yet he naturally slinks
back from it. He corrupts himself in every dispensation of the Lord, seting up
his own lusts there, serving them, and forgetting the Lord his Maker and
Redeemer. He makes every path and truth, either of the Law or Gospel, serve his
own carnal spirit: in so much as though he walk in all the ways of the Lord (as
he accounts them,) yet he serves himself in all, and not the Lord in any. Man's
flesh, man's reason (nay man's vanity and corruption) gets into every way of the
Lord, polluting it self there, and profaning all the holy things of God. It
turns out of that which is indeed the way, and walks in that which, though it
still calls it the way, yet is not, but only a way of its own, (for the very
Ordinances and Institutions of God, after the spirit of man has entered into
them, and molded them to his own bent, God will no longer own them, but terms
them his ways and inventions.)

3. In the season of man's corrupting himself, which is after Moses his death,
after the death of the Witnesses, after the departure or death of that life in
him, which seized upon him, overcame him, and as it were forced him into the
ways of God. When the light of God comes down upon man, and overbeareth his
spirit, he cannot but follow it: but when that light is gone, he returns to
himself again; He turns from the life, from the purity of that into which he
was led, retaining only so much as will serve the ease, quiet, content and
satisfaction of his own corrupt spirit.

There are gales of the Spirit of God, which descend upon this earth, the
spirit of man. Where these blow strongly, man is hugely changed: He has as it
were a new spirit in him, whereby he is (after a sort) naturally led to follow
the Lord. But when the Lord withdraws this breath, his life perishes, and
man returns to his Earth, to his very corruption again, yea and takes unto
himself seven Devils worse then the former: For the higher that man is raised,
by this breath from the Lord; the lower he falls, when this breath is
withdrawn. It is the spirit of corrupt man, getting (or advanced by the Lord)
into the purest ways and forms of Religion, which brings forth the filthiest
abominations.

4. In the result of this corruption, and evil will befall you in the latter
days. Sin most naturally brings forth death. Corruption or putrefaction is a
degree of, and a direct passage unto death.

And it will break forth and appear in the latter days. Man must have a time to
corrupt, in which he is to be let alone: but in the latter days, when his end
draws nigh, death hastens apace: his corruption then begins to open it self,
and to discover the death which lay hid in it. Then that evil, which man hoped
all this while to secure himself from, will begin to manifest it self to be in
the nature of his own spirit, or in the nature of that sin and corruption,
which he hid within the nature of his spirit. He has hid his destruction in
his own bowels, he has hugged it in his bosom, in the midst of all his designs
to escape it: and in the latter days when it is grown ripe and strong, thence
it will start, seize upon him and devour him. When the Lord has thoroughly
tried the spirit of man, and when man has thoroughly corrupted himself; then
will he lay the ax to the root of this tree and cut it down, that it may cumber
the ground no longer. He has cut down the Jews already; Their latter days,
wherein evil did befall them, have overtaken them: and he will also cut down
the Gentiles. The Jews were not the seed, for after the death of Moses they did
corrupt themselves, and discover, that they (like the rest of the world) were
but flesh. Neither are the Gentiles the seed, for they also after the death of
that life, which did flow from the Spirit into Christ and his Apostles, did
also corrupt themselves. The uncircumcised and unclean spirit of man, did enter
into this Temple and Worship, as well as into the former: Therefore the Lord
will both cut down the spirit of man, and will also down with all that into
which the spirit of man can enter; and then will he bring forth his own Truth;
his true Temple, his true Worship, his true Worshippers.

5. In the ground of this death and destruction to man, because ye will do evil
in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger through the works of your
hands. All the motions of man anger God: All the works of his hands are filthy
and corrupt in themselves, and provocative to the eye of his nature and spirit.
All man's knowledge, all his life, all his ways of Worship, Faith and Obedience
in every kind, every thing that suits the eye and judgment of his spirit, and
wherewith he thinks to please God, is lothsom to God: This lothsomness stirs
up in God his indignation, which causes him (in the proper season thereof) to
bring death upon man, and to bring him to Judgment, after which comes the
second death. Then it shall be known who have been led by the Lord, and who
have truly followed him, (though the spirit of man now laughs at all, who walk
not with him in his way of understanding:) Then shall all see and know who are
righteous, and be forced to confess from their very hearts, saying, Verily
there is a reward for the righteous, a competent reward, a full reward unto
them, for all the sufferings and misery which have attended them, in their way
and passage hither.

Blessed is he whom the Lord leads (by the proper cross attending every
dispensation) through trouble and death into life! But excessively miserable is
that man, whose fleshly spirit remains in any dispensation, or who passes
from dispensation to dispensation with his life unslain, therewith feeding upon
the Ordinances, duties, enjoyments, or any other holy or spiritual things of
God, and thereby fattening and fitting himself for death and destruction
against the great and terrible day of the Lord God Almighty: according as the
spirit of Christ in David speaks, Psalm. 94.12, 13. (with a gloss whereupon I
shall draw toward a conclusion.)

Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy
Law:

That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit be
dug for the wicked.

There is a pit digging for the wicked, into which when it is finished, when it
is every way made large and deep and piercing enough, the whole wicked spirit
of man shall either fall or be cast, or partly fall and partly be cast into it.

Till this pit be dug it is a troublesome time to the seed, but a quiet time
with man. The spirit of man is now at ease; He can serve, he can please, he can
enjoy himself in his whole course both of nature and religion; yea and he can
also secure himself from future danger, from danger at the last: He has made a
covenant with death, and with Hell is he at agreement; When the overflowing
scourge passes, it shall not come near him. It is for unbeleevers, for
sinners, (for persons who know not God, or obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ) to fear death and Hell or eternal destruction. But when this pit
is dug, the Spirit of the Lord (with his light) will search out the spirit
of man, under all his disguises, and what ever has not the true breath of life
in it, shall be cast into and dye in this pit.

There are persons also to whom God will give rest from the days of adversity.
Those who have all along been persecuted by all sorts of enemies, and afflicted
with all sorts of miseries, that spirit which has been hunted, wounded,
grieved, distressed all the day long, by the cruel spirit of man and Satan,
shall be rescued from the jaws of each and be refreshed. Those who are leavened
with the life of Gods most holy Spirit, who are so new-changed by it, that they
have none of that life, none of that spirit left remaining in them, which the
Lord comes to destroy, the Lord will give them rest. When the Lord comes
forth to hunt, take and devour the spirit of man, those in whom that spirit is
already dissolved, shall not be in fear or danger of his severity, but shall
find the abundance of love, sweetness, peace and rest administered to them by
the same hand, which will then so eagerly and fiercely prosecute the spirit of
man. Then they who have hitherto been at ease, shall be troubled; and they who
have hitherto been troubled, shall have ease, And to you who are troubled, rest
with us, When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed, etc. 2 These. 1.

The ways, whereby God leads his to this rest, are partly Instructions, and
partly Corrections. He breaths his Spirit into them, and by the power and
virtue of his rod, bears down and subjecteth their spirits. He burns up
their dross aforehand, that he may make them fit to be saved (and that it may
be righteous for him to save them) in the day of the worlds destruction. He
strikes them down, he lays load upon them, he humbles them exceedingly,
until he has fitly tempe^ed them to hear, and then he teaches them the Law of
his Life. And thus he renews both his knocks and his beams of light, as their
condition need and capacity requires.

O happy, happy, thrice happy are they whom God leads, though through a
wilderness and the dismal exercises thereof, into his land of rest. All that
severity of Discipline, under which they are now nurtured and trained up, is
nothing to that misery, which they shall then escape, or to that life and
blessedness which they are hereby prepared for. I shall close thus,

They that trust in lying vanities, vanity shall be their recompense. Yea they
that trust or hope in God, or in Christ, or in God through Christ; after the
strength of their own apprehensions fastened upon or gathered from the
Scriptures, and not according to the knowledge and power of the truth as it is
in Jesus, shall find even these objects vanity to them, their faith and
expectation upon them vanity also, and their end misery, when they sink into
death and destruction with the world, yea and that somewhat deeper then the
world. But they who in truth are taught and led by the truth, to wait and hope
under their bondage and misery for the truth (how extravagant or rediculous
soever they may appear, to all the various eyes of the several sorts of
Religious persons, from the strange exercises of God upon them) shall be owned
by the truth.

The root, nature, yea and all the motions of the spirit of the creature (even
in all the dispensations of God) is rejected: for, in the true state and nature
of things, it is not that which the Lord can accept. It is dark in all its
light, dead in all its life, a captive and a slave in all its liberty, an hater
and a rebel in the midst of all its love and obedience: and therefore how can
the Lord (who searching the spirit, clearly knows and discerns this in the
spirit) but throw it aside, notwithstanding its glittering appearances of light
and life from him, of precious faith and hope in him, and of sweet love and
obedience toward him? But the root, nature and motions of the seed, under all
its disguises (in the midst of all its darkness, death, bonds, captivity and
estrangedness from God) is his delight, is his heir, (it is the heir of his
nature and spirit) and therefore shall undoubtedly inherit the truth and glory
of life in him.

He that has ears to hear, let him hear the spirit, which testifies the same
thing now, as it has done all along the Scriptures. O let him who desires the
truth of salvation, harken to the voice of the spirit of God in the Scriptures,
and not give ear to such fictions as his own spirit does most naturally form
out of them.

XIV. The happy End of the holy Nature and Course of the Seed of Life, which
the Spirit of Life, through all the various dark paths of sin, death and
misery, most faithfully guides it unto: or, The sweet and happy End of the
Righteous.
PSALM. 37. verse. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end
of that man is peace.


THe perfect or upright man, is he who is of an entire stamp or nature, and who
walks entirely with God in every dispensation, from the Law of this nature.

The very nature of man is imperfect, He is a transgressor from the womb. Let
him never so honestly and ingenuously dedicate himself to God and to
righteousness, yet he cannot for his heart walk with him, or live righteously.
But the other cannot but do so: And however he may slip from the weakness of
his present estate, yet his nature still sets him right again.

Now there is no man more miserable in his present condition, then this man.
The unrighteous, the unholy spirit of man can thrive in the world, or flourish
in any form of Religion: but this man, not having the spirit of this world,
cannot seek or enjoy it, nor deliver himself from the oppressions and
sufferings which are multiplied upon him by it. Nay he is persecuted also and
grievously afflicted by the powers of darkness, which will not spare him in
this their hour. Yea his God estrangeth and hides himself from him (he hides
his face from the house of Jacob) chastisiing him sorely continually. Because
of that corruption which cleaves unto him, and which his feet are still
gathering, the holy God which loves truth and purity, is ever and anon casting
him into the fire. The Lord by his Spirit of Judgment and Burning, does most
naturally search, try and judge the spirits of his people, until he has
purified and perfected them. Alas, how sad therefore must it needs be with
them, in the midst of all these!

The world may live and flourish, but they are still withering and dying. The
world may enjoy the freedom of its natural spirit (after a sort:) but theirs is
in bonds. The world may laugh and rejoice, because of the contents they find,
and can reap and enjoy in the things of the world, and in their several forms
and exercises of Religion: but these cannot but weep, and lament that they are
left desolate and have no Comforter. These are the sick ones, these are the
blind ones, these are the lame ones, these are the poor ones, these are the
naked ones, these are the pe^secuted ones, these are the oppressed ones, whose
misery no eye can see, no heart conceive, no tongue express. Any misery that
man meets with, the spirit of man may pity him in: but this is a kind of
misery which the spirit of man knows not; and these are the persons whom he
judges, and whom his heart is hardened against.

But mark the end of this man. Look upon all this distress, all this misery,
all this lamentably hard travel in its end. For the end of that man is peace.
There is no knowing of any thing as it now appears under its vail, in this dark
shadowy world: but if you would understand any thing aright, keep your eye
fixed upon it and observe it to the end. In the end flesh, when it is stripped
of all its seeming glory, will appear what it is: and in the end spirit, when
it is unclothed of all its deformed rags, will appear what it is. If you
consider the perfect man without the discerning of his end, he will appear the
poorest, most miserable, most contemptible thing that can be: but if your eye
can truly follow him unto his end, you will have another ghess sight of him
there, for the end of that man is peace.

The end of a man is that to which he tends, that toward which his nature and
all his motions bend their course, that unto which he grows, that which all his
exercises and varieties (in all the several dispensations through which God
leads him) contribute to. Every thing has its end. There is an end of every
dispensation, and an end after every dispensation. There is an end of all
troubles, an end of all motions, an end of all rest, an end of all peace which
is known in this world. Now there are two great Ends, according to the two
great Natures which are sown in this world, which are Death and Life, Joy and
Sorrow, Anguish and Ease, Heaven and Hell.

Peace is that quietness of Nature, wherein it is and enjoys it self and what
it desires. Trouble is the disturbance of Nature, Peace is its settlement.
There is trouble, and there is peace now to be seen in the world, but they are
but shadows: but the trouble, and the peace which is the substance of the
thing, is to be discovered in the end: and then that peace which belongs to
the nature and life of the perfect man, shall be dispensed to him. All old
things, all old trouble, all old peace shall pass away, and this new trouble
and peace succeed and take hold of things, according to their nature, estate
and degree. But what this Peace particularly is, none can apprehend, but he who
knows the nature, the spirit and the trouble of the perfect man: yet if you
desire an outward description of it, take it thus:

It is the perfect serenity and calmness, both of the liquor and of the vessel
of Life, in the Land of Rest: Where whatsoever might annoy or disturb is
removed, and which abounds with whatsoever may ease or refresh. There is a
Peace, which passes all understanding to conceive not only the extent, but the
very nature of it, which is the end of the perfect man, or at which the perfect
man shall arrive in his end. Here his inmost spirit, clothed with his natural
soul, which is also encompass^d with an outward bodily garment, shall sit down
in their proper seat of perfect rest. When the holy house or habitation of God
is opened, into which no unclean thing shall enter (but be disturbed by it, and
suffer from it according to the nature and degree of its evil) then shall this
holy Child of God be admitted and welcomed into its own place and portion of
rest and peace there.

Take notice also by the way, of one great advantage this perfect man has in
any present dispensation of God. The world is now very dark and barren; and if
a little light should break forth, it would mightily refresh it. But alas man
would be lifted up above himself, and distempered by it at present, and
afterward he would dye again and become more miserable. But the perfect man
would both enjoy it more truly, more fully, more substantially at present; and
also not be in such danger afterward: Because it would not be his life, but his
life would rather be Lord over it; and so his chief happiness not depending
upon it, his chief happiness would not pass away with it. Miserable is that
man, who is only differenced from the rest of the world by a present
dispensation: but happy is he whose difference lies in the root of his own
nature, which changes not in the midst of the varieties of all conditions or
dispensations.

A lamenting and pleading Postscript.
HOw deep and true a sense my spirit has had of my Fathers brethren and
kindred according to the flesh, (understand me aright:) both of their present
sad estate and future misery: and what grief and lamentation it has occasioned
in me (it so nearly concerning them, of whom I once was, and whom I always have
loved, and cannot but love tenderly still) the Lord only knows. Many times in
the bitterness of my Soul have I complained in spirit, and said unto my God, O
Lord God, Behold how sweetly and comfortably that stands in others, which thou
have so forcibly broken down in me! If it were of a true substantial enduring
nature, why was it broken down in me? Was I not most naturally formed by thy
hand into plainness, into simplicity, into a low, believing, broken,
self-denying frame of spirit? and this nakedly hanging not upon any worth or
excellency in it self, but upon the free dispensation of Life from thee of
thine own mere grace, from which it came, and by which it hoped to live? O why
did the severity of thy hand go forth so bitterly against it? How could thou
find in thy heart to wound, trample upon, and destroy such a poor worm and no
man? But if it was of a nature devoted to death and destruction, why is it
suffered to stand in others? Have thou snatched me as a brand out of the fire?
O who can either endure to be so snatched out, or to undergo the scorching heat
thereof, when it is once let loose upon his spirit? Or how shall I bear the
miserable sight of so dreadful burnings, as must be kindled upon that which is
left behind? When thou once kindlest thy fierce flames, ah what shall become of
the poor dry stubble! It is easy now to find a shelter, while thy wrath is at
a distance: but alas what shall cover poor naked Adam (for the most religious
man, which is not truly renewed, is no better) when thou walk toward him
with the bright piercing flames of thy Light! O how tender has my spirit been
of this seduced wandering generation! and yet thou have made me only a
stumbling block, and not an help unto them. Thou have enforced me (among
others) to give out a testimony against them, and several warnings unto them;
but in such a way and after such a manner, as they could not possibly avoid
being offended. It is true, O Lord, Their spirits have not been able to
withstand or acquit themselves (in thy sight) of what has been testified
against them: but yet the testimony has not come forth so, as they might be
able to consider and receive it. It has been spoken in such strange dialects
as they understood not, and also accompanied with such strange appearances, as
might seem rather to become the spirit of Satan then of God. Yea Lord, Satan
has made such a noise, There have been such multitudes of his loud voices and
languages, that thy low still voice might easily be drowned. No doubt, O Lord,
but thou will be able to justify thy self in all these things: but in the mean
time what shall become of these poor Souls? Shall they always wander, and
please themselves this little moment (which is their only time) with strange
invented vanities, such as foolish vain man may admire and magnify, but the
Spirit of the Lord knows not, nor cannot own?

Dear Friends, Let me plead a little with you once more, from the tender love
and pity of my Soul toward you. Do ye consider what has been testified unto
you, and from whence that testimony may come for ought ye know? Have ye dealt
ingenuously with the Lord in this point? or rather have ye not watched for the
halting of those which have testified, that so ye might harden your spirits in
your own invented ways? (For if ye could make good that they once were the
Lords, yet they are not now his, unless the same spirit and light did again
lead into them and quicken them. The Lord loves Spirit and Truth, but
regards not a dead form, although it were the very same wherein his Spirit
once did live.) Can ye blame the Lord for preparing a stumbling block for you,
or for suffering or giving you up to stumble, when ye your selves desire it? Ye
will have such and such Ordinances, paths and practices to be the ways of the
Lord (every one according to his own imagination,) and cannot endure to hear
any thing to the contrary: Ye will be judging and measuring the things of God,
before ye have received either an eye, or light, or measure from him. But I
injure you, ye have eyes, ye have light, ye have the reed of the Word, and can
measure things aright by that. It is well, so it must be: But assuredly the
Spirit of the Lord has tried and judged all your light, all your ways, all
your knowledge and practices in Religion, and has found them scanty in his
balance, scanty even of that true light, nature and spirit which he seeks to
worship him, and which he alone delights to be worshipped in. Alas Sirs, ye
may please your selves awhile, but ye cannot stand before the blasting breath
of the Lord, which blows upon all flesh, and corrupts it! If the Lord has
testified against your duties, as being things which he requires not at your
hands; against your Ordinances and ways of worship, as not being those which he
has appointed; against your graces, as not being of the nature of his Life and
Spirit; against your evidences for Heaven and happiness, as not being such as
will endure his trial and touchstone; yea against your very foundation, as not
being that which the Spirit of the Lord has laid, but which your own spirits
by your own art and skill (a little heightened perhaps by your study of the
Scriptures, and other exercises of your mind) have fastened and built all upon:
I say, If the Lord has testified these things against you, the Lord will not
fail to make them good; and whatsoever your confidences to the contrary are, ye
shall not prosper in them.

O consider this, if ye love your Souls! It is not a building upon Christ after
the flesh (it is not either a believing or obeying from any rational knowledge,
from a knowledge of the understanding, though the heart and affections be never
so much heated therewith, accompanying it never so vigorously) which will save
any man: but a building of a new nature upon the new nature of Christ. It must
be a building of a new nature, for Christ saves his building, his people, his
seed, his Church: and it must be built or founded upon the new nature of
Christ; for Christ himself saves not according to the oldness of the letter,
but according to the newness of the Spirit. It is not the building of such a
new nature upon such a Christ, as man will call so; but a building of the truth
upon the Truth. Alas, what a poor imaginary thing is the Christ which many (if
not most) apprehend! Christ consists not in the name, but in the nature and
in the spirit of the thing. Now who knows the nature of Christ, or of that
God which dwells in Christ? Who knows the nature of his Wisdom, the nature
of his Goodness, the nature of his Greatness, the nature of his Life, Spirit?
etc. Who knows the nature of the Father which begat, or the nature of the Son
who was begotten, either in his life or death? yea who knows himself? Man
does not build himself (I mean his own nature) upon Christ: but that which he
calls himself, upon that which he calls Christ. Here will appear to be
strange work, when the Lord searches into it. Wonderful serious are men in
their Religion, and yet (through the present thick darkness) little do they
know what they do: Little do they perceive how they build an imagination upon
an imagination. It is very true, that the Apostles had a true knowledge of
Christ, and that they came forth with a true knowledge of Christ, and (it then
being the time of light) that the Spirit of the Lord also went forth to quicken
that knowledge (where it pleased him) unto the hearers: But what knowledge is it
whereupon men now build? Who now knows the nature of the Lords Anointed,
which is the only Savior? Who looks into the Scripture now with a new eye? I
am sure with an old eye no man can see the things of God. But I see the things
of God (will thou perhaps say) therefore my eye is new. Nay but thou see with
the old eye, and therefore thy sight is not right: Take heed lest thou be
convinced of this too late. O Lord God, that ever man should give scope to
himself in so great vanity, as to lay the stress of his own eternal condition
upon the motions of his own blind dark nature! But who does thus? I acknowledge
to thee O man, that in thy light and according to thy measure thou do not
so; but in the light of the Lord, and according to his measure, who does not
so? Tell me true, Do not thou built upon Christ according to thy creaturely
understanding? Ah, Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads to
life, the fleshly reason, the fleshly understanding, the fleshly affections of
man are too gross to enter into either. The first Adam (how excellent soever)
cannot lay one stone in the building of God. The eye of man's purest Reason
cannot read one line in the Book of God. O who knows God or his Christ, or
his Worship, or any of his Truths? We have a great deal of knowledge in the
world, why all sorts know, but yet my spirit says to all the sorts of this
present generation, Who knows God? neither do I speak about the degree, but
concerning the true nature of knowledge. The gross unclean spirit of man (which
it still is, in the midst of all its Legal and Evangelical washings, cleanness
and purity) cannot possibly see or be acquainted with the Lord. No unclean eye,
no unclean heart, no unclean hand, etc. can ever come near the Life and Nature
of God, but only that which is truly changed. Nothing can live in the presence
of God, but that which has the true Life and Nature of God in it, which
grows not from any institution or form of Religion, whereby so many appearing
changes are wrought in the world, but from a true seed sown in the spirit of
man by the Spirit of the Lord.

Now do not mistake me (and so still prejudice your selves) as if I went about
to dissuade you from duties, Ordinances, reading of the Scriptures, praying,
hearing of the Word, and the like. No, I dissuade you not from any of these,
(nor from any thing else wherein ye might truly serve and enjoy God, as I am
sure ye might in the true knowledge, use and exercise of these:) but only from
setting up dead things in stead of these (which become not the things
themselves; by your esteeming or naming them so) that so ye might once come
into a capacity of seeking and serving the Living God. I do not dehort you
either from building up an house unto the Lord, or from worshipping him there
with his worship: but this I testify unto you that it will not be good for you
to build up the Lords house with your materials, or to set up your worship
there in stead of his, calling these the Lords, and forming them as like as
possibly ye can unto that which was once the Lords, that so they may pass the
better, both with your own spirits and before men. Certainly this will not be
profitable for you in the upshot. It would have been better for you to have
sunk down in that desolation which ye so despise, then to build with such hewn
stones. They who are Christ's, are taught by God to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes: Out of fleshly Egypt, into the straightened Wilderness: Out
of the Wilderness, in an entangled path to Canaan: Out of Canaan, into the
Wilderness again. The seed of Christ are not to set up a fleshly rest in
Canaan, but to be led again by the spirit into the Wilderness for the exercise
of their spirits; and they are not afraid to follow the spirit, though out of
Canaan and into the Wilderness. I will lead them in paths they have not known,
says the holy one of Israel. Vain foolish man will limit the holy one of
Israel, and follow him only in such paths as he knows: but the true-spirited
child (which understands the nature and truth of his guide) is not afraid to
follow him any whither. And if ye can hear, consider this (I speak not at
random) There are secret, pure, hidden paths of Faith, Love, Worship,
Obedience, etc. wherein God and some of his people meet, know, own, and (after
a sort) enjoy one another, even in this Wilderness, where their spirits are fed
by him, and his life and nature embraced by them: But the outward Court is
given to and profaned by the Heathenish spirit of man, and can be no more fit
for the spirit of the seed, until it be again measured and purified by the
Spirit of the Lord. If ye do not plough with the right heifer, this will prove
a very strange riddle to you: Yet it is never a whit the less true in it self,
for your not apprehending or not relishing of it. Take heed of fleshly wisdom,
take heed of a fleshly line, it is always dangerous, but then most of all, when
it appears as if it were spiritual. Ye cannot measure any thing aright by a
fleshly understanding of the Scriptures. He that begins in the spirit, may
turn aside and end in the flesh: But he that begins in the flesh, can never
(in any part of that line) arrive at the spirit. This will one day appear as
manifest, as it is now true, that he that begins not with a right spirit,
with a right principle, with a right nature, cannot be right in any of his
motions: Neither in his Faith, nor in his Love, nor in his hopes, desires,
prayers, or any other part either of his outward or inward worship and
obedience. O that it would please God to uncover the truth, and to swallow up
that thick vail, which lies as yet upon all Nations!

ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 19. r. a rising. p. 6. l. 8. for, a, r. or. l. 18. and 24. for,
stay r. stage. p 7. l. 3. dele an. p. 8. l. 20. d. or. p. 16. l. 9. d. of. p.
23. l 4. r. throw. l. 34. r. plainly. p. 27. l. 3. for, in r. is. p. 28. l. 34.
r. observing. p. 39. l. 23. r. disperse. l. 31. r. these. p. 42. l. 2. d. in*
l. 3. r. in them. p. 43. l. 5. r. power. l. 24. for, then r. there. p. 57. l.
32. r. Region. p. 58. l. 18. r. reaches. p. 60. l. 32. add fourthly. p. 63. l
19. r. if he could. l. 20. r. in this kind of nature. p. 109. l. 7. for, in r.
is.

FINIS.
Some Books extant of this Authors, to be had at Mr Giles Calvert's Shop at the
black spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's.
1. A Voice out of the Thick Darkness, etc. 2. Light or Darkness, Displaying or
hiding it self, as it pleases, and from or to whom it pleases, etc. 3.
Several fresh inward Openings (concerning several things) which the Day will
declare of what nature they are, to which Judgment they appeal for Justice,
etc. 4. An Echo from the Great Deep, etc. 5. The Fundamental Rights and
Liberties of the People of England Discovered, etc. 6. The Life of a Christian;
which is a Lamp kindled and lighted from the Love of Christ, etc. 7. A Question
about Government, etc.
These out of print.
Four Questions about the Teachings of God. A Touchstone or Trial of Faith. The
great and sole Troubler of the Times, or a Map of Misery. A Word for the
Commonweal.

