OBSERVATIONS On some Passages of Lodowick Muggleton, In his Interpretation of
the 11th Chapter of the Revelations. As also on some Passages in that Book of
his, styled, The Neck of the Quakers Broken, and in his Letter to Thomas
Tailor. Whereby it may appear what spirit he is of, and what god his Commission
is from.

Whereunto is added A brief Account of my Souls Travel toward the Holy Land,
with a few words concerning the Way of knowing and receiving the Truth.

Written in tender love to Souls, in true sense and understanding received from
the Lord, and with reverence to his holy Spirit and Power, By Isaac Pennington.

Printed in the Year, 1668.

The Preface to the Reader.
HAving bad a Book of Lodowick Muggleton's sent me to peruse, and having been
earnestly pressed thereunto by some, who had let in his spirit and doctrines,
to their great hurt: in the fear of the Lord, and in the sense of his holy
Spirit of Truth, and in tender love to them who had requested this of me, I
cast my eye thereupon; wherein I observed very many things contrary to the
Spirit of (...) Lord, the Testimony of the holy Scriptures, and the nature of
Truth; some whereof (for the service of others) are here communicated. To
which, there arose somewhat in my heart to add concerning my self, in reference
to my wearisom seekings, journeys and travels after the Lord. Indeed it came
upon me very freshly and livingly: and the Lord may please to make it useful
to others, even to help to stay the minds and quicken the hopes of such that
are fainting, as I deeply was. Now if so be any shall reap any benefit thereby,
let them give glory to the Lord alone, who alone is worthy thereof. For I seek
not esteem of men; but all my desire is, that men might know the Lord and the
Power of his Truth, and by him be gathered into and preserved in that which is
pure of him It is the day of the Gospel, even of Gods Eternal Power, which is
risen in many hearts: for indeed the Light of the Everlasting Day of God shines
gloriously, and does conquer and shall conquer the darkness and corruption in
men's minds daily more and more. O that more might partake of its virtue, and
not stumble at that stumbling Stone, which the Builders out of the Life and
Power, in every Age and Generation, have first despised and rejected. O that
men might seek after Christ, the Wisdom of God aright: not in that spirit and
wisdom which shall never find him. For it is easy to seek amiss, but none can
seek aright, save only those that are led and taught of God so to do.

Observations on some passages of Lodowick Muggleton, in his Interpretation of
the 11th Chapter of the Revelations.
IN Page 9. he says, [The Law is not written in the Seed of Faiths Nature at
all, but in the Seed of Reasons Nature only. (Reason, or the Spirit of Reason,
he says, is the Devil, p. 15.)]

Observe. The Sum of the Law is Love: Even to love God above all, and ones
Neighbor as ones self. And this Love, which is the Sum of the Law, and fulfils
the Law, God writes in the hearts of his spiritual Seed.

In p. 15. he affirms, [That that saying of the Devil was true which he laid
to Christ, All the Kingdoms of the Earth are mine.]

Observe. The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. The Devil has no
right to it. God never gave it him: but God himself is Judge, who throws down
one and sets up another, disposing of the Kingdoms of men according to his
pleasure, Psalm. 75. 7. Dan. 4. 25.

In p. 19. he says, [There never was no Enmity between the Person of the
Serpent and the Person of the Woman: but the Enmity which lay between them was
in the two Seeds.]

Observe. Is not the Enmity as expessly placed by God between the Serpent and
the Woman, as between their Seeds? I will put Enmity between thee and the
Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed, Genesis 3. 15.

In p. 21. he says, [So that now God himself is not capable to dissolve
himself into Seed or Nature, as he was before.]

Observe. Is God changable? Is he one thing to day, and another thing tomorrow?
and can he never be any more what he was yesterday? His god may be so: but the
true God is not so. (I the Lord change not.) his Nature, his Seed, his Life,
his Spirit, his Power is the same for ever.

Further in p. 21. he says, [These two Seeds were those two spiritual bodies
which are called by the revelation of Moses two Trees. Yet they were in forms
of men, and was capable as they were spiritual bodies to dissolve into Seed or
Nature, and so become capable to suffer the pain of death.]

Observe. O the depth of imagination from that Spirit, which gives imaginations
to them that will receive them! He that is taught of God never learned thus;
but learneth much otherwise: and in the feeling sense and experience knows
the two Seeds, and is born of the one and separated from the other from the
very womb, I mean, from his birth of the Jerusalem which is above, which is
free (from the spirit of deceit and all its imaginary knowledge) which is the
Mother of all that are born of the Spirit.

In p. 22. he says, [Knowledge proceeds from life that has wisdom in it.]

Observe. Living knowledge does. But there is a knowledge which comes not from
the true Wisdom; nor does convey Life but Death. And such is the knowledge
which he has from his god, and holds forth to others: it poisons and corrup^
the mind, and leads out of the capacity of receiving and obeying the Truth, as
it is in Jesus.

In p. 27. he says, [Reason can feed on nothing but what it can see with this
visible eye.]

Observe. That is not Reasons food only, which is seen with this visible eye:
but Reason is in the mind, and feeds chiefly on thing which the mind gathers
and comprehends inwardly.

In p. 29. he says, [I declare by revelation from the holy Spirit, that out of
these two spiritual trees came forth these two Commissions, namely the
Commission of Moses and the Prophets, and the Commission of Jesus and the
Apostles.]

Observe. He had said before, p. 11. One of these trees was the tree of
knowledge of good and evil (in the form of a man, p. 14.) that tempted Adam.
Was that which tempted Adam, the tree out of which Moses his Commission came?
Does not he call this tree the Serpent? (p. 30.) Had Moses his Commission from
the Serpent? Surely every one that is of God will say, no.

In p. 30. he says, [These two Olive Trees and Candlesticks here spoken of, I
declare are those two Commissions which came forth of these two spiritual
trees.]

Observe. One of these trees he said was the very Person of God himself, p. 10.
That the other was the tree that tempted Adam: whereas the Tree did not tempt
Adam, but the Serpent tempted Eve to eat of the Fruit of the Tree.

Again p. 30. he says, [Moses acted as a God in the person of the Angel or
Tree of knowledge of good and evil.]

Observe. Moses was faithful in all his house as a Servant. Nor did he act in
the person of the Serpent; for the Serpent was the Devil, and was out of Truth
long before Moses time, and spoke of his own: but Moses spoke and ministered
from the pure holy Spirit of Life. Was not the Devil defiled, a corrupt tree,
an Angel fallen from his habitation, before he tempted Eve and Adam to sin and
fall? And who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? or an holy Commission
out of the Devil?

In p. 31. he says, [The Law (speaking of Moses Law) which is just and good,
does enlighten Reason to do as he is done unto, not as he would be done unto.]

Observe. If Christ may be believed, he says otherwise: for he says, All
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7. 12. So that the Law and the
Prophets did teach and require this, not only for a man to do as he is done
unto, but as he would be done to.

In p. 32. he says, [The Law of Reason is called a law of sin and death, it
being given unto reason, because reason is sin; for there is nothing does break
the Law but Reason]

Observe. Those that are delivered by the powerful appearance of Christ from
the law of sin and death, knows it to be another Law then the Law of Reason,
even a law contrary not only to the Life of Christ, but to the reason and
understanding of a man, bringing him below the state of Reason, even into
brutish captivity and sensuality. Does Reason teach a man to manage his body
destructively and unreasonably, as the corrupt and unreasonable law of sin and
death teaches many men? Reason is not sin: but a deviating from that from
which Reason came, is sin. God did not create man in sin; or make a sinful
Creature: but he gave him Reason, and thereby made him reasonable.

In p. 34. he says, [The Moon (Rev. 12.) did signify the Law of Moses, which
must now be trod underfoot by the Sunshine Light of the Gospel.]

Observe. No not so: the Law is not trod underfoot by the Light and Power of
Life, when it appears; but its righteousness is fulfilled in them that walk
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 4. Christ did not teach men
to tread Moses and his Law underfoot; but brings forth that Life and bestows
that Spirit, which leads through and beyond the Law, even to the righteousness
of Faith, (which the Apostle Paul said) they did not make the Law void by, Romans
3. 31. Therefore not trod underfoot through Faith in the Gospel.

In p. 37. he says, [There was none of the Prophets that were commissionated
to write Scripture.]

Observe. They spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy Spirit, and is not
that a sufficient Commission? In his Book called The neck of the Quakers
broken, he had scoffingly cast away the Writings of Solomon from being
Scripture; and now he casts away the Writings of all the Prophets too, as being
written without Commission?

In p. 42. he argues against Gods being an infinite, incomprehensible Spirit,
saying, [Such a great vast Spirit does not know it self, neither can this vast
Spirit tell where to find or see it self: and if it cannot know or see it self,
how should his Creature be able to know or see his Maker, when as he cannot
know or see himself? Then also that would be a vain thing which is spoken of in
holy writ, where it is said, It is Life Eternal to know the true God.]

Observe. Here is dark imaginations indeed. He that cannot read in the Spirit,
let him read that place, Isa. 40. 12. according to the plainness of the Letter,
and see if God can be less then infinite and incomprehensible. He that knows
the Nature and Spirit of God, knows God, though he be not able to measure or
discern the utmost extent of his Being, which who can? For he is a Sea of
Life, a Sea of Love, a Sea of Purity and Righteousness, a Sea of Power and
Wisdom, etc. but in a measure of the same Life, received from him, we know him
so to be; and worship him in the Spirit and Life which is of him; not making
likenesses of him in our minds, but bowing to him and worshipping him in his
own appearances.

In p. 77. he says, [The holy Ghost sat upon none like as of fire, but the
Twelve Apostles; neither could any other speak with tongues by inspiration, but
the Twelve Apostles.]

Observe. This is directly contrary to the Testimony held forth in Scripture.
For, said Peter, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on in at the beginning, Acts
11. 15. And they of the Circumcision which believed were astonished, because
that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the holy Ghost. For they
heard them speak with tongues and magnify God, Chap. 10. 45, 46.

In p. 52. he says, [Christ's Apostles could do no miracles, neither could
they cast out Devils until he was ascended.]

Observe. Did they not cast out Devils and do miracles, while he was on Earth?
Did not he give them power so to do? See Mat. 10. 8.

In p. 59. and 60. he speaking of the wild Olive Tree, and the good Olive Tree.
[The wild Olive Tree, he says, is the state of nature or reason, the Devil
which is wild by nature. The good Olive Tree, he says, was the very Person of
Christ, which the Gentiles were ingrafted into by Faith. But the Commission of
Mises and the Prophets proceeded from the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil,
he acting his part in that Seed, etc.] which he before said was the Serpent.

Observe. Is the wild Olive Tree (the Devil which is wild by nature) one of Gods
Witnesses, or the head or root from whence any of the Commissions of Gods
Spirit came? Did the Law of God, which was against Sin and the Devil, come from
the Devil? Is not the Law holy, just and good? and did it come from an unholy
root? What was the Olive Tree the Jews were broken off from? Read their state,
Romans 9. 4, 5. and 11. 16, 17. Was this holy Root they were broken from a wild
Olive Tree? What interpretation of Scripture is here? Surely from a Spirit
quite contrary to that which wrote it.

In p. 63. he says, [The great and high wall about the new Jerusalem, was all
that visible and external worship, which was set up by Moses, which did belong
to that Tabernacle, etc.]

Observe. Is this the defense about the glory of the new Jerusalem? is this the
Wall and Bulwark? Nay, nay: the Power of Gods Salvation is the Wall and
Bulwark, Isa. 26. 1. which is a sure defense upon all the glory of this
Building, Isa. 4. 5.

In p. 66. he says, [The Apostles should be equal in the Kingdom of Glory, as
they were equal here in the Kingdom of Grace. And again, p. 67. As there should
be no pre-eminence with the Apostles here in the Kingdom of Grace, neither
should there be any pre-eminence in the Kingdom of Glory. Yet p. 102. he says,
Peter was the head of the Apostles.]

Observe. Has the Head no pre-eminence in the Body? Are the rest of the Members
equal with the Head? is not this an absolute contradiction?

In p 78. he says, [The Commission of the Apostles was not the Commission of
the Spirit.]

Observe. Paul says, they were made able Ministers of the new Testament, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. What is to be desired more then the
new Covenant? wherein Life, Spirit and Power is received. Now the Apostles were
made by God able Ministers thereof: and the glory of this Covenant and
Ministration remains, verse 11.

In p. 93. he says, [Death being the Firstborn of the Law, it went forth as a
Conqueror of all Life both in God and man.]

Observe. The Law is holy just and good, and brings forth only that which is
holy. Sin is not of the Law, but against the Law; and the wages of sin is
death. Yet neither sin nor death could ever conquer the Life of God, but the
unconquerable Life and Power have ever reigned over them. Gods Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion endures throughout all Ages, which Sin,
nor Death, nor Hell could ever conquer. That life which Christ did give up,
none took from him as a Conqueror, but he laid it down freely, at the requiring
of the Father, knowing his glorious Power was able to restore and raise it up
again.

In p. 105. he says, [The body of man is that Tophet that was ordained of old,
and the spirit of Reason is that King, which must abide in this Tophet.]

Observe. The body of man was Gods Temple before it was defiled with sin; and is
Gods Temple again, when it is purified and purged from sin. Now him that
defiles this Temple of God, him will God destroy. And Christ said, Fear him
who after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell, Luke 12. 5. What is he
able to cast into Hell? why, both body and soul, Mat. 10. 28. Then the body of
man is not the Tophet or Hell: but Tophet is that whereinto the souls and
bodies of the wicked are to be cast.

In p. 116. he says, [Eternity did become Time, and Time shall become Eternity
again.]

Observe. Eternity did never become time, but is unchangable in its Nature,
Spirit, Life and Being for evermore: but it brought forth natural and
changable things in time, which time shall have an end.

Observations on some Passages in a Book of Lodowick Muggleton 's, styled by
him, The Neck of the Quakers Broken.
IN p. 14. he affirms, [That Adam had no part in the begetting of Cain.]

Observe, The Scripture says, Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived and
bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord, Genesis 4. 1. Here the
holy Spirit of God attributes the begetting of Cain to Adam's knowing his wife
Eve: but L. M. says otherwise.

In p. 15. he says, [Whoever is partaker of the seed of Adam, may be said to
have the Spirit of Christ in them, and their spirits to be in him, that is
Christ dwells in their hearts by Faith.]

Observe. The Scriptures distinguish between the first and second Adam. None
have the Spirit of Christ from or in the first Adam, but only from and in the
second. And the old Adam's seed, spirit and nature is to be put off by him that
puts on the new; and he must be born again of the immortal Seed of Life, who
receives the Spirit of Life.

In p. 17. [He calls Reason the Devil, and p. 29. says, This Devil so much
spoken of in Scripture, is no other but the spirit of Reason.]

Observe. Indeed corrupted reason is of the Devil: but pure Reason is of God.
Man, by his fall, had his reason corrupted, and so became brutish and
unreasonable: but by Faith in the redeeming Power he is brought out of the
Fall, raised from Death to Life, and in the new Life has the true, holy,
righteous Reason restored to him again, 2 These. 3. 2. which Reason is neither
the Devil, nor of the Devil.

In p. 22. he says, [If God be a person in the form of a man, as I am sure he
is (for I do acknowledge no other God but the man Christ Jesus, who is a
distinct body of flesh and bone of his own) how then can he fill Heaven and
Earth with his presence, and get in-the Quakers bodies etc.]

Observe. Solomon said in prayer to God, 2 Chronicles. 6. 18. (which prayer God
testified his acceptance of, as being from his own Spirit, chap. 7. 1) Behold
Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, how much less this House
which I have built? Again, Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth
Eternity (what is Eternity?) whose Name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit etc. Isa. 57. 15. Yet
again it is said, Ye are the Temple of the Living God, as God has said, I will
dwell in them and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Is it such a strange thing that
God should be in Heaven and in Earth also? Is not the Earth his Footstool? and
are not the feet present in the place on which they tread? Was not Christ in
Heaven while he was hear on Earth, according to his own words? No man (says
he) has ascendded up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, the Son of
Man which is in Heaven, John 3. 13. And cannot God be in Heaven and in Earth
too, and also by his Spirit in the hearts of his people?

In p. 23. he says, [To say that Christ according to the Flesh was of Abraham
is Blasphemy.]

Observe. The Apostle said concerning the Jews (whom he calls his Brethren and
Kinsmen according to the Flesh, Romans 9. 3.) of whom as concerning the Flesh
Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen, verse 5. Did Christ
come of the Jews according to the Flesh, and did he not come of Abraham
according to the Flesh? Now lest any should apprehend there may be some
difference between according in verse 3, and concerning in verse 5, I shall add
this, they are both the same in the Greek. It is (...) in both.

In p. 24, 25. he says, [None can interpret Scriptures truly, but himself.]

Observe. All that are children, to them God gives of his Spirit: (Gal. 4. 6.)
and they that have the Spirit, have that which interprets Scriptures truly;
which they keeping to, cannot be deceived about the interpretation of them. But
they that keep not to the Anointing within, but receive interpretations from
men without, may easily be deceived.

In p. 25. he says, [God has made him the Judge of the Scriptures.]

Observe. Let him that reads, wait to feel the Spirit which is of God, and the
Light wherein God dwells, and that will open Scriptures and the mysteries of
the Kingdom to him (he abiding in unity therewith, through the pure subjection
thereto) and manifest to him who is the Judge in spiritual matters in Gods
Israel.

Again p. 25. he says further, [We the Witnesses of the Spirit do know more
then Moses, the Prophets and Apostles did, things of more higher concernment.]

Observe. The Apostles were not the least in the Kingdom, but in the glory of
the day (1 Pet. 2. 5.) in the Eternal Life, in him that was true (1 John 5.
20.) and they had the whole Counsel of God, even a Ministry sufficient to
perfect the Work of God in the Saints (Ephesians. 4. 12.) that so they might
present men perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28. And happy is he that receives
their testimony, and comes into and walks in that Light which their message
was concerning, 1 John 1. 2. and verse 5, and 7.

Yet again, p. 25. he says, [The Quakers have only the dead letter of other
men's words, whose light was but dark in comparison of the light that comes by
this commission of the Spirit.]

Observe. Yes, they have much more then the dead letter of other men's words; for
they witness the living Spirit, and are taught thereby and subject thereto,
Blessed be the Lord, who is become the Shepherd and Teacher of his people
himself, according to his Promise.

[And as for the Apostles light being dark in comparison etc.]

Observe. We all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even of the Lord the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Again, God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, chap. 4. 6. In that day the woman
was clothed with the Sun (for as many as are truly baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27.) had the Moon under her feet, and was crowned with a
Crown of twelve Stars, and not only traveling to bring forth, but brought
forth the Man-child which was to rule all Nations. They who are indeed in the
Spirit, know that the Light which is now broke forth, is but the Light of the
same Day which shined then very gloriously in them, who were the glory of
Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 23. They had the Spirit of God plentifully poured upon them,
which opened to them the mysteries of the Kingdom and the deep things of God, 1
Cor. 2. 9, 10. And how highly soever he think or speak of himself, yet this is
known concerning him, that he has a very great journey to travel, before he
can come to that measure of Light that they were in, or to receive that
proportion of the true Spirit that they received: For he is yet quite out of it.

In p. 29. he affirms, [That it was the very Godhead Life that suffered
death.]

Observe. If the Godhead Life suffered death, what power was left to raise it
up again? I am the Resurrection and the Life, said Christ; but he spoke
concerning that which raised Lazarus, which was of an immortal nature and could
not die: not concerning the body; but the Life and Power of the Father, which
dwelt in and was revealed through the body; which died not with the body, but
remained alive to raise the body. What kind of doctrine is this, that the very
Godhead Life suffered death, and so to make the Creator mortal like the
Creature?

In p. 39. he says, [God the King of Heaven is not in this World at all.]

Observe. Whether shall I go from thy Spirit? or whether shall I flee from thy
Presence? said David (who had the Spirit of God) If I ascend up into Heaven
thou art there: if I make my bed in Hell, thou art there etc. Psalm. 139. 7, 8.
And do not I fill Heaven and Earth says the Lord, Jer. 23. 24. But L. M. has
affirmed contrary to these Testimonies, that God is not in this World at all.

In p. 48. he says, [I am the only and alone Judge what shall become of men
and women after death; neither shall those that are damned by me, see any other
God or Judge but me, or that Sentence which I have passed upon them.]

Observe. Is he God? is he Christ? is he the only one? is there not another God
another Judge? (Yes we know there is another, who judges otherwise then he
has judged: who judges that to death which he judges to life, and that to
Life which he judges to death.) And in the Resurrection of the just and the
unjust, shall not both the just and unjust see him who is the Judge? Read
Matthew. 25. 31, etc.

Again, p. 48. he says, [No man upon the Earth can or ought to judge of the
Doctrine of a Prophet, that has a Commission from God.]

Observe. Cannot he judge, who has the Anointing? Does not he that is a Child
of God receive his Spirit? and is not the Spirit of God able to judge in them
that receive it? Judge not according to the appearance, (says Christ) but
judge righteous judgment, Joh. 7. 24. Did Christ absolutely forbid men from
judging concerning him, or his doctrine and miracles, or did he not rather
direct them how they might judge aright? I speak as to wise men, judge ye what
I say, 1 Cor. 10. 15. The Apostle had a Commission from God, and yet he did not
barrmen from judging of his words, but bid them judge: and the same Apostle
says, Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the others judge, 1 Cor.
14. 29. Is the Spirit of God given to and received of the Believer, and shall
he not therewith judge concerning Spirits and Doctrines and Commissions which
pretend to be of him, and Apostles and Angels, whether they be Angels of Light
indeed, or only such as would so appear? Believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits whether they are of God, 1 John 4. 1. And they which are of God, love
to come to the Light which tries and makes manifest; but they that are not of
God refuse to be tried by it. Thou have tried them that say they are Apostle
and are not, and have found them Liars, Rev. 2. 2. God gives that Light, that
Spirit, that Anointing to his which has in it ability to try, and they ought
to try therewith Doctrines, Spirits, Prophets, Apostles, and certainly find
thereby that they are of him before they receive them, or else they may easily
be deceived? Despise not prophesyings, says the Apostle, 1 These. 5. 20. but
yet withal though a man may not despise them, yet neither may he receive them
without due trial: therefore the Apostle in the next words adds, Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good, verse 21.

Further p. 48. he says, [Who do you blind Quakers think should be judge of a
Prophet that has a Commission from God?]

Observe. What says the Apostle? 1 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit searches all things,
yea the deep things of God. And again verse 15. The spiritual man discerns
(or judges) all things, yet he himself is discerned of no man.

Yet again p. 48. he says, [Is not a true Prophet the Lawgiver? and ought not
every one to submit unto his Law?]

Observe. There is but one Lawgiver, but one King, but one Lord, but one
Master. All Prophets and Ministers from him, are but his Messengers and
Servants, not Lawgivers. The Law comes forth from the King himself, from the
great Prophet and Shepherd of the Soul, to every Lamb and Sheep in the
Covenant, as it is written, All thy children shall be taught of the Lord (and I
will write my Law in their hearts) and so taught by this Prophet (in the new
and Living Covenant) as that they shall need no other Teacher. This was once
fulfilled before the Apostasy (as is faithfully testified, 1 John 2. 27. The
Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you; and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all thing etc.)
and it is again fulfilled after it, blessed be the Name of the holy one of
Israel.

But mind Reader, what is the reason that he reviles us above all others,
calling us blind, and the darkest pieces to interpret Scriptures, and the
cursedst of all Sects, and the like; but because we stand most in his way,
because we cannot receive him as a Lawgiver, because we have received the true
Light, the true Spirit and Anointing from God, which discovers and denies
him in his very root and ground.

In p. 50. [He makes himself the Judge, and the day of Judgment but a day of
general Execution, wherein Christ shall say, Come you blessed and go you
cursed. He says there shall be no more pleading with God, but this will be all
that God will say in the Resurrection, Come you blessed and go you cursed.]

Observe. Yes, there will be more said. There will be the reason given publicly
why men are blessed or cursed, as was testified by Christ himself, while he was
here on Earth, Matthew. 25. 35, etc. And men shall have liberty to plead as is
there expressed, verse 44. So that Christ, the great Judge, is not so bound up,
as he would bind him up: nor are persons, to be judged by him, absolutely bound
up from considering of their Sentence and pleading their cause with him; but if
they have any thing to say on their own behalfs, they shall be equally heard.

In p. 60. he says, [God does not come down from Heaven upon this Earth to
interpret Scriptures to men, but this was always Gods practice to
commissionate particular men, and furnish them with gifts for that purpose, and
what interpretations of Scriptures they give, it is owned of God as if he had
done it himself.]

Observe. The Apostle says, Every man is to stand or fall to his own Master,
and bids every man be fully persuaded or assured in his own mind, and affirms,
that whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14. 4, 5. and verse 23. Nor did
Christ deal thus, with his Disciples, requiring them to receive what ever
interpretation of Scripture he would give them, but he opened their
understanding that they might understand the Scriptures themselves, and says
the Spirit of Truth should lead them into all truth. Nor did the Apostles thus
deal with men, but they waited for Gods opening of the true capacity in others,
and were not lords over men's Faith, but Demonstrators of the Truth of God to
men's Consciences by his Spirit, and as in his sight.

Again he says, [Christ does not teach every particular man neither by his
Spirit, nor by voice of words.]

Observe. Every man that is truly begotten and newborn to God, is born of his
Spirit, John 3. (There is not another begetter and bringer forth of Life in the
heart.) And the Spirit of the Lord, in the new Covenant, teaches all its
children. It was written so of old, All thy Children shall be taught of God.
How taught? Why, they shall hear and learn of the Father, John 6. 45. Thus the
Scriptures speak: and thus it is witnessed, felt and known in the heart,
blessed be the Name of the Lord. For the children of the Lord are anointed with
the holy anointing, with the oil of the same Spirit (the same oil of gladness,
Psalm. 45. 7. and Hebr. 2. 11. wherewith Christ was anointed; which makes them
also of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, and of deep insight into
the mysteries of his Kingdom, as they grow up in his life, and sweet innocent
holy nature.

Yet again in that page he says, [The true and right interpretation of the
Scriptures, it lies in those men that God has chosen, anointed and sealed for
that purpose, and men cannot come to the knowledge of God, nor the true meaning
of the Scriptures, no other way.]

Observe. The Gospel is a ministration of the Spirit and Power of the endless
life: and it consists not in receiving words, but in receiving the Spirit from
which the good words and precious knowledge comes. And he that receives the
Spirit and has the Spirit, receives and has that which opens and gives
entrance, not only into words concerning the Kingdom, but into the Kingdom it
self. And the Apostle who had a true Commission from God, was not sent to limit
men to his interpretation of Scriptures; but to turn men to the Light and to
the Power which gives to see the Scriptures and spiritual things, Acts 26. 18.
And the Church of Laodecea was counseled not only to buy gold and raiment, but
also eye salve of Christ, that therewith they might be enabled to see, Rev. 3.
18. They had words from those that were sent by God, and much knowledge
(insomuch as they seemed to themselves to be rich and full) but yet they wanted
the eye salve, which they were to buy themselves: for no man is to offer any
thing, but at his own cost.

Yet again in p. 60. he says, [The opening of the Scriptures belongs unto
commissionated men, and not unto Christ himself.]

Observe. In the new Covenant God himself is the Shepherd, the King, the
Prophet, the Teacher. (This is not known only from words left upon record by
holy men of God; but also inwardly felt and witnessed.) The Eternal Word is
nigh; nigher then words from commissionated men; and teaches more inwardly and
fully, then words from men can. The same God who creates the heart anew, puts
his Law into the mind and heart, yea his Spirit within. Now to this the Gospel
Ministers formerly did (and still do) direct and turn men; but did not limit
them to words from themselves, or to their interpretations of Scriptures, as
was said before. And as under the Law men were to hear Moses: so under the
Gospel men are to hear Christ in all things; and he that does not hear him is
to be cut of, as Acts 7. 37.

In p. 62. he says, [Though the Prophets and Apostles were anointed and sealed
of God for that great Work, will it follow therefore that you Quakers, because
you read their Writings, that you are anointed and sealed of God for the Work
of the Ministry?]

Observe. Where was this ever affirmed by them? But this they certainly know and
faithfully testify, that they have received the very same Spirit in measure
which the Prophets and the Apostles had, and minister in its Name and Authority
and Demonstration, and have the true and living Seal of their Ministry in many
hearts.

In p. 17. he says, [As for my mouth being full of cursing, that is my
Commission. And p. 18. God has ordained me the chief Judge in the World at
this day to give sentence upon men and women's spiritual and eternal state what
will become of them after death. Full of this cursing I confess my mouth is,
and I do rejoice in it too etc.]

Observe. When Christ pronounced Judgment upon Jerusalem, he did it weeping,
Matthew. 24. 37, 38. and Luke 19. 41, etc. And the true Apostle knew that those
that watched for the soul, when they gave up the account concerning such as did
not submit to and obey the Truth, but rebelled against it and perished, they
could not do it with joy, but with grief, Hebr. 13. 17.

In p. 69. [He teaches his Disciples to curse men to eternity, despsing
spirits he calls them, such he means as do not own his Commission, but know it
not to be of God, and faithfully testify against it.]

Observe. Christ taught his Disciples to bless, saying to them, Bless them that
curse you, Matthew, 5. 44. And the Apostles said, Bless and curse not, Romans 12.
14. And Christ is the same at this day, and teaches his Disciples so now. Yea
I and many others can faithfully witness it, that since we felt the seed of
blessing in our hearts, we never learned of it to curse any man, but rather to
pity them and pray to the Lord for them, and direct them to the holy Light,
Spirit and Power, whereby they might be turned from their iniquities and come
into the blessing, as Acts 3. 26. And though he pretends that those whom he
curses, have sinned the sin against the holy Ghost, and are Devils; yet that is
but the judgment of his spirit, not of Gods Spirit: for they are in that which
keeps from grieving Gods Spirit; much more from sinning the great and
unpardonable sin against it.

In p. 63. he says, [Neither do I curse any, until he judge me first.]

Observe. Feel, ye that have true sense and understanding, what moves him to
curse.

In p 73. he says, [If the witness that informed me did not witness truth,
then the Sentence which I have passed upon them shall be of no value.

Observe. How often has he affirmed his Judgment to be infallible and such as
God himself could not reverse? But here, it seems, it is such as may be passed
by hearsay, and depend upon the Witnesses words: so that if the Witness that
informed him spoke truth it shall stand; but if the Witness did not speak
truth, then the Sentence which he has passed shall be of no value. What, shall
a man be commissionated and receive authority from God to judge irreversibly,
so as God himself cannot pardon that man he has judges (as he affirms) and
yet that man not receive true sense, wisdom and understanding from God to
preserve him from misplacing it but it may be a true Judgment or a false
Judgment, according as the Witnesses information was? Ah cease deceit, and for
shame be silent: thy covering is manifestly too narrow.

In p. 66. he says, (speaking of the penalty or punishment of the Laws) [If my
innocence nor money will not deliver me, I must and will suffer under it.]

Observe. He has took scope enough to avoid the cross or suffering by any Laws,
which might lay hold on him for Conscience sake. The Apostles never saved
themselves by money from their sufferings for their Testimony.

In p. 70. he says, [Every man that reads the Scriptures does think to find
Eternal Life in them, as Christ said to the Jews, and as you Quakers and others
do now adays.]

Observe. Do the Quakers think to find Eternal Life in the Scriptures? did they
ever teach men so? have they not very often faithfully testified otherwise? Not
in words concerning the thing, but in the thing it self, in the Word which was
in the beginning and from the beginning; do they look to find Eternal Life. Yea
and there they have found it, and do live in the Life which is Eternal, and the
Life which is Eternal lives in them. This Testimony has the living seal to it
(whereby it may be known by those that are truly living) and cannot be shaken.
But he has manifestly in this thing (as in several others also) discovered
himself to be a false Witness: and a false Witness can never be a true Judge.
Nay alas his judgment is of and like his spirit, which manifestly is not of
God; and his knowledge which he holds forth leads not to God not to Life, but
to the Chambers of Hell and Death.

Observations on some Passages in his Letter to Thomas Tailor.
IN Page 5. he says, [I marvel what satisfaction any man can have in his mind
in believing in a Quakers God, to tell a man that God abides in himself and is
what he is.]

Observe. Does not God say to Moses concerning himself, I am that I am. When
Moses desired to know how he should answer the Israelites, when they should
enquire who sent him to them, God bid him tell them that I am had sent him,
Exodus 3. 14. How could the Israelites understand what God was by this? what
satisfaction could they find in this answer of Moses, would this spirit say?
But God is not to be known by the description of words of the earthly wisdom,
but in his own feeling Spirit and Life.

In p. 11. he says, concerning the Quakers, [That which purifies your hearts
is the Law written in your seed or nature, even the same as was written in the
Angel-serpents nature before his fall, which is no other but the nature of
Reason.]

Observe. This is not a true Testimony: for the Light wherewith Christ
enlightneth the Soul (to redeem and bring it back out of the Fall) is not of
the nature of Reason, but confounds corrupt Reason and brings it into the dust,
begetting the Soul into the Divine Wisdom and giving it to partake of the
Divine Nature. Yea that which we are born of and purified by (as we sensible
feel and truly understand) is not the nature of the Serpents reason, but the
immortal Word of Gods eternal Power, which does that in us and for us, which
the nature of reason never did nor can do in any.

Again in p. 11. he says very slightingly and as untruly concerning the
Quakers, thus. [As for the sins your hearts are cleansed from, they are no other
but such like as these, that is to say, to keep the hat on the head before a
Magistrate, and to find fault with gold-lace and a piece of ribbon, a
bandstring and a gold button, and to rend and tear gold-lace, and other lace
off their clothes and burn it, and to use the Language of thee and thou. He or
she that gets thee or thou perfectly, is a very good Quaker, they are gotten
half way to the Quakers Heaven. These and such like righteousness is the
Quakers perfection, and all the cleansing of heart they have etc.]

Observe. O thou despiser, reproacher and belyar of the Work of God in the
hearts of his children. Nay, nay, there are thousands, who in Gods Presence can
testify against thee, that they have waited for and received the inward
clensing from the filthiness of flesh and spirit, from the inward lusts and
motions of sin in the mind, having felt the Ax of the Lord and the two-edged
Sword, which cutteth up sin at the very roots. But thou art so far from having
thy heart cleansed, that thou art not yet cleansed from lying lips, but bring
forth thy false reproachful, slanderous testimony against the Heritage of God
in the sight of the Sun.

In p. 13. he says further of the Quakers, [That they own no other death of
Christ, but what is within them, what ever they pretend by using the words of
Scripture etc.]

Observe. They sincerely and in plainness of heart, own and acknowledge the
death of that Body which the Father prepared for his Son, in which he did the
Fathers Will in his suffering without the Gate of Jerusalem. Therefore in this,
he is a very false Witness, and therein has grossly belyed the Quakers.

In p. 15. he says, [You Quakers are the darkest pieces to interpret
Scripture, of any other Opinions in the World, for you will name places of
Scripture, but never interpret any etc.]

Observe. It is better to bring men to that, which opens the mind to understand
the Scriptures, then to give men interpretations of words or things beyond
their capacity. Yet the Spirit of the Lord, in and through many called Quakers,
does often open many Scriptures in clearness and demonstration to others. (Read
the Book, called Gospel-Liberty or the Royal Law of Love, and see if many
Scriptures be not therein opened to the lowest capacity.) But the Lord has
given them the true skill and understanding, and they are not to open to and
feed that in men, which the Lord has appointto be famished. Yet if they did
not open Scriptures, the Scriptures are plain to him that has an understanding.

Now for a close, I shall add somewhat of the Testimony which is written in my
heart, by the finger of Gods Spirit, concerning the People called Quakers.

Indeed they have met with many reproaches, and sore oppositions many ways,
since they were a People: but notwithstanding all, their bow abides in
strength, and the hands of their arms have been made strong against the wicked
one, with all his devices in his several kinds of instruments: and their Light
is still the same and their God the same, who blesses them from day to day,
even in the midst of all the revilings, slanders, persecutions and curses,
which they have met with from men without, and in the midst of all the
temptations, inward trials and afflictions also, which are often met with
inwardly. Yea we know him to be our God and cannot but trust him, having found
him to be faithful to us hitherto, and knowing his nature to be such, that he
cannot but continue his loving kindness and faithfulness, to all who are
gathered by him into his holy inward, spiritual Covenant of Life and Peace, and
who dwells with him therein. And truly we are fully satisfied and at rest in
him, and cannot desire another, then he who has redeemed our Souls from death,
given us Life, brought us out of the pit wherein was no water, into a large
place, set our feet upon a rock (a rock indeed) and establishes our goings in
the path of holiness, working all our works in us and for us, by his Spirit and
Power. Yea, we have the Witness in our hearts, even the Witness which never
erred nor can deceive, which testifies to and with our spirits our Sonship: so
that we do not imagine our selves sons from apprehensions upon Scriptures, but
we feel our selves sons in the true sensibleness, and know who David is, and
reap and inherit the sure mercies of David daily, O blessed be our Father, O
blessed for ever be the Father of Life, who feeds, who nourishes, who waters,
who refreshes (with the Bread of Life and with the pure living Water) his
Lambs, his babes, his plants, his tender ones, of whom he is daily tender, and
who are daily tender of his Name and Honor. And if any man preach another God,
then he who creates anew in the true Light, and therein puts forth his arm of
Salvation, death and destruction and the curse are his portion from the hand of
the Lord.

Now, O people, any of you that reads this man's writings and admire them; what
spirit are ye of! what is it in you that relisheth them? what do they feed in
you? Not the true Birth, I am sure: but that in you which must perish, and come
into death and destruction, if ever your Souls be saved. I speak sensibly, and
from the true understanding and experience which God has given me: yea I
certainly know, that the knowledge and notions which he holds forth are not
pure nor able to cleanse the heart of any that receives them

And all people, that truly love your Souls and desire the Salvation thereof, O
wait on God that ye may be enabled by him rightly to distinguish, between
receiving notions concerning God and Christ, and feeling and receiving the
Power which effectually redeems from sin and death: for deceit may enter in at
the one, but cannot at the other. The Enemy has all deceivableness of
unrighteousness, to paint as if it were righteousness and appear in, and to
enter and possess the mind by: but he is excluded the redeeming power. He that
feels that which renews his heart to God, and breaks the power and strength of
lusts and temptations in him, and brings him into subjection to the Truth,
which from God lives in the hearts of those that receive it in the virtue, life
and power of it: here his devices and deceits are at an end, and here the elect
Sheep feel the hand of the Father, which is stronger then all, which none can
pluck out of. Here is the Fold, here is the safe dwelling place, whither the
Lord leads and where he preserves his Lambs and Children, and there is not
another.

Now as for him (notwithstanding all that he has done against the Lord and
against his dear people) so far am I from wishing any harm unto him, that I
could wish with all my heart, that it were possible for him to come to a true
sense of the true Light of Gods holy Spirit, that by it he might examine,
wherein he has provoked and sinned against the Lord, that the Lord should thus
leave him, not only to be deceived himself, but to become an head or root of
deceit to others, and so to bring the blood of many Souls upon him, which will
be his bitter burden and misery in the day of the Lord upon him, when the Lord
shall rebuke him for blaspheming his Name, his Light, his Spirit, and shall
justify (in the sight of men and Angels) those to be his Heritage and
everlastingly dear unto him, whom he has reproached, misrepresented and cursed
unto eternity: but they are gathered by God into the blessed Seed (which he
knows not, nor in this spirit nor by this Commission shall ever know) where
he cannot curse, nor can his curse reach or touch them, but they therein are
blessed for evermore,

Amen.
A brief account of my Souls Travel toward the Holy Land, and how at length it
pleased the Lord to join my heart to his pure, holy, living Truth (wherein I
have witnessed the new Covenant, and peace with the Lord therein) with a few
words concerning the Way of knowing and receiving the Truth: which is not done
by disputes and reasonings of the mind about it; but in waiting aright for the
Demonstration and Power of Gods Spirit to open the heart and understanding, and
by submissive obedience to it, even in its lowest appearances, in the inward
parts.
MY Heart from my childhood, was pointed toward the Lord, whom I feared and
longed after from my tender years; wherein I felt, that I could not be
satisfied with (nor indeed seek after) the things of this perishing World,
which naturally pass away; but I desired true sense of and unity with that
which abides for ever. There was somewhat indeed then still with me (even the
Seed of Eternity) which leavened and balanced my spirit almost continually:
but I knew it un^^distinctly, so as to turn to it and give up to it, entirely
and understandingly. In this temper of mind I earnestly sought after the Lord
applying my self to hear Sermons and read the best Books I could meet with, but
especially the Scriptures, which were very sweet and savory to me: yea I very
earnestly desired and pressed after the knowledge of the Scriptures, but was
much afraid of receiving men's interpretations of them, or of fastening any
interpretation upon them my self; but waited much and prayed much, that from
the Spirit of the Lord I might receive the true understanding of them and that
he would chiefly endue me with that Knowledge, which I might feel sanctifying
and saving. And indeed I did sensibly receive of his Love, of his Mercy and of
his Grace, which I felt still freely to move toward me, and at seasons when I
was most filled with the sense of my own unworthiness, and had least
expectations of the manifestation of them. But I was exceedingly entangled
about Election and Reprobation (having drunk in that doctrine, according as it
was then held forth by the strictest of those that were termed Puritans, and as
then seemed to me very manifest and positive from Romans 9. etc.) fearing, lest
notwithstanding all my desires and seekings after the Lord, he might in his
decree have passed me by: and I felt it would be bitter to me to bear his Wrath
and be separated from his Love for evermore; yet, if he had so decreed, it
would be, and I should (notwithstanding these fair beginnings and hopes) fall
away and perish at the last. In this great trouble and grief (which was much
added to by not finding the Spirit of God so in me and with me, as I had read
and believed the former Christians had it) and in mourning over and grapling
with secret corruptions and temptations, I spent many years, and fell into
great weakness of body; and often casting my self upon my bed, did wring my
hands and weep bitterly, begging earnestly of the Lord, daily, that I might be
pitied by him and helped against my enemies, and be made conformable to the
image of his Son, by his own renewing Power. And indeed at last (when my nature
was almost spent, and the pit of despair was even closing its mouth upon me)
mercy sprang and deliverance came, and the Lord my God owned me and sealed his
Love unto me, and light sprang within me, which made not only the Scriptures,
but the very outward creatures glorious in my eye, so that every thing was
sweet and pleasant and lightsom round about me. But I soon felt, that this
estate was too high and glorious for me, and I was not able to abide in it, it
so overcame my natural spirits: wherefore, blessing the Name of the Lord for
his great goodness to me, I prayed unto him to take that from me which I was
not able to bear, and to give me such a proportion of his light and presence,
as was suitable to my present state, and might fit me for his service. Whereupon
this was presently removed from me, yet a savor remained with me, wherein I
had sweetness and comfort and refreshment for a long season. But my mind did
not then know, how to turn to and dwell with that which gave me the savor, nor
rightly to read what God did daily write in my heart, which sufficiently
manifested it self to be of him, by its living virtue and pure opperation upon
me: but I looked upon the Scriptures to be my rule, and so would weigh the
inward appearances of God to me, by what was outwardly written, and durst not
receive any thing from God immediately, as it sprang from the Fountain, but
only in that mediate way. Herein did I limit the holy One of Israel, and
exceedingly hurt my own Soul, and I afterward felt and came to understand. Yet
the Lord was tender to me and condescended exceedingly, opening Scriptures to
me freshly every day, teaching and instructing, warming and comforting my heart
thereby: and truly he did help me to pray, and to believe, and to love him and
his appearances in any, yea to love all the sons of men and all his creatures,
with a true love. But that in me which knew not the appearances of the Lord in
my spirit, but would limit him to words of Scripture formerly written, that
proceeded yet further, and would be raising a fabric of knowledge out of the
Scriptures, and gathering a perfect rule (as I thought) concerning my heart, my
words, my ways, my worship: and according to what I thus drank in (after this
manner, from the Scriptures) I practiced, and with much seriousness of spirit
and prayer to God fell a helping to build up an Independent Congregation,
wherein the savor of Life and the Presence of God was fresh with me, as (I
believe) there are yet some alive of that Congregation can testify.

This was my state, when I was smitten, broken and distressed by the Lord,
confounded in my worship, confounded in my knowledge, stripped of all in one
day, (which it is hard to utter) and was matter of amazement to all that beheld
me. I lay open and naked to all that would enquire of me and strive to search
out, what might be the cause the Lord should deal so with me. They would at
first be jealous that I had sinned and provoked him so to do: but when they had
scanned things thoroughly, and I had opened my heart nakedly to them, I do not
remember any one that ever retained that sense concerning me. My Soul
remembers the Woomwood and Gall, the exceeding bitterness of that state, and
is still humbled in me in the remembrance of it before the Lord. O how did I
wish with Job, that I might come before him and bowingly plead with him: for
indeed I had no sense of any guilt upon me, but was sick of love toward him,
and as one violently rent from the bosom of his Beloved! O how gladly would I
have met with death! for I was weary all the day long and afraid of the night,
and weary also of the night-season and afraid of the ensuing day. I remember my
grievous and bitter mournings to the Lord; how often did I say, O Lord, why
have thou forsaken me? why have thou broken me to pieces? I had no delight but
thee, no desire after any but thee. My heart was bent wholly to serve thee, and
thou had even fitted me (as appeared to my sense) by many deep exercises and
experiences, for thy service, why do thou make me thus miserable! Sometimes I
would cast mine eye upon a Scripture, and my heart would even mel^ within me:
at other times I would desire to pray to my God, as I had formerly done; but I
found I knew him not, and I could not tell how to pray or in any wise to come
near him, as I had formerly done. In this condition I wandered up and down from
mountain to hill, from one sort to another, with a cry in my spirit, Can ye
tell news of my Beloved? where does he dwell? where does he appear? but their
voices were still strange to me, and I should retire sad and oppressed and
bowed down in spirit from them.

Now surely all serious, sober, sensible people will be ready to enquire, how I
came satisfyingly to know the Lord at length: or whether I do yet certainly
know him, and am yet truly satisfied?

Yes indeed, I am satisfied at my very heart. Truly my heart is united to him
whom I longed after, in an everlasting Covenant of pure Life and Peace.

Well then, how came this about? will some say.

Why thus, The Lord opened my spirit, the Lord gave me the certain and sensible
feeling of the pure Seed, which had been with me from the beginning; the Lord
caused his holy Power to fall upon me, and gave me such an inward demonstration
and feeling of the Seed of Life, that I cried out in my spirit, This is he,
This is he; there is not another, there never was another. He was always near
me, though I knew him not (not so sensibly, not so distinctly, as now he was
revealed in me and to me by the Father) O that I might now be joined to him,
and he alone might live in me. And so in the willingness, which God had wrought
in me (in this day of his Power to my Soul) I gave up to be instructed,
exercised and led by him, in the waiting for and feeling of his holy Seed, that
all might be wrought out of me which could not live with the Seed, but would be
hindering the dwelling and reigning of the feed in me, while it remained and had
power. And so I have gone through a fore travel, and fight of afflictions and
temptations, of many kinds; wherein the Lord has been merciful to me, in
helping me and preserving the spark of Life in me, in the midst of many things
which have befallen me, whose nature tended to quench and extinguish it.

Now thus having met with the true Way, and walked with the Lord therein,
wherein daily-certainty, yea and full assurance of Faith and of understanding
is at length obtained; I cannot be silent (true Love and pure Life stirring in
me and moving me) but am necessitated to testify of it to others: and this is
it, To retire inwardly and wait to feel somewhat of the Lord, somewhat of his
holy Spirit and Power, discovering and drawing from that which is contrary to
him, and into his holy Nature and Heavenly Image. And then, as that mind is
joined to this, somewhat is received; some true Life, some true Light, some
true Discerning; which the Creature not exceeding (but abiding in the measure
of) is safe: but it is easy erring from this, but hard abiding with it and not
going before its leadings But he that feels Life and begins in Life, does he
not begin safely? and he that waits, and fears, and goes on no further then his
Captain goes before him, does he not proceed safely? yea very safely, even till
he comes to be so settled and established in the Virtue, Demonstration and
Power of Truth, as nothing can prevail to make him. Now, blessed be the Lord,
there are many at this day, who can truly and faithfully witness, that they
have been brought by the Lord to this state. And thus have we learned of the
Lord, to wit, not by the high striving, aspiring mind: but by lying low and
being contented with a little. If but a crum of Bread (yet if bread) if but a
drop of Water (yet if water) we have been contented with it, and also thankful
to the Lord for it. Nor by thoughtfulness, and wise searching and deep
considering with our own wisdom and reason have we obtained but in the still
meek and humble waiting, have we found that brought into the death, which is
not to know the mysteries of Gods Kingdom, and that which is to live, made
alive and increase in Life.

Therefore he that would truly know the Lord, let him take heed of his own
reason and understanding I tried this way very far: for I considered most
seriously and uprightly, I prayed, I read the Scriptures, I earnestly desired
to understand and find out, whether that which this people (called Quakers)
testified of, was the only Way and Truth of God (as they seemed to me but to
pretend:) but for all this, prejudices multiplied upon me and strong reasonings
against them, which appeared to me as unanswerable. But when the Lord revealed
his Seed in me and touched my heart therewith, which administered true Life and
Virtue to me, I presently felt them there the children of the Most High, and so
grown up in his Life, Power and holy Dominion (as the inward eye being opened
by the Lord, sees) as drew forth from me great reverence of heart and praises
to the Lord, who had so appeared among men in these latter days. And as God
draws, in any respect, O give up in faithfulness to him. Despise the Shame,
take up the Cross: for indeed it is a Way which is very cross to man, and which
his wisdom will exceedingly be ashamed of; but that must be denied and turned
from, and the secret sensible drawings of Gods Spirit waited for and given up
to. Mind people; He that will come into the new Covenant, must come into the
obedience of it. The Light of Life, which God has hid in the Heart, is the
Covenant: and from this Covenant God does not give knowledge to satisfy the
vast aspiring, comprehending wisdom of man; but living Knowledge to feed that
which is quickened by him: which Knowledge is given in the obedience, and is
very sweet and precious to the taste of him, that knows how to feed upon it.
Yea truly, this is a very excellent, pure, precious nature, and a little of it
weighs down that great, vast knowledge in the comprehending part, which the
man's spirit and nature so much prizeth and presses after. And truly, Friends,
I witness at this day, a great difference between the sweetness of
comprehending the knowledge of things as expressed in the Scriptures (this I
sed much on formerly) and tasting the hidden Life, the hidden Manna in the
heart (which is my food now, blessed for ever be the Lord my God and Savior.)
O that others had a true, certain, and sensible taste of the Life, Virtue and
Goodness of the Lord, as it is revealed there: surely it could not but kindle
the true hunger and inflame the true thirst, which can never be satisfied but
by the True Bread and by Water from the Living Fountain. This the Lord (in the
tenderness of his Love and in the Riches of his Grace and Mercy) has brought
us to, and this we earnestly and uprightly desire and endeavor that others may
be brought to also, that they may rightly (in the true silence of Flesh, and in
the pure stilness of Spirit) wait for, and in the Lords due time receive that,
which answers the desire of the awakened Mind and Soul, and satisfies it with
the true precious Substance for evermore.

Amen.
THE END.

