A Touchstone or Trial OF FAITH, BY The Original from whence it springs, and
the Root out of which it grows: Held out By way of EXPOSITION of the 12 and 13
verses of the first Chapter of John's Gospel, and of the six former verses of
the third Chapter, which treat expressly about this point: Intended Not for the
disquiet of any, but for the eternal Rest and Peace of all, to whom the Lord
shall please to make it useful thereunto.

To which is added, The Spiritual Practice of CHRISTIANS in the Primitive
Times.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black Spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's, 1648.

To the Reader.
READER,
IF thou have any leisure from partaking in, or exclaming against the bitter
contentions of this present age, which have eat out most men's content in
themselves, and their pleasingnesse to others; Here are some serious
considerations proposed to thee, as thou will one day acknowledge, when thine
eyes come to be fully opened.

It is high time to look out after some other place and certainty of
entertainment there, when this earth by its continual shaking and cracking
under us, does so often threaten that it will not long support us. There is no
true security for us, but by Faith in Chrisst; he is the only Rock, and there
is no stepping thither but by Faith: there is no certainty, but by an assured
knowledge of the truth of this Faith; whereof there are so many and such
accurate cheats, that it is not possible to discern the difference without
through sifting and scanning. The Devil, that great cozouning merchant, has
all kind of counterfeit wares which he paints and guilds, that he may put off
for true. He has grosser ware for the grosser sort, whom he can content with
any thing; but more refined stuff for such as look more narrowly into things:
Men that are openly vain and profane, yet can hardly be beaten off from it,
but that they love God, and have such a Faith as will carry them to heaven;
though they do not live so strictly as others, yet they believe in Christ, and
that is it God looks after.

This deceit thou see through oh stricter soul! but know withal, the Devil
has more curious counterfeits, wherein there is the exact proportion of the
thing resembled, all but the life and power; yea, he is cunning also in
imitating the life and power of every thing, he has a resemblance of that too
(for those that will not otherwise be content) to keep them from attaining the
truth and substance which if they were not thus deceived by him, with the
similitude of, they would not cease to pursue.

Thou art confident thou art not deceived, so are all that are deceived; the
Devil could not deceive thee, with that which is false, if he did not withal
work in thee a persuasion that it is true: What will it hurt thee to try and
try thoroughly? Nay, surely it will much advantage thy very confidence: After
trial, thou may be confident upon knowledge, now thou art confident but upon
supposition; and if thou should at last prove mistaken, thou would have
too much time to befoole thy self, and bewail thy confidence; thou will be
more angry that thou were pressed no further to trial, then thou art now
offended that thou art pressed so much to it. Thou art but a Traveller in this
world, and yet thou will look after a sure title in these transitory things; oh
look that there be not a flaw in thy title to thy true inheritance: And if thy
spirit be seriously bent toward this employment, here perhaps the Lord may
administer to thee some help and direction, or furnish thee better some other
way when he shall see good.

The way of trial here propounded, is certain, though somewhat difficult,
yea, indeed altogether impossible without the help of Gods Spirit: And yet,
what sweeter, safer, truer direction can be given, to us poor, weak, empty
creatures, who are nothing, who can do nothing, then to fly to him who is able
to do all things, to issue out that power to us, and manage it in us, whereby
the thing we desire may be effected; and to wait quietly upon him in our
present uncertain condition till he shall please to do it, rather then patch
up a satisfaction of our own?

And this way of trial is not any invention of mine, but it is plainly
represented in these Scriptures, from the mouth of John and Christ, referring
the trial of Faith, to the birth, and of the birth to the Spirit, as thou
may more fully see in the Discourse it self; to which I now leave thee to
make what use of it, the Lord shall direct thee.

Thine in what the Lord pleases, Isaac Pennington.

A Touchstone or Trial OF FAITH:
JOHN 1. VERSE. 12. 13. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name;

Which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God.


THis sweet and soaring Evangelist having glanced at the excellency of our Lord
Christ, in his relation to God (being his Word) his presence, and oneness with
God, verse. 1. in his influence upon all things, he gave them their being, verse.
3. he gave them their life too (for it was first in him) and his life contains
all that light that man at any time receives, either natural or spiritual,
either from and through the creatures, in at the windows of his own sense and
reason; or more immediately from the Spirit of God, into his own spirit, verse.
4.

Having thus given a general and pithy description of him, who was to be the
maine subject of his discourse; he comes in the next place to speak of his
forerunner, and what of Christ might be learned from him.

He describes this forerunner: 1. By his mission, he was sent from God; he
did not go of his own head, but God bid. him go: 2. By his name, His name
was John, verse. 6. 3. By the end of his coming it was for to be a witness, to
testify somewhat from God unto the world: 4. Concerning what he was to
witness; It was concerning that light he had spoken of, that came into the
world and shined in the darkness, uncomprehended by the darkness, that this
was the light indeed: 5. To what end he was to witness this, that all through
him might believe; that by his means men might universally come to acknowledge
this light, and to cast themselves upon it, to lead them unto life, verse. 7.

In verse. 8. he removes a mistake which might arise in men minds, concerning
this end; He was not that light, but to bear witness of that light; as if he
had said, do not mistake, he was not this light himself, he came not to that
end to be the light, but only to give in a testimony from God concerning the
light; to tell men which was it, that men might not have recourse to him but to
the light; he was to point with the finger at Christ, and to send men thither.

And he gives a reason why John could not be this light, verse. 9. because he
wanted the property of this light: This light is the original light as it was
described before, who has all light in him who gives out all light, who is
the very light; The true light that lightneth every man that comes into the
world: It is he gives the light of reason to every man that comes into this
outward world, it is he gives the light of the spirit to every man that enters
by faith into the inner world. Now John was not this true light, this very
light, but only had his candlelighted by it.

Verse. 10. The Evangelist proceeds further to describe this light: He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world know him not: He did
not only enlighten the world from the beginning of it, but at length he
himself came into the world; and the world had a near relation to him, for
he gave it its being, it was the workmanship of his hands, and yet the world
knew him not; though he had not fo^gotten the world, but came in due time to
look after it, yet the world had forgotten him and knew not who he was.

Yea, he came to his own, verse. 11. his own people the Jews, whom he had
selected out of the world; whom he had always cherished, to whom he had
promised this coming of his, and who had long expected it, and yet they
received him not.

All this seems to be the Answer of an Objection, such an Objection as this:

Object. If Christ was the light, what need he have such an one as John to go
and proclaim it? what need John come to bear witness of him? light discovers
it self: The Sun needs none to go and proclaim that there is light in it; If
this were the fountain of light, the very light indeed; what need has he of
John's testimony, of John's finger to point at him?

Answ. Yes, says he, need enough, for though he was in the world; yea, and was
the great Architect of the world, yet the world knew him not; and though he
came to his own people, who had all the light of God that was in the world, yet
they received him not. The world, they did not know him; the Jews they would
not own him; though they did partly know him, yet they did not like him.
Surely, he who was thus unknown, who lay hid in the field of the world, to the
world; who was thus rejected by his own, had great need of a witness, to
declare to the world who he was, and to testify to the stubborn Jews, their
rebellion against the light.

But then it may further be demanded, what did the Jews loose by not
receiving, or what should the world gain by coming to this light, when they
were pointed to it by John?

Why very much, as verse the 12th holds out: But as many as received him, to
them gave he power to become the sons of God: They should gain this great
dignity to be the sons of God, coming into Union and Fellowship with him, they
should partake of his honor from, and interest in the Father. Christ would
give them this privilege, to become the sons of the most High; to go and
call him Father, and desire any fatherly act of him; and if he be questioned
for it, tell him Christ bid him do so; he gave him this right and privilege,
to be a son: What means that? what is it to have a Father? what is it to be
a son?

It includes these three things in it.

1. Careful education by the Father. 2. A sonlike spirit in himself from the
Father. 3. A sonlike inheritance for himself with the Father.
Each of these is included in this prerogative of being a son.

1. Careful education by the Father. The Father is to nurture, and bring up
his child, suitable to his own state and degree. This is an universal law of
nature, and universally observed by every creature; every creature brings up,
what it brings forth; and doubtless the substance of this law is written on
Go^s heart, who has written the image of it on every thing that comes from
him. Now Education has these three things in it.

First, Instruction in such literature, as becomes such a son: Thou may go
to God, for such knowledge as becomes a son of God; thou art to be brought
up in the knowledge of the most High, this is thy right; It is written in the
Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God; they shall all know me from the
least to the greatest. The least of them shall not want suitable knowledge; They
shall all know God who is the greatest thing to be known, and whom it requires
the highest life to know: This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God.

Secondly, Preservation from dangers. The Father is to provide Tutors and
Governors to look to the child, that he do not wrong himself, nor that any
else wrong him; When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: All
things shall work together for good to them that love God: The stones of the
field shall be at peace with thee. Creatures, men, devils, temtations, sins,
corruption; nothing shall hurt them, nor they shall not hurt themselves;
nothing can hurt them but departing from God, and their Father will look to
that too; I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me, Ier. 32. 40.

Thirdly, Provision of meat, drink, clothes, recreations, and whatsoever else
is needful for him, suitable to his degree: This God will take care for too, he
will take care of this for the body, He that feeds the Ravens, and clothes
the Lillies, shall he not much more feed and cloth you? but it is their spirit
he^^s specially the Father of, that is his child, and spiritual meat, drink,
clothes, recreations, etc. he will not fail to provide for it: He will give
grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold: The Lions may suffer
hunger, and want food for their bodies; but none of his shall want food for
their spirits; as he promises the poor captive exile, who is banished from
his presence and in captivity under Satan, bound in his pit; he promises him
that he shall not die there, nor his bread fail there, Esaias 51. 14. The words
in the Hebrew are in the future tense, He shall not die in the Pit, and his
bread shall not fail.

2. A sonlike spirit: It is natural to the son, to be, like the father; but
why? because he has it from his father. God also will put his Spirit into his
Sons, I will put my Spirit within you; Indeed, it is the spirit of a son
makes a son; and therefore those that want the spirit of sons, we say they
are unnatural. God should beget unnatural children if he should not endue
them with a sonlike Spirit: He could not be a true Father, beget a true child,
unless he begat his own spirit in him: There can be no life of a son, no
voice of a son, no motion of a son without the spirit, Romans 8. 9, 26.
Sonship and the spirit are knit together, Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are Sons,
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba
Father. It belongs to the Father both to beget, and cherish a sonlike spirit in
his son: God has undertaken for his, as well that they shall be sons and
daughters, as to be a Father to them, 2 Cor. 6. 18. He will beget in them, and
pour out upon them such a sonlike spirit, that neither he, nor they, shall be
ashamed of the relation.

3. A sonlike inheritance: Such an one as becomes such an heir; what God now
possesses, he must inherit; if he be his son, his heir, it is his privilege;
what power, wisdom, goodness, glory, etc. God now enjoyes, he must have when
he is grown up to it, Romans 8. 17.

This all that receive Christ, must have from and with Christ; all this God
has given unto Christ, and he gives it all with himself, so that take him
and take all.

Quest. But what is this same receiving of Christ? who are those persons that
receive him? how may we know them?

Answ. The next words tell you, It is them that believe on his Name? The name
of Christ is his power to save, to bring men out of their misery and
wretchedness unto this. This light comes to lighten men out of their darkness
into it self; and who ever lay hold on him he fetches them out; who ever is
fastened unto him, cannot abide in darkness, but must come out with him: Now
to believe on his name, is to fasten on this power of his; faith is that glue
which makes the soul in whom it is, stick and cleave to Christ; and any such
souls he fetches them out of the clutches of the Devil presently, and from
amiddest that power of darkness under which they lay, and gives them this
privilege to become sons of God, Act. 26. 18.

Quest. But how may we know those who believe? or how come these persons to
believe and receive him before others? his own they receive him not; how comes
it about that these receive him?

Answ. That is resolved in the following verse, (verse. 13.) they have a new
principle of life put into them, which inclines them so to do, Which were born
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
These persons come to it by a new birth, they come not to faith by the powers
of nature, but they are new born before they believe: They have a new seed of a
new life put into them, out of which faith grows, and from which it fetches
its ability to act. Now concerning this birth, that we may not be deceived
about it, he shows first what it is not, whence it does not proceed; and then
what it is, whence it does proceed: It is not a birth of blood, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

1. Not of blood: Blood may import that instruction in Religion and disposion
toward Religion, which a man receives from his Parents; There is a vein of
Religon runs along with the blood, and there is a kind of natural
inclination in all persons toward Religion, both which meeting together with
some addition of instruction, will carry a person very far in Religious
practices. This was the Religion of the Jews generally; what they drank in
from their parents, and were accustomed to by their education, that they were
very strict in the observation of. And this is the root of most of the
Religion, at this day in the Word; Turks, Papists, yea, Protestants generally
suck in their Religion with their blood; indeed, they all pretend to a power of
God, and strive to make up a kind of satisfaction to themselves one way or
other, whereas the groundwork whereupon they build is rotten. But this is not
the true birth; man in the natural way of generation cannot convey it; Abraham
did not thus convey it to Isaac, but he was a son by Promise; it is not the
blood of Abraham through which the Faith of Abraham runs.

2. Nor of the will of the flesh: The will of the flesh being distinguished
from the will of man, denotes the corrupt part with the desires thereof, which
also does operate and has a power to produce a birth in Religion though not the
true birth. This will of the flesh may work a twofold way; either in ones
self, or in others; and either way may effect a great change in the person, in
the reference to Religion, though not the true one.

First, There is the will of the flesh working in a man's self; when a man for
by-ends, as vainglory profit, quietness sake, or any such like thing, takes
up the profession and practice of Religion; this is from the flesh, from a
corrupt principle; when a man takes up Religion, not from a pure conviction of
conscience, not for Religions sake, but because it suites with such and such
by-ends of his, tends to advantage him in this or that respect. Thus the
Pharisees took up most of their practices, out of a desire of honor and gain;
and it has been observed, and known of many in former times, that they have
been Puritanes on such terms as these, to obtain a wife, to please their
friends, to increase their custom and the like; And thus are many things
maintained among us at this day, which the light that is abroad would quickly
and clearly dispell, only corrupt ends keep them alive. And thus a man may be
born anew as it were, a great change may be made in him, and he appear a new
man to all that behold him; when as it is indeed but the working of the flesh,
his prosecuting some corrupt ends of his own which makes him thus forward and
zealous in Religion.

Secondly, There is this corrupt part, or will of the flesh, not only working
in a man's self but in others also; and that is, when other men for corrupt
ends of their own, strive to bring on persons (specially such as may be more
easily led) to such and such practices in Religion, and to zeal in such and
such particular things: Thus the Pharisees did bring the people into many
practices, for their own corrupt ends; and thus were the poor Proselytes born,
they were brought into a way of Religion by the Jews, who took great pains to
effect it, but made them ten times more the children of hell then they were
before: And this we shall see, will be the case of many poor souls at last,
who have followed such guides as have had glorious pretenses in view, but
corrupt ends in their hearts; they become ten times worse at present, and will
be ten times more miserable at last then if they had never known such and such
ways of Religion, or had not been so zealous in them. But this is not the true
birth neither whence true Faith does flow; all the changes that are made in us,
from any corrupt end or desire of our own, or of any others whatsoever, will
be of little value to us.

3. Nor of the will of man: The will of man being distinguished from the will
of the flesh, notes the purest and most ingenuous part; and that either in a
man's self or any other; It notes, that desire that is naturally in man, to
find out God and his will, and to worship and please him, and so to use the
best means the soul can meet with in reference thereunto, as seeking into his
word, hearing, conferring, praying, and observing what it finds to be his
will; This indeed is noble, ingenuous, and acceptable in the sight of God in
its kind and degree; but yet it does not rise so high as this birth that is
here spoken of: All this prosecuted by the soul, yet will never bring it to
God, though God does ordinarily (if not always) bring such persons to
himself, whom he thus seriously and constantly inclines.

Nor will this desire in others, with all the means they can use accomplish
it; though they themselves be new born, yet this will not beget another; though
the most precious Saint that is, should never so earnestly desire the begetting
of a soul to God; out of the purest ends that might be, and should use all
spiritual means toward it, pray hard to God, diligently spread the knowledge
of Christ before the person and beg on him day after day with tears, to
pity his poor perishing soul, yet all this will not do; Abraham did as much
for Ishmael as could be done, if the will of man would have done it; he was
careful to instruct his whole Family, but in a special manner very feign
would he have had grace breathed into him, Oh that Ishmael might live before
thee! How feign would Isaac have had the blessing run to Esau! how much did
Christ do for the Jews, how large were his affections; Oh that thou had
known at least in this thy day the things that belong unto thy peace! how vaste
his pains! All the day long have I stretched out my hands to a foolish and
gainsaying people. So Paul for the Jews, Romans 9. 2, 3. The Apostles of Christ
though they did travel with men, yet they could not beget or bring forth whom
they would; and those persons that were born of this will of theirs, yet that
birth came to nothing, they fell away from the Faith afterward, both from
Christ while he was alive, (as this book abundantly testifies) and from the
Churches after his ascension. So that here are the three great engines of
Religion, which turn all the world upside down, and make almost all the
changes in Religion among men, Tradition, Corruption, Reason and Ingenuity,
they are all here discarded, as not being able to convey the true birth whence
true Faith proceeds.

Then at last, the Evangelist having shown whence it did not proceed, shows
also whence it did proceed, both the birth and the faith; but of God, the birth
comes from God, the faith from the birth or from the new born child: God by his
Spirit, breathes a breath of life into him, puts a new principle within him,
and by virtue of this he comes to believe on Christ: God by the power of his
Grace, changes him and makes him a new creature, and then he comes to put
forth this new act of true and spiritual Faith: God sows a seed in him,
causes this seed to grow and at length brings it forth, so that the child is
born; and then Faith naturally, after the law and manner of the Divine nature
sprouts from it: The first act of the living child, is to exercise the power of
Faith, which before lay hid in him. And this is done, this birth is brought
about, not from a man's own will, whether corrupt or ingenuous, nor from the
will of any else, but from God, from his will, of his own will begat he us,
Iam. 1. 18. This, and this alone is the true birth.

For a close to these two verses, take notice of these four great truths,
wherein much of the Gospel does lie; three of them are contained in these two
verses, the first of them in the foregoing part of the Chapter.

1. That Christ is the light come into the world to lighten men out of their
darkness; there is no getting out of spiritual darkness, but by Christ the
true and only spiritual light.

2. The persons for whom he does this, must believe, must receive him by faith
for their light.

3. Faith proceeds from the new birth, a man must be new born that he may
believe.

4. The great privilege Christ bestows on those that believe, which is this,
he gives them Authority to become the sons of God.

Those that will be the sons of God, must believe on his Christ.

Those that will believe on Gods Christ, must be born of God.

Those that are born of God, cannot but believe on Christ, and Christ cannot
but lighten them out of their darkness, for that end he came.

JOHN 3. Verse. 1. There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of
the Jews:

2. The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that
thou' art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou
do, except God be with him.

3. Jesus answered, and said unto him, Verily, verily I say thee: except a man
be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

4. Nicodemus says unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he
enter the second time into his mothers womb, and be borne?

5. Jesus answered, Verily, verily I say unto thee, Except a man be born of
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is borne of the
spirit is spirit.

Here is an excellent Dispute between Christ and Nicodemus concerning true
Faith; John had described it before in the twelf and thirteenth verses of the
first Chapter, where he had showed that those that did indeed believe, were
born of God: This act of Faith in them, which did entitle them unto Christ, and
whereupon they did receive the right of Sonship in and from him, did not
proceed from any light set before them by men; nor from any inclination of
heart which man could work in them; but from a new principle of life breathed
into their souls by God.

Here the case is more fully argued between Christ and Nicodemuus. Nicodemus a
Pharisee, and Rules of the Jews, comes to Christ by night, acknowledging him
to be a Teacher from God, one who had the will of God revealed unto him by God
himself, and came to make it known unto the sons of men: He gives Christ
the ground which induced him thus to believe, which was, because of the signs
he showed, the wonders he did, which no man could do unless God were with
him. Those things he did were beyond the working of any humane power, therefore
God must needs be with that person who does them; he comes as one that would be
a disciple (though he comes not so openly as others did) and at his first
salute, he acknowledges Christ to be a Teacher sent from Heaven by God,
rendering his reason withal, whereby he could not choose but so judge, which
was no mean one neieher, but drawn from the mighty things Christ did, wherein
the very power of God did appear to the eye of reason evidencing unto it that
living Spring from whence he came, and the Pres^^^^ of that living Spring with
him: This is expressed in the first and second verses.

In the third verse, Christ applies himself to his particular state, wishing
him to consider the ground whence this acknowledgement of his did arise;
telling him plainly, that true Faith must arise from another root then sight of
his miracles; Jesus answered, and said unto him, verily, verily, etc. as if he
had said, Mark what I say, I know what I speak, Verily, verily, it is most
certainly so, unless a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

What is the Kingdom of God? The kingdom of God, is that state of life and
blessedness, which God has brought to light by Jesus Christ. As the kingdom
of the Devil is that state of death and misery man lies in by nature; so the
Kingdom of God is the state of life and glory man is advanced to by grace:
Philip preached the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of
Jesus Christ, Act. 8. 12. He opened the life and blessedness that belongs to
this Kingdom, and the name of Christ who is to bring us into it.

To see this Kingdom, is an act of Faith, which is the eye wherewith we
behold every spiritual thing; this eye no man has, but he that is born
again, he that is born from above: This eye does not lie hid in nature, and so
only wants somewhat to clear it, and draw forth the act of it; but it belongs
to a new birth; he that is begotten and born of God, he has this eye in him,
and none else: Therefore Nicodemus consider thy mistake, Thou think because
thou see by an eye of reason that I am come from God, and art drawn by thy
reason and ingenuity to acknowledge and own it, that therefore thou believe:
No, no, Nicodemus, if thou have Faith, it arises from another ground then the
sight of my miracles, it comes from a new birth in thee, though God may make
this useful to thee also to help thee to believe; but if thy Faith have no
better groundwork then this, it is like the forementioned Faith of those in
the former Chapter, verse. 23. whom I dare not, I cannot own as Disciples. Oh
weigh and consider this, all wise and ingenuous men, behold your snare, and
take notice of this also, which may help to enervate the force of it.

That sight and acknowledgement of any spiritual thing which we are drawn to
by a power of reason, by such evidences as reason it self cannot withstand (as
miracles were) we have just cause to suspect as not true and spiritual: It is
the sight of reason not of Faith; it is such an act of Faith as proceeds from
the natural man, not from the spiritual man; it is that act the eye that was
in us before puts forth, not the new eye. Oh see, how men are quite out in
seeking after the truths of God in every kind: They call for reason, for
evidences to have it brought by such hands as no man could justly refuse: Ah!
they should call for new eyes, or least for Gods discovering his truths in a
spiritual way to their eyes which all the miracles in the world cannot do:
They may by miracles be brought to a rational sight, and so to a present
acknowledgement of truths; but never to a spiritual sight, which alone ^s
satisfactory, and which alone w^ll be lasting.

Verse 4. Nicodemus apprehends this spiritual truth very carnally and
grossly, of a fleshly birth of the fleshly part; and it seems a direct
absurdity to him, what Christ had now affirmed: He thinks he has caught the
great Master (whom he acknowledged just now a Teacher come from God) in a
trap, and he so expresses it, as if Christ had overshot himself, and could
not tell how to make good what he had laid down; How can a man be borne
again when he is old? is there any possibility of this? can he enter the
second time into his mothers womb and be borne?

Verse 5. Christ does not abate any thing of what he has said, but affirms
it again with the same vehemence, further opening, and confirming it, Jesus
answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be borne of water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Do thou come to be a Disciple to learn the way to happiness? would thou
enter into that state of blessedness, that I come to preach? thou must be born
again; and not carnally, not of carnal things; but of water and of the spirit.

For the better apprehending of this, let us enquire a little into these
ensuing particulars.

1. What is meant by water? 2. What it is to be borne of water? 3. What it is
to be borne of the Spirit? 4. What this entering into the Kingdom of God is,
which none none can do, but that person which it born of water and of the
Spirit?
1. What is meant by water? By water is meant, the knowledge of God in Christ,
the sight of God in the face of Christ, wherein eternal life consists. If thou
had known the gift of God, etc. thou would have asked of him, and he would
have given thee living water, Ioh. 4. 10. What is this living water? Why, this
is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent? Ioh. 17. 3. The heavenly doctrine of life and salvation, is often
expressed in Scripture, by this term of water, My doctrine shall drop as the
rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. and Is. 55. 10. Heb. 6.
7. As God is the fountain whence all the life and sweetness of the creature
flows, whether natural (Is. 65. 9.) or spiritual (Ier. 2. 13.) So those
beams of eternal light, those streamings forth of life, which issue out from
God in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, they are waters from this fountain.

2. What it is to be born of water? It notes that fundamental and radical
change which is made in the heart by the power of the truths of Christ conveyed
thither, and working there.

There are three great effects of this water.

It begets, it washes, it nourishes; It begets a dead man to life, it begets
a man unto God; for it is a living and active water; or rather it is the seed
whereof a man is begotten and born; or at least the vessel, that living vessel
which contains it: It is that also wherewith he is washed after he is born
(though there be a washing with blood too.) And it nourishes him after he is
both borne and washed, he lives upon the very same water that he was borne of
and with: It is the first of these effects that is here spoken of, that stroke
that water has in the generation and birth of the new creature, He is born of
it. It is by letting in these waters upon the soul and into the soul that God
changes it, and makes it a new. Our change in our spirits, and our conversion
to God proceeds from, and is to be attributed to that power of truth that God
lets in upon us; and to that the Apostle ascribes it (as in many other places)
Romans 6. 17. Iam. 1. 1^. As our first change from God, was by drinking of the
Devils waters, which were waters of darkness and death, waters of error and
deceit; so this great change to God again, is wrought by drinking of Gods
waters, his spiritual waters of life, which are his truths which he holds out
unto us, wherein there is no darkness nor deceit at all, but they are clear,
living, and substantial.

3. What is it to be born of the Spirit? It is to have this change from these
waters wrought in us by the spirit. A man can never change his own heart, by
any of the truths of God; but it must be the spirit that must do it. This
water is too spiritual a seed for any man to sow in his own heart: No man, no
creature can sow another seed; this is the spirits seed, and he must sow it
if it be sown: Christ himself opens and illustrateth this further in the
eigth verse of the third Chapter, The wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it
goes: So is every one that is borne of the Spirit. The Spirit breathes his own
breath, blows his own blast, makes his own sound of life himself in our
spirits, and thus are we born of him. It is not all the changes a man can make
by the light of natural truths, nay by the light of spiritual truths, working
them upon his heart with never so much pains, that will amount to a new birth;
but it must be the spirit of Christ breathing this seed into him, and forming
him into a new creature by this seed* As it is water or the word of truth,
whereby we are begotten; So it is God alone who begets, and that he does of
his own inclination too, Iam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us with the word
of truth.

4. What is it to enter into the Kingdom of God? The Kingdom of God, is his
spiritual dominion in Christ, to which every spiritual thing belongs, and in
which all spiritual excellencies and blessednesses are laid up: To enter into
this Kingdom, is by a spiritual act of the soul to come within the verge and
bounds of it, even that very act which Nicodemus was speaking of, verse. 3.
namely, an act of true says; by laying hold on Jesus Christ and becoming one
with him, a man presently has right unto, and entrance into this Kingdom.

Now says Christ, it is impossible for any man to do this who is not first
newborn; he can never truly mount upward, whose earthly nature is not first
changed.

A man may talk of spiritual glories and his right unto them, but of a truth
he is not entered into the Kingdom, nor cannot by true Faith, who is not born
again, and that both of water and the spirit. To partake of the privileges of
Christ, to have life and blessedness from him, requires a birth of water, and
of the spirit: There must a new birth of water and the spirit precede there,
without which the person is not in a capacity of it; he must be made up again
of water, and that not of his own forming neither, but of the spirits forming;
and then by Faith he enters into the Kingdom, and becomes entitled to all the
privileges of the Kingdom, which without this birth foregoing cannot be done.

Verse. 6. In this verse, Christ lays down a position, to confirm the truth
he had spoken in the former verse: There is a necessity of being born of water
and the spirit, or else a man cannot enter into the Kingdom; for that is a
spiritual act, and a man can act no higher then he is, and he is not
spiritual, he is but flesh, if he be borne but of flesh, That which is borne
of flesh is flesh.

Flesh here is not to be taken in its latitude, but for that part of it which
is powerful in spiritual generation and production; for that power of man,
together with the means and engines that he can come by (whether natural or
spiritual) whereby he works a change in his own heart or upon others, in
imitation of that change which God alone does, and can work, by his Spirit:
Nature, Reason, Art, with all the advantages they can possibly desire or have;
Nature enlightened and purified by reason and art; Nature furnished as much as
may be with the knowledge of God, with desires to be like God, to recover his
image, to obey him etc. This is here meant by flesh, and does more directly
thus reach the state of Nicodemus, to whom Christ spoke (whose present
conviction was wrought by Christ's Miracles meeting with his reason and
ingenuity) then if it were understood in a more gross ence.

To be borne of the flesh, denotes the greatest change that possibly can be
made in a man by this power with all the means that it can use: The change is
so great, that a man is new born, becomes a new man, is changed inside and
outside, both to his own appearance, and in the thoughts of others. It is an
imitation of that work whereby God brings a man forth a new man. The flesh will
take his tools, set about his work and seem to produce the same effect, bring
forth the New Birth; but, in truth and substance, it falls short of it, for it
is but flesh: This birth, when a man has done all he can, used all the
spiritual means he can, yet it is but flesh. The fruit can have no more
virtue or strength and spirituality then the root had from whence it did
proceed, which was but flesh; and though there were never so many spiritual
engines in the hand of flesh, yet this will not alter the case; for those
engines cannot work of themselves, and the flesh cannot make them work
spiritually: So that all the births produced by man, are but fleshly, all the
changes man can make in his own heart, or any else, is but from flesh to flesh,
from grosser flesh to flesh somewhat more refined. Conversion by Miracles and
strong arguments, is but a fleshly conversion; all the ways that man can take
to bring his own heart to believe, to close in with Christ, to love Christ,
can produce but a fleshly Faith, a fleshly love; all the ways man can take to
kill and subdue sin in him, it is but a fleshly mortifying of sin; sin is
truly alive for all this, and will discover its life again, when it sees its
time. Christ does especially allude to the Miracles that were in Nicodemus his
eye; were thou born of these? thy birth is but fleshly; how spiritual soever
such a person may seem, how spiritually soever he may seem to act, yet at the
root he is but fleshly; The change is made but by flesh, and the thing changed
is still but flesh, how glorious soever the change may seem. Think well of it,
it cannot be said too often; all the ways and means man can use, to bring up
his heart to God, they are but fleshly, and can produce but fleshly operations
in him; all this Faith and holiness, though raised to never so great an
height, it is but that his heart must be mortified to, if ever he live
spiritually.

Oh! it would be sweet and profitable to consider the abundance of fleshly
changes, wherewith the Devil cozens men* They see a real change in
themselves, and so think they are sure; whereas it is but a real fleshly
change, not a real spiritual change, and so indeed not real in the true
sense; a change from natural unbelief to natural Faith, (for there is a
power in nature to believe, which may either be afrighted or persuaded to put
forth it self, for its own preservation. (Nature being convinced of its
present danger, and that there is no way of safety, but by believing on Christ,
which Faith must be accompanied with love to Christ, the truths of Christ, the
people of Christ; and that this love must show it self in obedience: Nature I
say, being convinced of this, does presently muster up all its forces of Faith,
love, obedience, laying them at Christ's feet to dispose of; it will trust him,
love what he will have it love obey what he will command it, hate what he will
have it hate, deny it self, its own ends, interests etc. there is nothing so
spiritual, but it will undertake and go thorough after its manner rather then
perish: and alas! what is this? All this is but nature working from its own
principle, with its own power, to its own end. There is no new birth necessary
to all this, though all this does also proceed from a new birth (where it is)
after more a excellent manner then nature can attain to.

But now, that which is borne (or begotten) of the Spirit is Spirit; that which
the spirit begets, which the spirit produces is spirit: That Faith, that love
to God which he breathes into a man, that is truly spiritual. If a man's heart
be changed, not by reason, not by the power of Miracles, but by him, by his
immediate power, then the change is true and sound: As it is the spirit who
begets, so that which is begotten by him, with that water which he uses in his
act of generation, is a true and spiritual birth.

There are three particulars which discover the reality of spiritual things,
as well as of other things.

1 The original from whence they come, 2 the nature whereof they are, and 3
the effects which they produce. Every spiritual thing it comes from the
spirit, it is spiritual it self, and it works spiritually, there is a true
tincture of its nature, and of its original in every effect it produces: As
every natural man is begotten by a man, has the nature of a man in himself,
and acts like a man, works the operations of a man* So every new man, every
spiritual man is begotten by the spirit, has the nature of the spirit in him,
and discovers his nature and original, in every one of his spiritual
motions and actions. His Faith, his love, every thing in him proceeds from the
spirit, partakes of the nature of the spirit, moves and acts spiritually.

The former of these, Chirst argues the truth of the new birth from, in this
place, its coming from the spirit, that which is born of the spirit is spirit.
What ever the spirit works in a man, is truly spiritual; that light he
shows, is true spiritual light; that grace he gives, is true spiritual grace;
that change he makes, is a true spiritual change: but all other changes are
but countersets of that true spiritual one, which he alone can make.

And this may show us the reason why there are so many changes in this flitting
age; it is because most men are changed by the flesh, the greatest power of
flesh still changes them: A strong Objection which they cannot answer, will
startle any man that is changed by a power of flesh. Hence men take up one
practice to day, another to morrow; now acknowledge this or that for a truth,
by and by it is false, then true again; why? because they see not things by
the light of the spirit which never varies, but by a force of argument, by a
power of reason which sometimes appears stronger, sometimes weaker, sometimes
greater, sometimes lesser; but a soul whose light is changed, whose practices
are changed by the spirit, that change remains good, let all the winds and
gusts of arguments blow never so strongly.

Take heed therefore of changing your apprehensions or practices about any
thing, till you can say the spirit changes them, else it will be but a fleshly
change.

What further remains, but that every one that loves his soul should lay
this to heart, and consider thoroughly according to the weightinesse and
importance of it, how it is with him? what that religion is, whereupon he
groundeth his hopes, what oil feeds his lamp, whence his Faith, his love came,
and of what rank and kind they are. And not to do this slightly, or determine
suddenly (as is most usual with men in matters of Religion;) but, as on the
one hand, to be thankful unto God for, and make much of the least hope (which
is not every ones lot;) so on the other hand, not to rest satisfied or let God
alone, till he has brought us to an absolute certainty; then and not till then
we may safely without hazard give over the debate of this question. And though
we may perhaps be a long while before we attain it, yet if God carry on our
hearts in the pursuit, we may meet with sweet pledges and refreshings in the
way, as may much mitigate Gods seeming tediousness in deferring our full
satisfaction herein. And indeed, though God leads his people in such harsh and
difficult ways to the eye of sense and reason, as would affright any carnal
heart; yet he has withal such sweetnings to mingle with them, as makes them
very passable to all whom he leads through them: Egypt, the bondage of it he
can make tolerable; The Wilderness, the intricacies of it he can make a plain
way through; Canaan, the high Walls and strong enemies thereof, even the
children of Anack, whose very sight strikes terror, he can make conquerable to
his Christ and to his seed.

Only take heed of suddenness, of sudden judgment. Men that are apt to be
sudden, are as liable to deceit, and commonly are deceived, especially in
abstruse and difficult cases; he that will give sentence at first dash, without
weighing the matter thoroughly, and the several circumstances of it, may
easily err in judgment; and an error herein is of no small concernment; there
cannot be a worse and more dangerous mistake.

There are two sorts of persons very prone to be sudden in the judgment they
pass on spiritual things, and their own estate in spiritual things.

The weak and dark Christian, who is ready still through his fear which ever
accompanies weakness, and darkness to conclude all against himself: and the
slight and superficial Christian, who never thoroughly looked into spiritual
things, nor has been well versed in the deceits about them, he is apt to take
the likeness and appearance of every thing for the thing it self; and to
conclude all for himself with as great confidence, as the other thrusts all
from himself with overmuch diffidence.

The former, lay any promise before him; he will say it belongs not to him:
bring him to any trial, he is presently cast: Try his Faith; alas! there is
nothing but unbelief to be found in him: Try his love, it is but a natural
affection: Try his obedience, it is but forced by the command: Try his
uprightness, why, there is nothing more deceitful then his heart.

The latter, he is in a clean contrary posture: Mention any promise, he can
presently lay hold o^ it, it belongs to him, and he can suck a great deal of
sweetness out of it: Speak of Faith, why he has it; he knows that he is
undone without Christ, and that he is the only way to life, such as believe on
him shall be saved, and him has he trusted with his soul: Tell him this Faith
must be wrought by God, why he knows that no man can work it himself, it is
the gift of God: Tell him it must be a spiritual Faith, he knows that too,
every grace is spiritual. Name any thing else, so soon as you have spoke it,
he has it; Speak of love, either to God or the brethren, his heart will
presently witness to him that he does love both God and the brethren, and it
is a sincere love, not for any by-ends in one kind or other: Come to obedience,
he holds sound there too, he obeyes the will of God, at least in desire and
endeavor; he performs duties, he strives against his corruptions; nay, and
he does not this in in a legal way, as thinking to be saved hereby, he
knows he must be saved by Christ alone, by Faith in him: and for his heart,
though he fail in many things, yet he blesses God that it is u right, and he
knows God is merciful to pardon his failings, and accept of his integrity: So
that he has no cause to fear or trouble himself about any thing; for he is
sure what ever may befall him here, it will be well at last, and so he is at
rest.

Now both these are commonly mistaken: The former; for the promises many times
belong to such a soul, though he cannot apply them; and he may have true
faith, and true love, and true obed^ence, though he cannot see it: The seed may
be sown in him, and grow up in him, though he know not how, and so cannot
acknowledge it; and he is not to be blamed for not acknowledging it (for how
can he till he know it?) nor for suspecting it; but only for such a sudden and
positive determining of the contrary, which he has as little if not less
ground for, then for his suspicion.

And for the latter, The promises do seldom belong to such a person: The
promises do not so easily meet with and melt into our spirits, as such kind of
language implies; and for his Faith, his love, his obedience, his uprightness,
they may be but of the stamp of nature; and if they should meet with such
trials and blasts as God has generally appointed, and does usually prepare for
his, they would soon discover themselves.

Now mark the danger of each: The former loses his peace, his comfort; The
latter his soul, if he be deceived; and both by the same miscarriage, their
forwardness and suddenness in judgment; the one determines for himself, the
other against himself, upon their own imagination and apprehension, before
they have the thing laid before them, and opened to them, which they should
judge; or the light held to them, by which they should judge; The one
determines against his Faith, The other for his Faith; and yet neither knows
what Faith is, and they both do it by their own reason, which is no true light
to discern or judge spiritual things by.

It were a more modest and suitable action for either, to bewail their own
ignorance with a sense of their need of understanding and determining this
thing, and to pray and wait for light and help from him by whom it is clearly
discerned, and who can make it discernable unto them.

FINIS.
THE Spiritual Practice OF CHRISTIANS IN The Primitive Times: Wherein Are
contained the sweet goings forth of life in the soul which is enstated in
Christ, and in the sweetness and clearness of the GOSPEL.
HAving laid down the trial of a Christian in the foregoing Treatise, it may
not be amiss to add somewhat concerning the Practice of a Christian, (as it
was cast in upon reading the Episte to the Ephesians) or some part of the Rule
whereby their practice was squared, which in that Epistle resolves it self
into these four streams.

1 To suck in the sweetness of the Gospel. 2 To admire God and Christ who have
been at the great cost to purchase and prepare this feast of fatness and
sweetness for the soul. 3 To walk worthy of this his his goodness: And 4 To
stand upon our guard that we be not driven from it, from enjoying the
sweetness of it, from honoring God with it: This is the path whereinto
Christians then were led, and wherein they walked.
1. To suck in the sweetness of the Gospel, to be ever seeding upon Christ; to
be ever delighting in that glorious state, and in those glorious privileges
God has bestowed upon us in Christ; and this is to be done two ways.

I. By considering the mercies and privileges we have in Christ: As

First, we have redemption, pardon of sin in him, we are bought from our
captivity and misery by his blood, we are washed from our sinfulness, from our
filthiness by the same blood, Ephesians. 1. 17.

Secondly, we are made sons and have a sonne-like inheritance; we are made
Gods portion, and God is made our portion, verse. 5. and 11.

Thirdly, we have all we can desire in this life, we have access to God for
any thing (Chap. 2. 18. and Chap. 3. 12.) who will be sure to do every thing
for us we need, freely, and to put us upon praying for every thing we need,
and also upon believing and waiting, that we may miss of no mercy his grace
has designed us; God will take care of us as of his own household, Chap. 2. 19.
He will be as sure of our growing up, as he is of the foundation he has laid to
bottom us upon, verse. 20. 21.

II. We further suck in, and better relish the sweetness of the Gospel by
comparing our present state with our former: We were dead, but are alive; We
were darkness but now are light; We were cursed with all spiritual curses in
Adam, but now are blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ; We were
without God, without hope, strangers to life and blessedness; but now we are
in God and full of hope, and every way nigh unto him, and every excellency in
him, Chap. 2. 1. 2, 3. and verse. 6. 12. 13. and Chap. 1. 3.

2. To admire that God and that Christ who have done this for us, who have made
such a sweet change in our condition.

1 Admire that great love wherewith they loved us, which was working from all
eternity to effect that for us, which now they are carrying on amain, Chap. 2.
4. Chap. 3. 19.

2 Admire that abundant free grace that has made no spare of any thing for us,
but has acted fully according to the strength of love, Chap. 1. 7. Chap. 2. 5.
and 7. There were but two precious lives, The life of God, and the life of
Christ; and grace has given us them both: To recover us from death, the life
of Christ was given for us; and to keep us in life, the life of God is given to
us.

3 Admire that rich mercy wherein all our former sins, and every days
unkindnesses even against Christ and his precious Gospel, and God our Father
and the sweet Spirit, are continually buried, Chap. 2. 4.

4 Admire that various, that manifold, that (...), (Chap. 3. 10.) which laid
all the plot of love, and which works us up daily more and more into the
heart of God, and nearer and nearer to our happiness, notwithstanding all the
pull backs in our selves, in the world, in our spiritual enemies, in the
varieties of our conditions, which all almost distemper us, that though we are
untoward under every thing, and in danger by every thing, yet we lose nothing.

5 Admire the mighty power which has thus translated us from darkness to
light, which daily preserves us from ^^lling back again, and is often mightily
working in us to raise us up to further degrees of perfection, Chap. 1. 19. 20.
Chap. 3. ^0.

3. To walk worthy of this blessed Gospel state (Chap. 4. 1.) (wherein God is
our Father, and Christ our head; wherein we have so many precious privileges
at present, and hopes for the future; wherein we profess our selves broken to
the world, and to all the powers of nature in our selves too,) to live like men
that live upon a new principle, from God, and in God, and to God.

Walking, it notes our whole course, all the service we are now to perform to
Christ, whose we are, and whom alone we are now to serve; in care over our own
hearts, in all duties of worship, in our callings, in our converse, in every
thing.

This walking worthy, principally appears in our manner of acting toward men,
whereof there are three sorts.

1 Our Fellow Christians, 2 the World, and 3 Persons that stand in outward
relations to us.

First, Our Fellow Christians, and specially those in Church Communion with us,
for they are those God has more specially set us to walk with, they are those
with whom we are chiefly to worship, and whom we must especial love, and of
whom we must especial take care, and watch over.

Now the manner of our acting toward them, must be:

1. With all humbleness and meekness with low thoughts of our selves, and in
a meet manner, Chap. 4. 2.

2. With long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, verse. 2. We must not
be apt to apprehend injuries, or seek recompense for injuries, but suffer long,
and forbear one another; and not simply because it is the will of Christ (who
has forborne us much, and forgiven us much) that we should so do, but from
the love we bear one to another, from a tender brotherly affection, and in a
tender brotherly manner.

3. The Apostle tells us what should be our great aim and endeavor in our
actings one toward another, verse. 3. To keep up unity, the unity of the
spirit, to keep it in the bond of peace, endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace; we must not keep a sinful unity, a carnal unity
in the bond of peace; no, the bond of peace must bind up no such unity in it,
but there must be war with, and opposition against, all such unity; but the
unity of the spirit, that unity the foundation whereof God has laid among us,
(who has made us perfectly one in spirituals) being all of the same body,
having all the same spirit of life running in us, having all the same hope to
attain the same end, all the same Lord to serve, all the same way of union
with him, subjection to him, and owning of him, all the same God and Father who
begat us all, verse. 4. 5, 6. to which might be added, we have all also the
same enemies and the same dangers.

Now God having laid such a foundation of unity in all our spirits, we must
endeavor to keep up unity so far as it is spiritual, and not to rent one
from another, in that wherein God has made us one.

Humbleness, takes away the root of contention, (which is the bane of all
societies, quickly eating out both the sweetness and benefit of them) for that
still flows from pride; pride begets, pride feeds contention; A man that has
low thoughts of himself, has little mind to contend; It is height of spirit
that blows up the fire of contention.

Meekness, takes away the occasion of contention, which arises much from a
rough harsh manner of expression; a meek spirit as it seldom takes occasion of
contention, but quietly lets it pass, so it seldomes gives others occasion to
contend with it.

Long-suffering and forbearance, puts a stop to the breaking forth of
contention, when occasions are given.

But besides all these; there must be an endeavor, an industry used to keep up
true and spiritual unity.

4. The Apostle directs us how to make use of our several gifts profitably,
according to the end for which they were given, which is, not to set up our
selves by them, but to perfect this unity, to build up one another in Faith, in
knowledge, and that so we may in all things grow up into Christ the head, verse.
7. to 16.

Secondly, The World; toward them we must walk wisely, Chap. 5. 15. First,
taking heed of partaking with them in any evil, nay, of countenancing the
least evil in them, Chap. 4. 17. Chap. 5. 7. 11. Secondly, redeeming the time
from them as much as may be for converse with God. Thirdly, doing as much good
as we can to them while we are with them; both which are included in that
phrase of redeeming the time, verse. 16.

Thirdly, those in near relations to us, whether brought home to Christ, or in
their natural condition, we are to observe the strict Laws of that relation
we stand debtours to them in, which we are not to fail in toward them, be
they superior or inferior, how ever they act toward us, Chap. 5. verse. 22.
to the end of the Chapter, and Chap. 6. to verse. 10. Our engagement to Christ
does not set us free from our relations and duties in any kind to men, but
only lays a bond on him to furnish us with free spirits, and power to fill up
what we owe in every relation; Christ gives us not freedom from, but freedom
unto every thing that is of God.

4. To stand upon our guard, not to be driven from the sweetness of the
Gospel, nor from acknowledging and admiring God in every step of his love,
mercy, wisdom, power and grace; nor from this walking worthy of the Gospel, by
any enemy, any temptation, or any thing that befalls us in any kind, Chap. 6.
10. 11. but to stand armed against our enemies, who are spiritually mighty, and
lay the sorest temptatious and baits in spiritual things, verse. 12. We are to
stand armed thus:

1. With an understanding having its light clear about it, and with a will
having an holy disposition ready to act in any kind God shall please to call it
out unto, verse. 14. To have an understanding ready to put forth it self,
knowing how to carry it self; how to obey, how to suffer; how to embrace, how
to resist; and a will graciously disposed to either, whenever God shall call
it forth: Our loins commonly are ungirt, our light is to seek, our grace hangs
loose about us, that we are unfit to act for God at all, much more unfit to do
it in the face of that opposition which we are still likely to meet with in
every spiritual undertaking: And for want of this piece of armor, we lie open
to our spiritual enemies.

2. With an holy resolution to act for Christ, according to that light he
shall give in to the conscience; to meddle with no evil, to omit no duty of
any kind; this is that breast plate that keeps the heart or conscience pure and
safe, verse. 14. when the Devil do^s not find us resolved against sin, or
resolved for duties, (be it how it will with us) he commonly takes us in his
snare.

3. With affections taken with the sweet truths of the Gospel* (as pardon of
sin etc.) and ready to hold out these truths for the Gospel to make out its
way into men's hearts, verse. 15. Troubles and ^fflictions we meet with within
and without, will quickly damp our affections, if they be not well fenced with
these.

4. With Faith over all these, defending even these as well as our selves in
other respects by Faith; by Faith interposing the power of Christ between us
and every enemy that may come to assault us in these or in any other respects;
that may come to ungird us and make us unfit to act, to damp our holy
resolution for God, to deaden our affections toward the sweet truths of the
Gospel which prepare the way for Christ, or to wound us with any temptation
whatsoever; Faith is a true shield, it defends both the person and the rest of
his armor, as we know a shield does: the Devil cannot prevail in any point
against a believing soul, verse. 16. Alas! we can do nothing our selves; do
no good, avoid no evil; all our strength lies in trusting God with our selves
in every condition, and with every spiritual advantage and help he has given
us to manage it as he pleases for us.

5. With hope of salvation by grace, both for eternity and from any present
distress in GODS time: Because many seeming miseries may befall the believing
soul, contradictions to his Prayers, Desires, Faith, yea, to all the motions
of GODS Spirit in him; he must have an helmet of hope, (verse. 17.) as well as
a shield of Faith: And this will keep up his spirit, that he shall not fear
looking up to GOD what ever befalls him.

6. With the sword of the Spirit, the Word of GOD, the living Word, the Word
which is Spirit and Life; This will kill all false reasonings, and every thing
that exalts it self against CHRIST; this will make enemies fly from the soul
(for they hate the Word of life, they know it is their death) and it will also
make the soul it self subject unto CHRIST, verse. 17.

And all this and every thing else must be done by Prayer, verse. 18. we can
do nothing, not gain this armor, not put it on, not use it; all must be done
by Prayer, by entreating another to do it for us; we cannot believe, we must
pr^y for Faith; neither can we pray, we must believe for prayer; we cannot do
either, both must flow from the spirit, and be done in the spirit, praying
always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit: Oh, how are we
stripped! when every motion sends us out of our selves to another, and yet
withal tells us, we are altogether unable to go out of our selves, or step
the least step toward that other.

And we must watch unto prayer, catch opportunities to breathe out our hearts
to GOD to do that in us which he bids us do; not being discouraged with any
difficulties, but persevering in our requests for our selves, and all the
people of God, verse. 18.

Behold o Christian thy spiritual employment, thine easy, and painful
employment, easy to thy spirit, painful to thy flesh; and as yet, somewhat
painful to thy spirit also, by reason of the cumberance of thy flesh, the
weakness of thy spirit, the power and fury of thine adversaries.

FINIS.

