Some Sensible, Weighty QUERIES, Concerning some things very sweet and
necessary to be experienced in the Truly-Christian State. whereunto is added A
Postscript, Containing some Queries on Isa. 50. 10, 11. A Scripture of Deep
Counsel and Concern to the darkened and distressed states, of some among those
that fear and obey the Lord.

Written by one, who has been sorely darkened and distressed, for a long
season, but at length mercifully enlightened and comforted by the hand which
afflicted and distressed him, Isaac Penington.

Come and let us return unto the Lord; for he has come, and he will heal us:
He has smitten, and he will bind us up,

Hos. 6. 1. And in that Day thou shall say, O Lord I will praise thee, though
thou wast angry with me, thine Anger is turned away and thou comfortedst me,

Isa. 12. 1. Printed in the Year, 1677.

A Brief Preface.
INdeed, the Lord has reached unto me by his living Power, and thereby has
begotten somewhat which he does own, and which he has taught to know and own
him in his living appearances in my Heart: and by its pure Life and Operations
in me, I know it to be the pure Power. And truly I would fain have this Life
and Power more and more reach to, prevail and spread in my own heart, and in
the Hearts of other men. I am not for any noti^nal Religion out of the Power,
in any Way or Form whatsoever (No indeed, I am not so much as for the very true
Form of Godliness out of the Power) but where there is any Touch, any Sense,
any Operation, any Savor of the true Life and Power any where, my Soul loves
and embraces it blessing the Lord for it. And O that this might be visited by
the Lord, Wherever it is, and kept alive to the Day of Redemption, and led by
the Lord into the pure and living Way, and holy, everlasting Covenant of Life,
Wherein he redeems, for which End these Queries have broke forth from me; and
indeed, no less then a Necessity (or a Necessitous Fonci of Love and Life
pursuing me) has constrained me to publish them, who with Reverence of Spirit
commit them into the Hand of the Lord, who can open the Hearts of whom he
pleases, and give the living Sense of what comes from him. I am satisfied that
God's Powerful Work of Redeeming will go on. O blessed be his Name, who has a
mighty Arm, and has done mighty things with it, inwardly ^n men's Hearts; and
we are in the true Faith assured, that he will yet do more mighty thin^s, as he
sees good, to the Gladding of the Hearts of those whose Hope is in him, and
who have no Help besides him.

Some Sensible, Weighty Queries, concerning some things very sweet, and
necessary to be experienced in the Truly Christian-State.
Query 1. WHat is the Water, wherewith the Soul or Innerman is to be washed,
that it may be cleansed from its inward Filthiness, as outward things are by
washing with outward Water? Ezekiel. 36. 25. Psalm. 51. 2, etc.

Q. 2. What is the Answer of a Good Conscience toward God, when the soul is
inwardly baptized and made clean? Pet. 3. 21.

Q. 3. Christ faith, Blessed are the Pure in Heart; Do, or can any witness
Purity of Heart before this washing?

Q. 4. How may the Heart be sprinkled from an Evil Conscience, and the Body
washed with pure water; so that there may be a drawing near to God with a True
Heart, and in full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22. Psalm. 26. 6.

Q. 5. How might the Jews wash and make themselves clean, Isa. 1. 16. Could it
be any otherwise done by them, then by taking heed to the Word of the new
Covenant, nigh in the Mouth and Heart, to which Moses had directed them, Deuteronomy.
30. 14. Psalm. 119. 9.

Q 6. What is the Fire which takes hold of, and burns up the Lusts and
Corruptions of the Heart? Is it not the Word of Life within, which flames
against Evil, and hammers down Evil? Does not the Holy One in the midst of the
Spiritual Israel do this? When Christ who knocks at the Door of the Heart, is
let in, and his Voice hearkened to, does not he become a Spirit of Judgment, and
Burning, judging and burning up, what is evil there? Is it not blessed to know
this spiritual Appearance, and this work of Christ in the Heart, Isa. 4. 4. and
10. 17.

Q 7. What are the Enemies of a Man's House? Who must overcome them? How may
they be overcome? Is a man safe or delivered from them till they be overcome,
Mat. 15. 19. 2 Cor: 10. 4, 5.

Q. 8. What is the House of the Strong-Man, where he dwells till he be
dispossessed? Who can dispossess him? How does he dispossess him? How does he
spoil his Goods and then garnish the House a new? O what a new Creation and
Change within is witnessed, when this is done? And who would not wait, and
pray, and believe, and suffer the Judgings and Burnings of the spirit of
Judgment and Burning, that this might be done thoroughly and effectually, Luke
11. 21, 23. Isa. 26. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 17.

Q. 9. What is that coming to Christ, which none can witness, but those that
hear and learn of the Father, and are taught by him; in the Drawings of the
Life and Spirit of the New Covenant, to come to the Son, John 6. 44, 45.

Q. 10. Who can confess Jesus to be the Lord by the Holy Ghost? Can any but
they that receive the Help of his spirit; and feel somewhat of his Lordship and
holy Dominion in their hearts, Isa. 26. 13.

Q. 11. What is the precious Faith, which is the Gift of God, which none can
obtain, but they that are born of God? John 1. 12; 13.

Q. 12. Can any rightly believe that Jesus is the Christ, runless they receive
this Faith, which God gives to his own Children that are born of his spirit, 1
John 5. 1.

Q. 13. Does not this Faith give Victory over the world? (over the worldly
nature and spirit within; over the worldly nature and spirit without also) can
any other Faith give victory? 1 John 5. 4.

Q. 14. What is the Love of God's Children? Whence does it arise? How come
they to love? Is it not of an heavenly, spiritual nature? Does it not arise
from God's begetting them and circumcising their hearts, and teaching them in
the spirit of the New Covenant to love him, and one another, yea and Enemies
also, 1 John 4. 7. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 1 These. 4. 9.

Q. 15. How come the Children of God, who are begotten of him, to obey his
Commandments? Is it not from the Constrainings of his Love, which makes them
natural and easy (where this Birth and Nature is grown up) and not grievous
and burthensom, Mat. 11. 33. 1 John 5. 3.

Q. 16. What is the Fear God puts into the hearts of the Children of the New
Covenant? Is it a Fear taught by the Precepts of men, or a Fear springing from
the Root of Life within? Can any who receive this Fear from God, and who are
preserved in the sense of it (and in the holy Awe and Reverence which it
produces) depart from the holy, tender, living God and Father? Jer. 32. 40.

Q. 17. What is the Law which God writes in the Hearts of the Children of the
New Coenant? Is it not the Law of the spirit ^ife in Christ Jesus? Is it not
the Law which the Isles wait for? Isa. 41. 5. And do the Isles wait for it in
vain? O blessed be the Lord, by the once distressed and miserable ones, in this
Age it has not been waited for in vain.

Q 18. What is the Truth that makes free indeed, from the Law of sin and
death? Is it not the Truth as it is in Jesus; the inward Truth, which has
Virtue and Power in it, to work against and work out that which is contrary to
Truth, and so deliver and free the Mind from it? For the Light, which is Truth,
can expel Darkness; the Life which is Truth, can overcome Death; yea, the Truth
which is living, holy and righteous, can overcome and subdue the unholy and
unrighteous Nature, and break down the strong Holds, and bring every rebellious
and captivating Thought into Captivity and subjection, John 8. 32. Romans 8. 2.
Ephesians. 4. 20, 21. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5.

Q 19. How does God cause the Children of the New Covenant to walk in his
Statutes and keep his Judgments and do them? Is it not by putting his spirit
into them, and by the holy Virtue, Power and Operation thereof in them? Does
not that make them a willing People in the day of his Power? And does not that
give them to do also, and strengthen them with might in the inner man? so that
not grieving that, or quenching that: that is as a Flame of Life in them, and
fills their Hearts with Joy, and the Joy of the Lord is their strength; and in
this Joy and strength they can rejoice and work Righteousness, and remember the
Lord in his ways, Isa. 64. 5. Ezekiel 36. 27.

Q. 20. Can any work Righteousness, or do Righteousness, but he that is truly
Righteous, inwardly Righteous; in whom the Righteousness of God, the
Righteousness of Christ is revealed from Faith to Faith? Must not the Tree be
good, before the Fruit can be good? Must not the heart be changed, be made holy
and righteous, before it can bring forth that which is holy and righteous? Can
any but the Plants of God, the Plants of Righteousness, bring forth the fruits
of Righteousness? Isa. 61. 3. and 1 John 3. 7.

O that People, Nations, Tongues and Languages, could understandingly, sensibly
and experimentally as in God's sight, with the seal of his blessed spirit,
answer every one of these things!

Three Queries more added.
Query 1. Do thou indeed know the new Covenant? Have thou inwardly felt the
spiritual, powerful Gathering, by the mighty Arm and Power of the Lord, out of
the sinful nature and state, into it? Do thou abide with God therein? And art
thou daily taught and fed by him there? These are very weighty things, can any
man be safe or happy without experiencing them? Heb. 8. 8. etc.

Q 2. Have thou experienced the true Hunger and Thirst after the Living Waters?
Have thou been called and led to them? Have thou eat and drunk the Bread, Wine
and Milk which those waters yield? Have thou been abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of God's house, and has he given thee to drink of the River of his
Pleasure? Has the Lord opened an Ear in thee to hear as the learned? And have
thou inclined thy Ear and come unto him who gives Life, and received him who is
Life and gives Life in that inward, spiritual, living Appearance of his in the
heart, wherein and whereby he gives Life? Have thou known his Appearance
inwardly, as of a Living Stone? have thou heard and learned o the Father how to
come to him, as to a Living Stone? And have thou been new-created and formed a
Living Stone by him? And art thou a Living stone built upon him the Living
stone inwardly in spirit, daily living in him, any daily receiving spiritual
Life and Virtue from him? If it be thus with thee, then surely thou do know
and enjoy the Everlasting Covenant, even the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55. 1,
2, 3 Psalm. 36. 8, 9. 1 Pet. 2 4, 5.

Q. 3. Do thou sensibly and experimentally know, how the spirit of the Father
begets the Child-like Life, Love and Fear in the heart, and how the pure Fear
of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, and the living Child's Treasure? And
do thou know what the Womb is, wherein the living Child is formed? What the
Jerusalem above is, which is the Mother of all that are truly living? and how
Christ is formed in all that are begotten, and born of, and live in his spirit?
Isa. 33. 6. Gal. 4. 26. John 3. v. 6, and 8. Gal. 4. 19.

The Conclusion.
O how Miserable is he, who is deceived about these things! O how Happy is he,
who has received the true Understanding from God, which cannot be deceived;
wherein he has the Evidence and Demonstration of God's Spirit concerning them,
and knows the Truth as it is in Jesus; as it is in his Life, in his Spirit,
in his Power, who ministers after the Power of an Endless Life unto all his
Sheep, woe are returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul, who hear his
Voice and follow him, wherever he goes or leads, who is an eternal Shepherd and
eternal Door of Life to his, and leads to precious Pastures, and sweet still
Sreams of Life, and is giving the sweet Food, Rest and pure Pleasure of Eternal
Life unto his abundantly, even as it is his Will, that after their many sore
Trials, Exercises and Travels (and Faithfulness to him therein) they should
abundantly possess and enjoy it. Glory to the Lord for ever, whose Kingdom is
set up in the Hearts of many, and who already reigns in the Hearts of many, and
will reign in the hearts of more. O that men might hear the sound of his
Everlasting Gospel, and learn to fear him, and give Glory to him, and know the
hour of his Judgment come in their own hearts; that by his Judgment against sin
and unrighteousness in them, they might come to know and worship him, and then
the worship of the Dragon and Beast would soon come to an End in their Hearts;
and they would worship the Begetter of Holiness the Begetter of Life, the King
of Saints, who dwells and rules in those that are his own, as the Devil the
Destroyer does in those that are his. The Lord God of Everlasting Power break
down the Kingdom of Satan (the Kingdom of Unrighteousness and Darkness in men's
hearts) and exalt the Kingdom and Scepter of his own Son instead thereof,

Amen.
Postscript, Containing some Queries on Isa. 50. 10, 11.
Verse 10. WHo is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the Voice of
his Servant, that walks in Darkness and has no Light? It is rendered in
another Translation. And no Light shines upon him, (which was Job's case in
his great Affliction, as is signified by him, chap. 29. 2. 3.) Let him trust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

Verse 11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that composs about with sparks,
walk in the light of your own Fire, and in the sparks ye have kindled, this
shall ye have of mine Hand, ye shall lie down in Sorrow.

Query 1 Does not the Tender and Merciful God, many times in the Bowels of his
Love and Mercy, bring Darksness and great Distress upon men's spirits, that they
might wait for his Healing and Redemption? Yea, does not this befall some who
fear the Lord, and are found in the holy reverence and obedience to him? And is
it not good that it should befall them?

Q. 2. Should not men in such a condition of Darkness and Distress, trust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay upon him, till he cause Light to arise out of
Obscurity, and comfort them that mourn in Zion; giving them Beauty for Ashes,
the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness?

Q. 3. Are not Persons very prove and liable in time of Darkness and Distress,
instead of waiting upon God for his Help and Salvation, to be kindling a fire
and compassing themselves about with sparks?

Q. 4. Are there not some who cannot be content without Heat and Warmth in
their Religion and Performances; and yet instead of waiting for God's kindling
the fire, and his causing the sparks of Life to arise, kindle a fire of
themselves; and compass themselves about with sparks of their own Kindling

Q. 5. May not men after they have kindled a fire and sparks; walk in the Light
thereof? And may not God in his just Judgment and sore Displeasure against
them, leave them to themselves, and give them up so to do?

Q. 6. What will God do in the end, or what in the end shall befall them from
God, who kindle a fire and sparks; and have continued walking in the Light
thereof, and have been heated and warmed thereby? Will not God cause them at
length to lie down in sorrow? O that Persons that are serious in Religion,
might not thus err, and so provoke God to give them up, to walk in the Light of
the fire and sparks of their own kindling.

Q. 7. When do men kindle a fire and sparks of their own? Do they not first
forget the God of their Salvation, and become unmindful of the Rock of their
Strength? And do they not then, plant pleasant Plants, and set strange Slips?
(And where do they plant and set them?) But what will the Harvest be in the Day
of Inheritance, when they come to reap and inherit what they have planted and
sown? (For what a man so weth, that must he also reap.) Will it not be a Heap
for the Fire of God's Jealousy to take hold of, in the Day of their
Tribulation, Anguish and desperate Sorrow of Heart, Isa. 17. 10, 11.

Q. 8. In what Light do men build up a wall inwardly, and daub it with
untempered Mortar, to secure themselves from the wrath to come? Is it not in
the light of the fire and sparks of their own kindling? Will any wall or
Defense built up in the Light of this fire or sparks secure men, will not the
Wrath of God in the day thereof, break forth upon all the Workers of iniquity,
whatever their Faith or Hope be to the contrary? Will any wall defend the soul
from the over flowing storm of Wrath, but the wall of God's Salvation? and can
any enter within that wall but the Righteous nation which keeps the Truth,
Isa. 26. 1, 2. The Name of the Lord indeed is a strong Tower, but can any run
into it, and get shelter in it, but the Righteous, Prove. 18. 10.

Q. 9. Who is he, who when he falls, shall arise again? and after he has
sat in Darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto him? Is it not he that fears
the Lord, that obeys the Voice of his Servant, that in the time of his
Darkness and Distress trusts in the name of the Lord, and stays upon his
God? Yea is it not such an one, as is willing to bear the Indignation of the
Lord, because he has sinned against him, until he plead his Cause, and execute
Judgment for him? Will not the Lord bring forth such an one to the Light, and
shall not such an one behold his ^ighteousness? Mic. 7. 8, 9.

Q. 10. When shall Persons Light rise in obseurity, and their Darkness be as
the noonday? When shall their Light break forth as the Morning, and, their
Hea^h Spring forth speedily; and their righteousness. go before them, and the
Glory the Lord gather them up. And when shall the Lord be their continual Guide
and satisfy their soul in droughts, and make fat their Bones, and make them
like a watered Garden and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. Are
not these Promises belonging to the Gospel-state; and are they not fulfilled in
the Gospel-state, as People come to know of keep the Gospel-fast, and the
Gospel Sabbath. Read (...) 55. 6 to the end and wait on the Lord to receive
Understanding from him that in reading thou may understand.

O that men Knew the Gospel-fast and the Gospel Sabbath with the leasts of
unleavened bread Tabernacles, Trumpets, etc: A little of the knowledge of
Mystery of the hidden Life and Power, is of more value, and would do their
Souls more than heaps of Litteral Knowledge, wherewith the world is so filled.
The knowledge of God and Christ in the Mystery, is no less than Life Eternal in
them and to them, who are taught in the new Covenant or Ministration of the
lower of the endless Life, So to know them.

THE END.

