Love without Interest: OR, The Man too hard for the Master. A COMEDY. As it
was Acted at the Theater Royal, BY His Majesty's SERVANTS.

Fallite fallentes ex magna part profanum,
Sunt genus in laqueos quos posuere cadant.
Ovid de Art. Amand. lib. 1. LONDON, Printed for Arthur Bettesworth, at the Red
Lion on London Bridge; and Richard Ellison, at the Eagle and Child in the
Pell-Mell, 1699.

TO The Right Honble the Lord Fairfax. The Right Honble the Lord Jefferies. The
Right Honble the Lord Widdrington. The Right Honble the Lord Buckingham. The
Right Honble the Lord James Howard. The Right Honble the Lord John Howard.
TO Sir Tho. Barnardiston, Bar. Sir Hugh Smithson. Sir John Walters, Bar. Sir
George Umble, Bar. Sir Charles Sidley, Bar. Sir Charles Inglefield, Bar.
To Nahaniel Barnardiston, Tho. Bull, -- Buller, Capt. Buller, -- Coventry,
Capt. Campthorne, Ellis Crisp, John Hilyard, James Jerras, Richard Lawley,
Ralph Lee, Richard Litton, Richard Minshell, Luke Norton, Peter Pheasant, John
Pit, Colonel Rumhall, John Roper, John Saywell, Simon Scroop, Washington
Sherley, Paris Slater, Charles Tryon, Edward Watson,
Esquires.
Gentlemen,
AS long and laudable Custom bears the Force of a Law, by virtue of which,
every Minor Scribler, even the poorest Dabler in Dramaticks, lays his Brat at
some Great Man's Door: In Challenge therefore of my Native English Liberty, I
take the Privilege of this present Dedication. It Is true, the general Class of
Paper-dawbers have hitherto arrived at no higher Confidence, than affixing some
single Great Name to a Play; whilst I, by a bolder Assurance (possibly a little
more pardonable in a Comedian) have here marshalled a whole Roll of Quality in
my Frontispiece.

Truly, Gentlemen, in this Presumption I know not what Trespass I may have made
in Good Manners; however the World must justify my Politics in this
Management. For by this Conduct, instead of one worthy for my Patron and
Protector, I have hooked in a whole Battalion of 'em to Champion for me. And
therefore undoubtedly this Piece must come safe into the World under so many
Shields of Honor. Besides, from the warm Influence of so many Noble Patrons,
if (to speak like an Astrologer) it is a Blessing to have the Aspect of a kind
Star at our Nativity; certainly this must be much more happy to peep into Light
under the Smiles of a whole Constellation.

Nay, Gentlemen, not to be too bold neither, but a little to extenuate my
Presumption, I have found out an old State-Distinction for a very substantial
Apology, by which I make you All this Present, viz. Not in your more exalted
Capacities of so many Persons of the highest Character and Quality, (that
Consideration would have kept me at a more awful Distance.) No, Gentlemen, I
attack you only as an Honorable Society over a cheerful Glass; where, all
Greatness laid aside, and Mirth, Wit, and Gayety, the only Reigning Ascendants
amongst You, I thrust in my Comic Phyz under that easier Access: The
Hospitable Door stands open, and from that Pasport I make my Intrusion.

Now, Gentlemen, according to the true Poetical Mode of Dedications, I shall be
very Oratorical in the Praises of all my Noble Patrons: But, truly, as my
Panegyrical Talent is none of the best; and to do Justice to so fair a List of
Honor, in an Encomium upon all and singular Your select Characters and
Virtues, is a Work beyond my reaeh: Nay, and what is another great Argument for
my Silence upon that Subject, viz. That so large a Theme before me would
out-swell the Bulk of an Epistle Dedicatory, and consequently (as my Bookseller
tells me) make my Portico bigger than my House. I shall therefore shorten that
part of my Dedication, and come to a nearer matter in hand, (which is) the
Merits of the Play. The Merits of the Play! -- Hold a little -- Whereabouts do
they lie? -- Merits! Yes positively Merits, and very considerable ones. For
look ye, Sirs -- St. George was the Patron of England. (Right.) And he made it
a peculiar Point of Honor and Gallantry to take the Weaker Side. (Right again!)
Now as it is the Top-Glory of every Heroic English Great Soul, to follow their
own leading British Worthy, and copy from so famous an Original. Ergo, The
Weakness of my Muse gives her a justifiable Title to Your Noble and Generous
Patronage; and from that Desert she claims Your Protection. Besides, when your
Great and Celebrated Authors Dedicate an OEdipus, an Alexander, or a Mourning
Bride, or any of those Gigantick Offspings of the Muses; methinks, in those
Atlas Piles of Wit and Heroicks, they overload their Patrons with the Present
they make them. It looks as if a Gardner should send you the whole Cargo of a
May-morning Market in Covent Garden (enough to stifle you with Sweets) when, in
my simple Judgment, it is much better (a lighter and easier Nosegay) to present
you with a Pink or a Rose-bud, as I do.

As to the but indifferent Success and Reception of this short-lived Play, (not
to want a Crutch for a Criple) I must take the modish way of imputing it to
Misfortune. Its being hurried up a little too hastily, made it appear to some
Disadvantage in the Performance. It is enough to disparage the Good Air and
Charms even of the Beaus themselves, to appear in too rude a Dishabilee.

With all this Plea for my Introduction to Your Good Graces; now, Gentlemen,
if, at your next Full House at the Rose, you shall generously please to pass an
Affirmative Vote in my Favor; or, what is more generous, to carry it with a
Nemine Contradicente; then (to boast no more of my own) the Merit shall be all
of Your side; and I shall, in all Duty bound, ever subscribe my self,

Gentlemen, Your most Obliged, and most Devoted Servant, Will. Penkethman.

PROLOGUE.
Spoke by Jo. Hains. IF any here dares cry My Prologue down,
Henceforth I Will not allow one Wit in the Town:
As Houses, haunted with Ill Spirits, are
All Noise and Lies, such is our Theater:
Ye talk of Wits, the Devil of Wit is here.
Wherefore, to let you know,
What Wit is not, I think cannot be amiss;
For no Man here, I Am sure, knows what it is.
First then,
Wit is no Scarf upon Fantastic Hips,
Nor an affected Cringe t'approach the Lips:
It Is not I-Gad! O Lord! or, Let me Die!
Nor is it, Dam me, ye Son of a Whore, ye Lie.
It Is not to tell how lewd ye were last Night,
What Watches, Wenches, Windows felt your Spite:
Nor is it an Abusive Epilogue,
Nor being Drunk, and cry, More Wine, ye Dog.
It Is not your Tradesman's Wit that makes him Great:
It Is a compendious way to Live, and Cheat:
'Nor is it Wit that makes your Lawyer prized,
His dagled Gown, his Knavery in Disguise,
To pluck down Honest Men, that he may rise.
Nor is it pert Phillis's Wit that does prevail;
It Is not her Tongue she lives by, it is her Tail.
It Is not your Scholar, Traveller, nor Mathematician,
Poet, nor Player, and Faith it is no Physician;
Were I now Clapped, I were in a sweet Condition.
It Is none of these, that singly Wit can be,
But all in one Man meeting 's Wit -- that Me.
PROLOGUE.
Designed to have been Spoken by Mr. Powel. OF all the Fates attend a Mortal
State,
A Poet's sure the most unfortunate.
Vintners and Cooks the Advantage have of the Bays;
Wines and Ragousts as various for to please,
As are the Guests they treat: He but a Plate
Before a squeamish Theater to set.
What, though in that two grand Ingredients meet,
The Piquant duly mingled with the Sweet:
A Jest to Gravity is but a Clinch,
And the galled Asses touched never fail to winch:
Should he pursue the ends of those that write,
Instruct the Mind, the Senses to delight:
Yet to your Grand Engrossers of all Reason,
Mirth is but vile, and Morals out of Season.
If like a Load'n Be, amongst Mountain-tops he slies,
Like hers his Wings are snapt, like her oppressed he dies.
A creeping Style provokes Sarcastick Scorns,
Then poor Poetic Snail plucks in his Horns:
A moderate rate's insipid too, for then
The Poet moves but just like other Men.
Thus high or low, quick, slow, never out of sight,
Poor Poetaster seldom's in the right,
The Stragler's damned for wandering in the Night.
Led by you, Stars, the Poet bids me say,
To the Boxes. He thinks h' has stumbled on the milk y way;
Disinteress'd Love, Sincere, Refined, and Pure,
From Sordid Selfishness, from Dross of Ore,
There for a space he hopes to find a Friend;
Few Nights conducts him to his Journey's end:
Then dart your Rays, the Poet's sure of this,
That Serpents Planet-struck want Power to hiss.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Penkethman, Entering weeping, with a Haltar about his Neck, all
in White, and a Nosegay in his Hand. COller'd in Hemp, hanging ripe through
Despair,
I come to say my Execution Prayer.
The Crime that puts me in this Fit of Quaking,
Was turning Fool, and gravely undertaking
To put that Coin upon you, which the snarling
Scribler that gave it me, said, Was not Sterling.
And since sad Plays with best Success are blessed,
To make this Play as bad as most of the rest,
I Will make this Dismal End, that all may see
Will Pinkethman can Act a Tragedy.
May Ladies, Gentlemen, and all that come
Upon my Day (d' ye see) want Elbow-room;
May Beaus have many Ladies to admire 'em,
And may the Masks prove kind as they desire 'em:
May every Female cast soft Looks upon 'em,
Tailors and Perriwig-makers never dun 'em.
But hold, to make an end of my Haranguing,
Since Company's never wanting at a Hanging.
A Lucky Thought has changed my Resolution,
Till my own Day I Will put off Execution.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN. Wildman, A Spark of the Town, whose Estate Sir Fickle has in Mortgage,
Suitor to Letitia. By Mr. Powell. Trulove, A Noble-minded Generous Gentleman,
but of a slender Fortune; in Love with Honoria. By Mr. Mills. Sir Fickle Cheat.
A Cheating, Amorous, Inconstant, Ridiculous Old Citizen. By Mr. Bullock.
Jonathan, A sly Rogue his Man, but very bold with his Master; in League with
Jenny. By Mr. Penkethman Wrangle, A passionate News-talker, a great Pretender
to Learning; one that carries all by hard Words misapplied. By Mr. Johnson.
Sobersides, His Counterpeice, a Formal, Magisterial sort of a Man, and a
pretended Sceptick. By Mr. Newth. Lurcher, Servant to Wildman. By Mr. Kent.

WOMEN. Eugenia, A cunning Jilt kept by Wildman, whom he topps upon Sir Fickle.
Mrs. Kent. Letitia, A Buxom, Witty, Airy Lady, Niece to Fickle, secretly in
Love with Wildman. Mrs. Verbruggen. Honoria, A Lady of a Mild and Honorable
Disposition, her Sister, in Love with Trulove. Mrs. Rogers. Jenny. Maid to
both. Mrs. Wilkins.

Music, Dancers, Bailiffs, etc.

Love without Interest: OR, The Man too hard for the Master.
ACT I. SCENE Wildman's Lodgings.
Enter Wildman, Eugenia following him fawningly. Wild. NAY, prithee, Girl,
retire and leave me; thou even cloy'st me with thy Kindness, by my Life.


Eug. Hold, Sir; your Oaths are as unseasonable as your Words unnecessary; I
can as well believe you without the one, as by the Coldness of your Mien guess
at the other. But you Sparks of the Town use us as you do your Hacks, ride us
till you tire or gall, then turn us loose on the Common.


Wild. And reason good, Girl; your true Punk, like your Bird of Prey, pines if
consigned; but at Liberty shifts for its self, and thrives on it.


Eug. By my Injuries, rather than thus be the slighted Subject of your nauseous
Rallery, I Will trust to Chance, and venture on my own bottom.


Wild. The Adventure's small, if any; for you Limberhamm'd Ladies have this of
certainty with the Dice, Cast ye as we please, Cube-like, you will be sure to
fall plum on your bottoms, as you call 'em. Well, Wench, Rallery apart then; it
shall go very hard, if I find not some Cully or other to top thee on: In the
Interim, I must go visit old Fickle, lest he should me; which if he does first,
he is eldest hand, and then ten to one but he beats me out of my little though
last remaining Stake.


Enter Lurcher. Lurch. Sir, Here Is Sir Fickle Cheat desires to speak with you.


Wild. Sir Fickle?


Lurch. Yes, Sir.


Wild. The Parthean Golden Cordial throttle him! Did tell him I was within?


Lurch. Yes, Sir; you left no Orders to the contrary.


Wild. Pox of my Improvidence! But show him up. Exit Lurch. Well, what is said
in jest of the Devil, I see, is literally true of these griping Citizens, no
sooner spoken of but they appear.


Eug. Nay, I Will be sworn, they never want your good Word: I wonder at you thus
to abuse Men.


Wild. Men! Monsters rather. Why, I tell thee, Girl, they are such Auimals, that
were Aristotle alive again, the Impossibility of comprehending their Natures,
would make him duck himself a second time in Fleet-ditch, as he did before in
Eurippus, for a far less Difficulty in my Mind, Faith.


Eug. So that I must not ask you to --


Wild. Define 'em! No. To describe 'em you may, and that too's intricate
enough: For you must know there is as great a difference 'twixt heard and heard
in the City, as there is in the Forest. But your common Breed are a sort of
Stag-headed, Hen-hearted, Harpy-claw'd Animals.


Eug. A pretty kind of Description truly. But Sir Fickle, is he of this kind?


Wild. No, nor of any else, Faith; he is an unnatural kind of a Mongrel: For tho
he be a Calf of Sixty odd, he is not so much as Velvet-headed yet: If he had,
it is such a Rascal, he should have been fray'd, burnished, and full-summ'd
In Faith, before this: I would have taken that Care of his Advancement. So --


Enter Fickle, Jonathan behind him; Wild. runs and embraces Sir Fickle. Sir
Fickle Cheat! The welcomest Man alive! You Have spared me some Pains; for, as you
see, I Would just made ready to wait on you, that we might adjust Affairs between
us.

Tick. Why truly, not to lie, as a Man may say, Sir, that was my Business, and
the main End of my Visit; for I should be very glad to make an end --

Wild. aside. Of my Estate, I thank him.


Fick. For Money's so rare, and Occasions so pressing -- In a word, we have
have paid so much for our Religion and Liberty --


Wild. That, Thanks to our Fighting Peacemakers, or we'd been forced shortly
to sell both to preserve our Property.


Fick. Right, Sir; and therefore I must desire you, with all speed, to pay back
my Money, your Indentures, scotcht, notcht, and in Statu quo, as a Man may say,
shall be forthcoming.


Wild. Sir, you're the Winner, and so may please to jest; but my Necessities
are so earnest, that I must entreat a present Supply of a Thousand Pound more,
and then you may be in a fair way to see an end, as you desire.


Fick. A Thousand Pound! A Thousand Pound! And ready Money too! O Lord, O Lord!
Why, it is more than Cathagena and the Spanish Flota can produce. Besides, Sir,
upon mature Consideration, I find that I have lent you more in Mortgage than
the Purchase of the Inheritance is worth; you have bit me, you Wag; you have,
In Faith.

Wild. aside. Would I had, I Would have lost my Teeth before I Would have left my hold,
damned Jew. To Fickle. Why, you will not thus laugh at my Necessity. 'Slife, Sir,
I Am on the point of marrying a Fortune, capable both to redeem and to add to my
Estate; it is but a little Money to squander amongst her Servants (as the Custom
is, you know) and swup, I lick her up as you do a Race of Ginger fasting.

Jonath. makes Signs to Wild.
Fickle aside. Will you so, you liquorish Whoreson, you? Would the Tongue of
you were out -- Why, this is one of the Devil's ordinary Capricho's, rides us
on the Spur to Mischief, and flounce leaves us stuck in the Mire. What a Plot's
here lost! Broke like a Roost-Egg, just when 'twas going to be hatched. Hanged,
I Will try however: If it don't serve me this way, it may another: He Will think I
love him, and then I Am sure to trick him.


Wild. How now? What, musing Man? Ha! --


Fick. A little, Sir; I was casting about to serve you.


Wild. Were your Will but equal to your Abilities, there would need no great
musing in the matter.


Fick. O Lord, Sir, were but my Abilities equal to my Will, the matter should
not so long lag A-stern -- But to show you, Sir, how much I tender you Welfare,
I Have a Crotchet just now come into my Head, might possibly be as advantageous
to you, as what you just now was mentioning. But seeing --


Wild. Come, prithee, no Seeing in the Case, but Hearing: Come, quickly, dear
Dog, open.


Jon. aside to Wild. O never fear, Sir; he is a staunch Hound, I Will warrant him,
and on a hot Scent that you know.


Fick. A little Patience, good Sir; let me but consider a while.


Wild. Pox of Consideration, that Cousin-German to Cowardice. Consideration,
quotha! Why, what Countryman are you?


Fick. Countryman! Why, a Cockney.


Wild. A Cockney, and consider! Ha, ha, ha; come, quick, quick, mouth it
Cit-like.


Fick. Why then, in three words: You know my Niece Lettice, take her and your
Estate back; and besides -- [ spying Eugenia] But I cry mercy; for I see, as
you was saying, you're already better provided.

To Eug. O Lord, Madam, I beg you a thousand Pardons for hindering you of your
Chapman; but in the City, Forestallers, as a Man may say, find but little
Encouragement. Once more a thousand Pardons, fair Lady, indeed la --


Eug. An unwilling and harmless Mistake needs none.


Fick. O Lord, Madam; O Lord, Mr. Wildman; what harm, pray now? What Mistake?


Wild. None of moment, Sir; for the Lady's too nearly related to me to be what
you imagine. Her Father lately dead, left her to my Charge, with Virtue the
chief part of her Fortune, which to preserve, as well as charm her Cares, not
knowing of a Family more honorable than yours, thither I was leading her, in
order to crave Admittance.

Aside to Eug. Now Girl.


Eug. Is this the worthy Knight, in whose Praise you were speaking of, Cousin?


Jon. Yes, Madam; he is a Knight, worthy [aside] to be Shoulder-slipt, with a
Horse-pox.


Fick. Yes, and please your Dainty Face, as a Man may say, I am a Knight, and
Common-Council-man of the City of London. I live in the City, where my House
would be very much honored and sweetened, as a Man may say, with your
double-refin'd Presence.


Fick. to Wild. Ah, were I but of your Years, I should tell her more of my
Mind: But I Am old, old --


Wild. claps him on the Back. Heart of Oak, I Will warrant thee.


Fick. strutting. Hum, hum.


Jon. aside. In the Name of Emptiness, how like a rotten hollow Hogshead he
sounds; would I had the hooping of him.


Wild. Well, Sir, your Proffer is so obliging, 'twere Incivility to refuse, and
inconvenient to defer it. Please to repose your self a moment, we'll wait on
you immediately.

Exeunt Fickle and Jon. Now, Wench, what think of this same Beast? Would he
not serve well enough to wear the Horns? A pair of well-spread Antlers,
methinks, would suit incomparably well with his Jobbernol.


Eug. Or if they will not, it is no great matter. Would I had him, he should have
Choice enough, if that would but content him.


Wild. A very virtuous Resolution, truly.


Eug. Tell me not of Virtue; what is Virtue?


Wild. Hum; why, Faith, it has been laid aside so long by the Commonalty, that
now they scarce know what to make on it: But your Politicians use it now and
then, as a Stalking horse, to pop down your overgrown Court Bustards -- But
your well-manag'd Dissimulation --


Eug. Is a most fashionable Beast; that I grant.


Wild. And a most serviceable one too, as the World goes. Now, whoever thinks
to rub through without it, will be most plaguily harrass'd before he comes to
his Journey's end.


Eug. Or will speed like a City-banker, with cracked Credit, and empty Coffers;
ha, ha. Now I hope I please you.


Wild. Ay, any thing that displeases them does so: I Have such a Natural
Antipathy against 'em, that it extends even to their Wives, which makes me so
seldom lay in their Nests. But to the Point; (for I Am yet as far from it, as a
Parson, whose Text is Obedience, and Sermon an Invective against Nonresistance)
I Would have you reduce these same Speculative Notions you have of that same
necessary Implement Dissimulation into Practice; for I Am mistaken if you have not
shortly occasion to show your Arts of Dissimulation, the Rascal did so eye thee.


Eug. O never fear: You will sooner find a Woman without Pride than Hypocrisy
and Dissimulation. Why, it is our Sexes Talent, our Inseparable Accident, our
Feminine Philosophers Stone, wherewith we convert you Men into Buzzards, from
Buzzards to Owls, from Owls to Cookoos, and from Cookoos to --


Wild. clapping his Hand before her Mouth. Hold, in the Name of Cerberus; by
the Egyptian Catadupes, set but these Female Clacks a-going, and, troll, they
run like the Wise Man of Gotham's Cheeses down hill.


Eug. Now by my Hopes, you're as impertinent as a French Valet de Chamber.


Wild. And by my Wishes, the Vanity of Ten truly Virtuous Women, make not the
tenth part of one sole Punk's, in the way of Preferment.


Eug. Nor do they, on the other side, possess the tenth part of those
Perfections.


Wild. Prithee make that appear, and I Will retract.


Eug. You shall: Be you the Doughty Knight, I the Lady fair; muster up the
whole Cargo of your Common-plac'd Courtship, if I don't outdo 'em at their own
Weapon, may I lie Cross-legg'd, Toe-ty'd, and Bedridden all the Days of my Life.


Wild. Seeing's believing. A Match, I faith. I begin.

Bows. Think not that Impudence, Divine Beauty, or rather most beauteous
Divinity, which is the Effect of All-conquering Love; that Love-which scorns to
be tied up to Time, but is no sooner born than adult.


Eug. Ha, ha, ha.


Wild. How now? What out already.


Eug. Ay, out already! What, this the Preamble for a Citizen! Why, this is
Common-Garden Cant, tout peur.


Wild. Why then in City Cant have at you.

Lays by his Sword and Wig, and scrapes. Dainty-fac'd Lady, the Flames of your
Beauty have so over-healed the yearning Intrails of my Affection, that they
already begin to simmer within my Belly, as they were in a Stew Pan, whence
through the Funnel of my Throat ascend more Fumes, than from a Mash-fat through
the Stoke-hole of a Brew House. Spare then the Bellows of your Disdain, and use
rather the Sprinkler of your Condescension; for if you continue to puff thus
scornfully upon me, I swear by all the Stock in my Shop, Cellar, and
Warehouse, my Heart, like a Shin of Beef in a Porridge-pot, will, in the
Poaching of an Egg; be hoil'd to Titters, la.


Eug. Alas, Sir, what ails you? Methinks I pity your Condition, though I
understand not your meaning.


Wild. Ah, my sweet Sugar Loaf, Words cannot express it: A Sign indeed I have
would soon make you conceive.

Squeezing her Hand. Now do you?


Eug. Heaven knows, I wish I did.


Wild. Kissing her. Nor yet?


Eug. Nor yet.


Wild. Ah the Devil! She Would have him show it her downright.

Ruffles and kisses her. Then thus and thus. There Is but one more that I know
of, and its a pair of Questions whether he can make it.


Eug. Protect my Honor! A Man kiss me.

Shrieks out.
Wild. How now! What the Devil's the matter? You Will raise the House presently.
Pox of your cracked Treble. So, here is Sir Fickle come to lend you a Hand, I Will
retire.

Retires, and listens.
Enter Sir Fickle and Jonath. who puts him by. Ambo. O Lord! What Is the matter?
What Is the matter?


Eug. Bless me, Sir, I Am so frightened. Oh --


Wild. Aside. For a handsome come off, and I Will cross the Cudgels: I Will
interpose, and give her a Breathing-while.

Enters. How now, Cousin; what, at the old Trade? What Whim now? It Is the
frightfullest Creature --


Eug. Then why would you leave me alone so long?


Wild. Aside. Good.


Fick. But with what, in the the Name of Wonder?


Eug. Lord, Sir, methought -- Hem, hem.


Wild. Igad, I Will never believe that Miracles are ceased, when I see a Woman in
danger of being choked with a Lie.

To Eug. The ruffling of the Wind in your Window-Curtain; that is all, on my
Life.

Aside. Sure I Am the first Man that ever helped Woman out with a Come-off.


Fick. Come, come, a Woman, and afraid of the ruffling of a Curtain.


Jon. Aside. Or of any thing else, and you were the Tom Bold that blew in at
her Window. She must cry out before she is hurt.


Fick. Well, Madam, how is it now?


Eug. Somewhat better, Sir.


Fick. to Wild. Then, if you please, we two'll lead on the way;
If Fortune hits, this is our Lucky Day.
Exeunt.
Wild. following. True, you old Coxcomb; for if Fortune hit,
I Will settle Fickle, and cross-bite the Cheat.
Let Us in, and there consult the surest way
To trap this Fox; and, if I miss my Aim,
Let Fortune, not my Care, receive the Blame.
Exit.
SCENE II.
Enter True Love leading Honoria. True. By all those Charms that captivate my
Soul,
By the sweet Torture of my longing Mind,
Explain this Riddle that confounds my Senses:
Your Eyes, your Actions, nay, your Words speak Love;
Yet when I press to ratify our Vows,
You blush, and sigh, and weep me a Denial.
Can I give further Proofs of my Affection?

Hon. No, you're too generous to an injured Maid,
Whose only Portion's Misery and Ruin;
Misery so great, 't has left me void of means
To make you a return more suitable or just,
Than by refusal: Heaven knows how dear it costs me
To involve you in my Ruin.

True. Cruelly kind, I see, instead of valluing
The Generosity you seem so much to prize;
You tax me with base Avarice,
Avarice worse than Misers,
Who, if presented with a precious Jemm,
Would not stand gazing, if 'twere set in Gold,
But instantly with grateful thanks accepts it.

Hon. True, Sir; but mine is of so mean a Luster,
That by Possession, when you have viewed it well,
Without a Foil, you will scarce think it worth the wearing.

True. There you mistake me, Dear; for by my Love,
A Heart, like yours, shows fairest when unset;
There Is no Defect in that, no Fault, no Flaw,
No Blemish, that requires the Artists Hand to help it.

Hon. Thou more than Man,
Take all my Vows, with Heaven my Wishes share;
But till that Heaven I daily do implore
Betters my Fate, I beg you would press no more.

True. A lasting Shame on that Barbarians Hand,
Who from the Teeming Womb of's Mother Earth
First forced to light that glittering damning Pelf;
Money, the scorn of noble generous Minds,
The venomed Hook that strikes inglorious Souls,
The petty Grain, which put in the guilty Scales,
Turns 'em against Virtue, Loyalty, and Honor;
And an Eternal Curse on him that rates
His Love so low, to barter it for Gold:
No, generous Love is like a matchless Pearl,
Not to be purchased by the massy Toy:
The like alone can make the just Exchange,
And the true Price of Love is only Love:
Mine you possess, with yours I think I Am blessed;
Let not that Bliss destroy my Happiness.

Hon. Forbear to urge, but too too well beloved,
This needless, fruitless, dismal Argument,
Your Words, your Deeds, have such a glorious Luster,
They Have quite amazed and dazzled my weak Senses;
Yet while my Honor and Gratitude remain,
I Will still be just, still love, and still deny.

Enter Jinny. Jinny. Oh Madam Honoria, I Have been seeking you all the House
over: Here Is my Master has been babbling for you this half hour: For my part, I
believe he is running Mad, he keeps such a Quarter.


Hon. Why, what is the matter? Has he lost any Money lately?


Jinny. Not that I know of, Madam; but I Am mightily mistaken, or he has got a
Mistress, and that may be as bad on all sides.


Hon. A Mistress!


True. Aside. What disconsolate Scavingers Relict can this be?


Jinny. I think so, Madam; she came with Mr. Wildman; he calls her Cousin
Eugenia.


True. Aside. Eugenia and Wildman Cousins! I thought they had been nearer
related.


Jenny. Lately come out of the Country, I vow, Madam: I dare lay my Maidenhead,
if my Master holds on his rate, if she don't return very speedily, she is like
to leave hers behind her, and follow the Example of her Predecessors.


True. Aside. Gamester-like, would slur that off in a Bett, she is afraid will not
pass current in a Bargain.


Hon. Surely you surprise me?


Jinny. Nay, Madam, that is not all; there is Mr. Wildman even as sweet upon your
Sister. I must confess she keeps him somewhat more at a distance, than the other
does my Master. Alas, these Country Ladies are the kindest Creatures --


True. Aloud. Ha, ha, ha.


Hon. Bless me, Sir, whence this Alteration!


True. From that which will cause, if I mistake not, the like in you. But to
your Post, and take this Word of Advice: Our Fortunes may in all probability
depend on Eugenia; therefore use her with respect, promote your Uncle's
Affection, and leave me alone for the rest.

For when a Miser once gives up his Heart,
With all the rest he easily does part.

Hon: My Obedience shall show my Love: So Prosperity and my best Wishes attend
you.

And to encourage you, and end our Strife,
Find me a Fortune, I Will find you a Wife.
Exit True Love. As Honoria is going out, Enter Letitia, who stops her.
Let. O Sister, I arrest you in the Name of Cupid: One moments Audience for
Love's sake. I come from this same Master mine to be; you know who I mean, I
see; prithee, what kind of Creature, what do think of him?


Hon. Mr. Wildman, I suppose, you mean.


Let. Ay, ay; who else coud'st imagine? But once more, What kind of Creature
do take him to be?


Hon. Why, a Man; and if by the little Acquaintance I have with him I may
guess, bating some Flights which Youth may excuse, and Slander increase,
except my Trulove, inferior to few or none.


Let. Nay, as for that matter, I strongly suspect he is no Novice in the World.
But, 'twixt you and I, I like a Journeyman never the worse, for having served a
Prentiship to his Trade, so he but mind my Business when I take him to me, I
shall never fall a reaping up of old Trespasses done in Strangers Enclosures.
As for your Comparison, Faith, you might have spared it; I think Mr. Wildman as
good a Man as your Trulove, as you call him.


Hon. Prithee, why?


Let. somewhat hastily. Prithee, why not?


Hon. Nay, no Passion, Sister; Sir Novelty says it is a Mortal Enemy to the
Complexion. Let Reason take place; I Will give you these: First, Whether he loves
you as my Trulove me, is a question --


Let. Which is more than I can resolve. However, if a Man be to be believed by
his Words, he is not far short; and the hindmost Dog, you know, may chance to be
first in with the Hare. As for my part, I love Mr. Wildman as well as you your
Trulove; so you may tell him; if it be but neatly done, you will pleasure me.
However, I Am resolved to have a Course or two with him before he snaps me up,
an't be but to show him the difference 'twixt my self and I know who; though
perhaps he may have no great need of a Whet. But all is one, I Am resolved to
venture my Maidenhead with my Affection, and go Supercargo of my own Goods.


Hon. Your Resolution shows your Discretion, and seems to me a happy Augury of
our better Fortunes.

Fortune's a Goddess, scorns the limmed Slave,
But Loves, Caresses, Crowns the Soul that is brave.
Exeunt omnes.
The End of the First ACT.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Letitia, followed by Wildman. Let. AND so as you was saying, you love me
as -- How was it? Lord, what a treacherous Memory have I?


Wild. Then I Will repeat it Myriads of times; I love Letitia more than herself
she loves, than Zealots Passion, or Court Upstarts Pride, than English --


Let. Beef.


Wild. Dutch --


Let. Brandy, or Wildman Flattery. Ha, ha, ha.


Wild. Now by your Beauteous Self, the greatest Oath,
By that which knows the Candor of my Vows,
My Heart's too nobly placed, to entertain
So mean a Vice:
Crushed as it is, and broken by your Scorn,
A truer yet never Homage paid to Beauty,
Which if you thus go on, though then too late,
Perhaps you will find to be but too too true:
Though Pardon dearest Angel if I wish,
Rather beloved, than for your Love to die:
Then when the Sand allotted for our Lives
Had been employed in Miracles of Love,
Wonders to most, Examples to the best,
With equal Pace we'll soar to the Seat of the blessed.
Embracing. Our Souls thus linked, we'd both together fly,
Lifting her up. Cut through the Clouds, and --

Let. singing. Hey boys up go we.

Pushing him rudely. Ha, ha, ha. Why, what Gallymaufry Stuff's this! I Would
undertake a Journeyman Cobbler courts not his Doxy half so ridiculously -- Why,
what Puddle-dock Pettifogger gave you Advice thus to open your Case! Or how
much Money and Time have you spent in mustering up from the Refuse and Scraps
of Auxiliary Penny Pamphlets, this nauseous Hodg-podg of Banter and Bombast! --
Ecud, it turns my Teeth an edge, worse than the Filing of a Saw.


Wild. Madam, though my Deserts merit not your Favor, yet my Civility may justly
claim a Requital: Neither is my Person, if my Friends belly me not, so monstrous
ugly, as to turn the Stomach of a more queasie Person than I take your Ladyship
to be. Why, 'sfoot, Madam, I Am a Man.


Let. So Madam Eugenia has partly informed me, or in Truth your Chattering
would have made me somewhat dubious.


Wild. aside. A Whore! Foolish Whore! Fire and Brimstone, she lies!


Let. Frost and Snow but she does not; for it is to your self I Am beholden for
this double Discovery; the most she gave me was indeed but a strong Suspicion,
which you have more strongly confirmed: But though a Town Spark's Cast-off be
good enough for a Citizens Lady; yet her Keeper, I suppose, is too modest,
after a Discovery, to intrude himself upon his Niece; which, as occasion
presents, I shall acquaint him with. So, leaving you to your more serious
Consideration, I remain in Expectation of a Second Meeting, yours, Letitia. Ha,
ha, ha, ha.

Exit laughing.
Wild. Meet thee again! I Would rather meet my Great Grandmother's Ghost at
Midnight in the bottom of a Cole-pit. What Wild-cats are these City
Virginities! I Would undertake to lick a Bears Cubb into Shape, sooner than to
reclaim one of these Haggerds from their Quirks and Freeks, into a competency
of Sobriety and good Manners. 'Sbud, is this the Quarry the Old Gentleman sent
me to truss up! It Is well, for all her Levity, an she been't too heavy for my
Pounces. Or is not this some Trick of his to stave me off my pretended Fortune,
and in the Interim to ruin what little Real yet remains. There Is it; confound
his Macchiavillian Curship: There Is it. Hum; here he comes; the Simile holds
true.


Enter Sir Fickle. Fick. Soh, my Merchant-Venturer to the Land of Love: What
Cheer, Man, hah! What, art in the Road? Art making the Haven? Hey, boy!


Wild. Softly, softly, Sir; though you may be ready to put into Port, I Am not put
out yet; for though the Moon be at Full, I cannot guess when the Tide will serve.


Fick. Nay, Pox, an you will not weigh Anchor, whose Fault is it?


Wild. 'Twas done, Sir; and Sails hoist, and just as I was launching into the
Main, I met with such a Vengeance Mackaril-gale, 'twas a Mercy I was not
over-sett: Of splitting I think there was no great Danger; I was kept too far
off Shore for that, Faith.


Fick. You talk Riddles, Man; prithee explain.


Wild. Why then to be short; I made my Addresses with all possible Civility,
she with more Coolness, nay, Rallery, received 'em: I complained, and she, I
thank her, gave me some small Reason.


Fick. As how, Man; as how?


Wild. pushing him. As thus Man, as thus; and a Wonder too I escaped so: For my
part, I expected no less than a Black and Blew Suit of Second Mourning.


Fick. A Suit of Second Mourning, quotha; ha, ha, ha. Pho, Pox; you know Women
at first are always shy of their Favors.


Wild. Hum; it is not her Shyness I complain of.


Fick. Oh, oh, I thought --


Wild. The matter's not great; a Claw or two on the Nose, as I take it, and a
broken Pair of Shins.


Fick. Ha, ha, ha; a broken pair of Shins, ha, ha. Why, what a Devil -- ha, ha?
Have you been at Football, ha, ha, ha?


Wild. Aside. These are the Fruits of Hyperbolical Exaggeration; it creates
Laughter where we intend it to promote Pity.

To Fick. Grammercy Dad to be, I Am glad to see you in so good a Humor: I
perceived you were in a merry Vein, and was willing to promote it; for, in
reality, things were not quite so bad; but, Faith, 'twixt you and I, I despair
of carrying the Town; my Ogling Shots almost spent, and not one of 'em has so
much as reached the Outwarks; and the Train of Bombastick Similes and
Protestations I brought with me to the Siege is too weak to make any reasonable
Breach; so that if you don't reinforce, I must even pack up Bag and Baggage,
and march off whilst I may, lest she should fall upon my Rear and rout it, as
she has already disordered the Van.


Fick. Heighty tity! What a Rise is here from breaking of Shins to taking of
Towns! Ha, ha. Come, Courage, Boy; the other Attack: If thou carry'st her not, I
will for thee, grate me like a Nutmeg, ha, ha. If thou succeedest not by Storm,
I Will cut off Provision, and shall do it by Famine, Wildman, or No Man 's the
Word.


Wild. Well, Sir, for once I Will venture to follow your Advice: Good Assurance
boggles not at the first Refusal; and, Thanks to my Stars, of that I Am pretty
well provided.

Once more at all; and if she fails me twice,
Modesty's Virtue, Impudence a Vice.
Exit.
Fickle Solus. Fick. Send thee good Luck, Boy, or somebody'll smart for it, I
feel that already. Why what a Gypsy Minks is this! She has wearied me out ever
since she came into her Teens; nay, even with Threats compelled me to procure a
Husband for her; and now I have don't, she flies off. What a Pox can be the
Reason of it! 'Sbud, he is handsome enough, and will be rich enough too for a
Gentleman. What else would she have? Unless the Devil has played Booty, and
given her the other Item of her concealed Fortune; which, if she ever gets into
her Clutches, she will mount and shine like a Kite, with a Paper Lanthorn at the
Tail on it: But I Have a Trick, I think, to cheat the Devil himself; for the
Devil's in the Devil, if he once imagins a Citizens Foreman should be true to
his Master.


Enter Jonathan. Jon. Lord, Sir, what do you mean to tarry thus mumping and
maundring to your self! Why, here is my Lord Mayor's Music come this half hour;
unless you will give 'em Employment, they will get so drunk, they will be for playing
on more Instruments than you imagine. Then there is the Cook smoking like a
Pasty, and swearing by his Chopping-block, unless you make haste, the Dinner
will not be worth a Fig, Sir?


Fick. Let 'em drink and swear on; I Have more Care and Business than they.

Wheedlingly. Jonathan.


Jon. mocking. Right Renowned and thrice Honorable Sir Fickle,
The Prospect of Dinner does my Fancy so tickle;
That no more than a Calves-head shall I here what you say, Sir;
Therefore stay till I Have Dined, and therefore pray come away, Sir.
Pulling him.
Fick. I see Hunger sharpens Wits as well as Appetites; the Fear of it has had
the same Effect on me.


Jon. Fear of what! Your Mistress?


Fick. No, no.


Jon. Why, I know that well enough; never fear her, Sir; she loves you, in my
Conscience, I believe.


Fick. Nay, prithee hear me; thou know how that Devil Lettice has been
continually at me for a Husband --


Jon. Pho! Why I know that too: And had I not been faithful Jonathan, she had
been fitted e're now. She knows how to choose, though I say it as should not. But
--


Fick. Nay, prithee, Patience.


Jon. Quick, quick then, Sir; this same business is the damnd'st Enemy to a
Hungry Stomach --


Fick. Why then thou know with what Care I Have sought her out one; nay, with
what Cost --


Jon. Ay, ay, Cost enough; before I Would have ventured so much on e're a skittish
Jades Head in the Town, I Would see her both hanged and drowned.


Fick. Hanged and drowned too! How Is that?


Jon. Why her Heels on a Hedge, and her Head in a Ditch. Come budge, budge,
Sir; my Gurs grumble most horribly for Ammunition: An I don't pacify 'em
speedily, they will be in an Uproar. Come pray, Sir, be jogging.


Fick. Then, shortly, thus: Whence her Disdain to Wildman springs I cannot
imagine, unless she be in Scent of her Fortune.


Jon. Ay, Pox, these Gilflirts have Noses like Northern Hounds: But if I was
you, I Would Law her -- She might hit on the Scent, but I Would spoil her for ever
coming up with the Game.


Fick. That, were it feasible, would help little; for when Women are once in
Scent of their Fortunes or Gallants, cut off their Legs, they will hobble afrer
'em on their Stumps. No, I Have a better Method for that; I Will make her beat
Counter, and then I shall be pretty safe: I Will commit the Writings to thy
Charge, and then I Will swear in all the Courts of Christendom, I know nothing of
the matter; if that will but content her.


Jon. Ay, ay, Sir; that you may do both with Safety and Honor; for though
downright Perjury may cause loss of Leather and Reputation, yet a handsome
Evasion was always allowed of as a Mark of Ingenuity.


Fick. Here, take my Keys. [Gives them.] And do hear? Be vigilant.


Jon. Oh, Sir, as the Dragon in the Story over the Golden Pippins. Vigilant!
Why, I shall not sleep a Wink while I have 'em [Aside.] for Joy.


Fick. We'll remove all secretly and securely, whilst I in and make 'em pay the
Pipers.

And to my lasting Praise it shall be said
A Man was once too many for two Maids.
Exit. Jonathan Solus. Why now Sir Fickle, you would think it a plaguey Disaster,
If the Man should chance to be too hard for the Master.
There Is Rhyme for Rhyme; and if I don't show you Trick for Trick, may I be
thought as great an Ass as your Worship -- Why, what an Antichristian Dog is
this Master mine, to abuse poor Girls thus: Before George I could almost pity
'em my self. Nay, were I sure of a Recompense for my Honesty, I should most
certainly make a Scruple of Conscience to be accessory to this same piece of
Knavery. Well, I Will to Jinny, and feel her Pulse; let her sound her Mistresses
Inclinations; for I Have so much Sense of Honor, as not to turn Knave but upon a
Vantage. -- So, here they come, Fox and Pack, In Faith. O Fox, O Joler, O
Damsel, O Lightfoot; A Boy, a Boy, a Boy.

Exit.
Enter Fick. and Eug. Wildman and Let. Honoria. Fick. Come Madam, come Nieces,
Gentlemen Fiddlers, I beg your Pardon. Come, let us see what Entertainment you
have for this Lady. Madam Eugenia, you're Mistress of all here. Pray do the
Honors of the House, it may be your own another Day, or to Night either; the
sooner the better, say I.


Eug. Aside. And I.


Fick. Come, hang Civility: Sit down, sit down.

Pushing 'em on their Seats.
Enter Jonath. who nods at Fickle. Jon. sitting on the Ground. Take your
Places, take your Places, Gentiles; show, show there. Pray Gentlemen, dispatch.

Aside. Pox of this scraping before Dinner, it serves only to set People's Teeth
an edge, and spoil their Stomachs: Gout and Palsy light on their mangy
Fingers! Would they had done.


An Entertainment of Music. A Sonato. Fick. Sweetly tweedled, In Faith. Now for
a Song.


Jon. Aside. A Song! Oh my Guts.


Fick. Madam Eugenia, you, I know, are good at it.


Eug. Excuse me, Sir; our Country Breeding affords but homely Music; besides,
my Heart's too heavy to --


Fick. Ay, ay, these Maidenheads are great Burdens, Lettice. I know that by
Experience. I bore mine about me for Thirty Years and upwards, and when I got
quit on it, methought I was so light, so easy -- Well, Madam, since you refuse
us the Happiness of your Voice, I hope I may entreat that of your Company at
Dinner.


Jon. rising. There you hit the Point, Sir. The best way to lighten a poor
Maidens Heart, is to fill her Belly. Go, pray Gentlemen, walk in, walk in.


Music. Sir, we can furnish you with a very new one, so please you to hear it.


Fick. By all means. Come, tune your Trebles.

In a Base Voice. Toll, loll, loll.


Jon. to Music. Frogs and Ravens cram the croaking Windpipe of thee.

To Fickle. Who he! Why, the newest Song he has is the Children in the Wood, or
the London Prentice, or some such like Ditty, set to the new Modish Tune of Old
Sir Simon the King. But if you will compound for a Ketch, I Will sing you one of my
Lord Mayor's going to Pin-maker's- Hall, to hear a Sniveling Non-Con Separatist
Divide and Subdivide into the Two and Thirty Points of the Compass.


Wild. For the Honor of the City let us hear it --

SONG.
SHE that marries an Old Man, let this be her Care,
At Home as she can, but Abroad well to fare:
For at Home tho she chance to be but meanly blessed,
Yet Abroad she may find how to make up the rest.
2.
If the Cuckold grow Jealous, let her never be dismayed,
But feign an Affection, that Passion is laid;
With him let her toy, kiss, chuck, play the Fool;
The Receipt is approved by the best Modern School.
3.
If he still be perverse, and begin to contest,
Let her know that a surer yet lies in her Breast:
So sure, it never failed yet to give present Ease;
But kill him with Kindness then do as you please.

Fick. Damned shrewd Council this! It Is well it is but Modern. Now will I be
pounded to Pepper, if this ben't the Exhortation of some Badger-back'd Holder
forth, that used to help these ravenous Wild-cats to a Bit abroad, as the Song
says, they liked better than their ordinary Fare at home -- But enough and too
much of that. Now had we a Dance, 'twould perfect the Business.


Jon. Aside. Hell take the Huntsman that --


Music. Oh, Sir, we'll help you out --


Joh. dolefully. Ah.


Music. On these occasions we bring Instruments of all sorts and sexes, fit
for this or any other Employment you can desire.


Jon. to Music. Hark you, Friend, have you ever a Black-pudding, Bacon-Hock,
or any such Instrument to employ my Grinders, my Belly most urgently desires
it; it is as empty as your Fiddle-case, by Famine.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.


Music. Black-pudding! Why, do you take me for a Tripe-man?


Jon. Tripe-man! Why, what a pox, if you were a Gold-finder, you're good enough
to make his Lordship a Crowdero. Why, what a Pox Goodman Catsguts and
Horse-hair is the matter with you, ha?


Wild. Ha, ha, ha. Prithee, Jonathan, three moments Patience, and then --


Jon. falling. Here lies the Famished Object of your Inhuman Barbarity.

Aside. Three Moments.


Wild. Ha, ha, ha. Poor Jonathan! He was a very honest Fellow --


Fick. But of an insatiate Appetite. He should have been one of Marriot's
Bastards by his eating.


Ambo. Ha, ha, ha.


Jon. Insulting Dogs, thus to triumph over a Man in Misery! But if I ben't
revenged on you both, may I go to Bed fasting, and not so much as dream of
Victuals till to morrow after Dinner.


A Dance. By Mr. Essex and Mrs. Temple. Fick. So, so, curiously caper'd brave
Boys, brave Boys all; adjourn to the Cellar or Kitchen till further occasion.


Jon. looking up. Ha! What Is that? Cellar and Kitchen.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, they have served Dinner upon Table.


Jon. starting up. Where, where, where?

Running out, Wildman stops him. No pray, Sir; it is dangerous jesting with
edged Tools.

Pointing to his Teeth.
Fick. Come then, Madam; come Mr. Wildman. Lettice, I think I need not desire
you; your late Exercise, I believe, has got you your Stomach.

Advance, I Will lead you on to try your Teeth
Upon a portly piece of Powdered Beef.

Jon. Then there is some Hopes at last, as l'm a Sinner:
I thought he would made all Dancing, and no Dinner.
Exeunt.
The End of the Second ACT.

ACT III. SCENE Continues.
Enter Jonathan with a great piece of Bread in one Hand, and pulling in Jinny
with the other. Jon. NAY, nay, never hang back for the matter, but come along.
What, do think it reasonable we two should fast, when all the rest are a
feasting? If this be the Conscience of a Chambermaid --


Jinny. And that the Fasting of a Foreman! Deliver us from a Conjunction! Bless
me! Why, what have you got there? A Shoulder of Mutton?


Jon. biting and mumbling. Pho, pox, no; this is but a Sippit in the Pan to stay
my Stomach, till that Covey of Cormorants within will give me leave to feed to
the purpose. But now I have so relishing a Bit before me, I may venture to
leave this --

Puts it in his Pocket, and kisses her.
Jinny. Stand off, Greasie-chops, and find somewhat else to stay your Stomach
with then --


Jon. What? Then a Chop of Mutton? Why, it is the Staple Dish, the Cobbler feeds
as well on that as the Czar. Ah, a Hind-Quarter of Young Mutton for my Money.


Jinny. Ay, ay, for your Money, and enough too. I believe your whole Estate
will scarce purchase the Carcass; but if ever you have me for better for worse,
such course Fare as that will never serve turn.


Jon. Sfoot, what would have? A Phoenix stewed in Nectar, Phenicoptero's
Tongues, Ortolan's Brains, or any such Kickshaw. Speak but the word there,
thine.


Jinny. No, no; I have enough for one while, with your Chop of Mutton, as you
call it.


Jon. A Chambermaid and satisfied! Nay, then Larks will be good cheap; but tho
you are so reasonable, yet I Am bound in honor to --

Offers to kiss her.
Jinny. Stand off, I say, Pepper and Ginger, or I Will call my Master, and have
you infused in a Hog-trough, where you may cool your Courage as you feed to the
purpose.


Jon. Why, you proud Minx; do you make a Bore of me?


Jinny. Why truly, your Snout and Grunting would somewhat incline me, did not
your long Ears and shallow Brains convince me that you're of another Species.


Jon. Y'abusive Jade, these Brains that you call shallow; shall, if you please,
produce a Masterpiece, and make thee shine in Silk and Satin, Jinny.

I Have had a Crop this day, let that suffice:
You Are the poor Fool, I only rich and wise.

Jinny. O rare Jonathan!


Jon. O true Woman! Who for two or three Nonsensical Bombastick gingling
Rhimes, will bestow on a grunting Swine-snouted, long-eard, shallow-brain'd
Beast of a Beau, the Epithet to Ben Johnson.


Jinny. Igad, an you go on at this rate, I shall rather esteem you a Downright
Wit, than a Citizen's Foreman.


Jon. The Other such word, and Empires, they are thine. Hang petty Lordships, I Am
for Kingdoms vast. I say, within this Pouch lie Keys that lock more Riches up,
than Craesus e're possessed.


Jinny Aside. Gad, the Rogue's elevated; there must be somewhat in this -- Pho,
now you think to make a mighty Secret of what I know as well as your self: But
it is the Trick of your Sex to whisper Proclamations.


Jon. And of yours to proclaim Secrets. Now will I be dock'd, if there ever
was, is, or will be that Arcana in Nature, that you don't pretend to as full a
Knowledge of, as any --


Jinny. Of you, and with as much Reason in my Mind.


Jon. Why there is the Business. Now will I work a Miracle, and convince you:
Prithee tell me but one thing; it belongs to your Trade; so far I Will assure you
paravance.


Jinny. Nay, if it belong to my Occupation, I can tell you twenty: What is it?


Jon. Why, the Shape and Size of Mother Eve's green Apron.


Jinny. There, I must confess, you have puzzled me.


Jon. Thy Ingenuity would almost make a Man suspect thy Sex. Now will I show
you a Quaking Tailor here hard by, who, without Chalk or Yard, and only by his
Inward Light, shall give you the Dimensions of it with as great Expedition and
Exactness, as if 'twere lying on his Shop-board before him: Or as you would do
your own with your nimble Fingers and Picked Elbow there.

Measuring from his Fingers end to his Elbow.
Jinny. Would I had a Glimpse on it, that I might prye into this Mystery you
keep such a Fuss withal.


Jon. Confess and recant, and somewhat may be done.


Jinny. Well, I do my Presumption; as for thy Secrecy, it is Woman-Proof, I
acknowledge it.


Jon. Why then here stands honest Jonathan a Grocer's Foreman, that can boast
of more than the French King and his whole Cabinet Council, who are all led by
the Nose by a She Bearward.


Jinny. Ay, ay; but prithee unravel what it is?


Jon. That that shall make thy Mistresses to obtain,
Strive to outvie thy Master in their Gifts:
Thus fixed I Will stand, while they offer Gold by Pecks,
And unregarded slight 'em like --

Jinny. A Fool in Folio; would you not?


Jon. Aside. Gad, so I should; the Jade's in the right on it. But this same
High-flown Language is so pretty, it makes a Man so Heroic, so like a Player.
As for Example now:

Hussy, I say, your Mistresses would not dare
T'affront me thus as you do, for their Ears.

Jinny Aside. My Mistresses again! Igad I have it. Come, Faith, now I guess it;
my Master has entrusted thee with somewhat.


Jon. With somewhat! Why, there are you as far out of the way again, as when
you're mumbling your Prayers, and meditating of Mischief -- With somewhat,
quotha! With all, I say; mark that: Once more I say, with all; and amongst the
rest, with your Mistresses Fortunes, their Father's Will and Testament, cum
multis aliis, enough to bulge a Wheelbarrow. What say now, my Prester Joan,
shall I make my Words good, ha -- Come, shall us to Pontack's?


Jenny. And fling the Sop to the Fiddlers


Jon. Agreed; there, Blind Harpers, take it among you. But the other Bite.


Jenny. Ay, twenty. Now if this be true, I Am thine as fast as Love can make me.

Aside. It Is good striking now the Iron's hot.


Jon. A Match, I faith; there is one.


Jenny. But, my dear Jonathan, thou must be honest though.


Jon. O never fear that is my way: If the Ladies do but outbid my Master a
Teaster, they shall even have 'em; I Will show 'em I can be just -- But here a
comes with a full Paunch, and empty Pate, the only two Distinctions 'twixt an
Amsterdam Burgher and a Citizen of London.


Jenny. Then let us away, and remember not a Word by our Loves.


Jon. Oh, never fear; I shall find other Employment for my Tongue than tattling.


Enter Fickle, and Eugenia; Wildman, and Letitia; Honoria, as from Dinner.
Eugen. Sir, the Nobleness of your Entertainment has so far exceeded Thanks,
'twere vain to think of any other Return than that of admiring your Bounty.


Fickle, aside. Poor Rogue! I warrant her Holiday Feast in the Country was but
Bacon and Bagpudding at the best.

To Eug. Madam, the least of your Favors is a sufficient Reward; but Thanks is
more than I deserve for this and better Entertainments I have in store for you.


Eugen. Sir, They are far too mean to offer to your Merits; I should think my
self much indebted to Fortune, had she lent me any thing more worthy your
Acceptance.


Wild, aside. Good -- Let Women alone for taking old Occasions by the topping.


Fickle. Bear Witness, Gentlemen -- Madam, you have that in the bottom of your
Bag would make an Emperor proud of accepting.


Eugen. Then name it, Sir, once more it is yours.


Fickle. Why it is your self; your Love I ask, for all --


Eugen. 'Lass, Sir, my Heart's too full of Grief to harbor the least Thought
of Love; a grateful Acknowledgement is the little All I Am Mistress of; it is
yours, if you think it worth the receiving.

Weeping.
Wild. aside. Excellent Jade! How she drills him!


Fickle, whispering. Nay, don't cry, Sugar Candy, don't cry; trust me, you will
make me do so too. Cheer up, Honey, I Will be thy Father, and Mother, and Sister,
and Brother, and all thy good Friends.


Wild, aside. Now for me (to Eugen.) Come, Cousin, you are mine by your dead
Father's Will committed to my Care; speak, Is your Heart engaged?


Eug. pointing to Fickle. Alas! 'twas free, till first I saw those Eyes.


Fickle, staring. Hum, hum.


Wild. Then thus I give you to your Wishes, so you consent.


Eug. Witness these Blushes, let them supply my Speech.


Fickle. Make room, make place, by your Leave there, Gentlemen, that I may
receive my Princess as I ought, (kneeling.) Thus, as your Prentice, I pay my
Respects unto your Beauty.


Eug. raising him. Then rise, my Lord, my Master, and my Husband.


Fickle. Madam, you will kill me with Kindness, as the Song says in the new
Opera: Ay, do if you can; why, I Am happier than the Pope in the midst of his
Seraglio.


Let. The Turk, Sir, the Turk.


Fickle. The Pope, Mrs. Pert; the Pope, I say: Turk or Pope, pray where is the
difference, ha?


Let. Nay, Sir, I confess you are the better Historian, Holinshead, Stow, and
Baker, were Fools to you, I believe.


Fickle. Yes that they were, Mrs. Hammershine, Mrs. Puspaws; find me out ever a
Stower that ever stowed, ever a Baker that ever eat, or ever a Brewer that ever
had the first sup of so dainty a Firkin as this is.

To Mr. Wildman. I beg your Pardon; but this same Madam Kicke-te-scratch there,
with her Bakers, and Stowers, and Hollingsheads, and the Devil and all, has put
me so besides my self, that I for got the best of my Friends. Pray, Sir, study
how I may requite you.


Wild. pointing to Let. There Is one, Sir, would over-rate the Service, if --


Fickle. If what, Sir? If what? Sure I Am Master of my own. Come, Mrs.
Nimble-toes, no shall I? shall I? This, or none. I Have heard of your Pranks, you
see. If I were not in good Company, I should -- ay, that I should. Come, come.


Let. aside to Wild. Forbear, or, as I live, I Will discover all.


Wild. Sir, your Good Will I esteem as a perfect Proof of your Affection; hers
by after-Services I shall endeavor to deserve, if possible.


Fickle. Nay, Sir, if you're for Consideration, pray take your own time.

To Eugen. Come, Pruine Eyes, let us not interrupt their Loves, nor our own.

To Let. And do you hear, Mrs. Fly-at-all, 'ware worrying, or I Will musle,
chain, and to Kennel with you, I will. Come, my Sugar-Plumb, my Mackaroon, come
along.

Exit. Fickle, Eugen.
Wild. Now, fair Letitia, what is it yet remains?


Let. Only to take your Labor for your Pains. -- Ha, ha, ha; what, a rhiming
again? I gad, I hate that worse than your Contrivance, for that was pretty
tollerably carried on for a Beginner.


Hon. What Contrivance, Sister? what was it?


Let. Why --


Wild. aside. All will out. Now shall I, 'spight of my Modesty, have my good
Qualities laid open before my Face.


Hon. But what was it, good Sister?


Let. Why, only to make a small Swop of --


Wild. aside. Ah! it is a coming.

To them. Ladies, I beg Pardon for the Abruptness of my Departure; but,
Business, Madam, Business.


Let. Nay, pray, Sir.


Wild. Nay, Good Madam.


Let. catching him. Nay, pray, good, dear, plotting, contriving, bantring,
wenching Sir, hear but your Indictment, Sentence shall immediately pass, and
then you may go --


Wild. aside. And be hanged, so I may, faith and troth; the Halter's all I have
then left to trust to: And by good Luck I Have just Money enough left to buy one.


Let. over-hearing. Bless me! how a Woman may be mistaken.


Wild. Mistaken Madam, what do you mean?


Let. Why, I thought you had been a Beau?


Wild. Not I, Madam, by my Faith.


Let. So I find by your Pocket, Three Half Pence! Why, I have heard of a Beau
at a Nonplus for a Half Penny worth of Ferretting to tie up his Breeches, till
the poor Punk, at the Expense of her Garter, had recruited the Damage he had
sustained in her Service, which he himself was not able to repair.


Hon. Come, Sister, to the Contrivance.


Let. Why, that was so small I Would almost forgot it, 'twas only to make an
Exchange of his Cousin,

looking at him for himself -- As for the rest, the bloody Battery he complains
of was caused by his own Assault; he was for forcing me with him to the World
in the Moon, I think, to some Seat he has lately purchased there, as I take it.
Was it not, Sir?


Wild. Rapture, Madam, Rapture.

Aside. I was most plaguily afraid of a full and true Discovery.


Hon. Nay, if you blame him for that, Sister, I must tell you now you're too
cruel, I protest, had I a Heart to dispose of --


Let. As I have yet, thank my Stars; it would scarce be in his Favor: So, Sir,
I beg your Pardon for the abruptness of my Departure; but Business, Sir,
Business.

Exit, laughing.
Wild. The first Woman that ever I knew leave her Pleasure for Business.

Exit.
Hon. What, Pleasure! Sir, believe me, you're ill acquainted with our Sex's
Passions, they will laugh for Sorrow as well as cry for Joy.


Wild. But in her Smiles I read a grating Scorn;
Heavens! In what cursed Minute was I born,
To be thus tortured with Disdain?
Malignant Planets!

Hon. Curse not your Stars, they are more auspicious to you
Than you imagine, or thine to me,
O, Trulove!

Wild. For Pity sake untie this Gordian Knot
That keeps my fettered Soul in dark Suspense:
The Virgin Bride, with eager trembling Joy
Never long to embrace the loved, and lovely he,
As I for some Relief to ease my Soul.

Hon. What Ease you can imagine I can give.


Wild. Oh no! your Trulove's kind, Letitia's coy,
Nay worse.

Hon. Nay better, Sir, if that her Love you prize.


Wild. Letitia!


Hon. Loves you, Sir, I Would almost said,
As I love Trulove, or as Trulove me;
In Tears I Have heard her sigh it to her self,
And make the Simily.

Wild. Amazement siezes me! Can this be true!
Yes, it is true, for Honoria speaks:
But pardon, Madam, if I ask for once
What means her Shiness, mingled with Disdain.

Hon. She doubts it is Int'rest-forces your Addresses;
She thinks your Heart has been enslaved before,
And then she well may fear you do not love.

Wild. Both true to Heaven and you, I both confess
To you, who, next that Heaven, I dare most trust;
Yet may I feel there all revenging Ire,
If, this Moment that I speak, my Heart's not free
From any Chains but hers,
As Infant Babes before they heard Love named.
From Fate and Want, it is true, first sprung my Love;
But by that aweful Deity I swear,
Her Coldness, by a Power well known to him,
Has so fomented, nay, increased my Flame,
I Would rather live upon some Desert Rock,
The Weeds for Food, Repentant-Tears my Drink,
Her only for my All,
Than 'midst the greatest Luxury and Pomp
This World, this nauseous World! can give without-her

Hon. Trust me, your Words and Actions are so full
Of true Repentance, and of generous Passion,
That had I Tears for any but my Trulove,
I could spare some for you.
But go, be prosperous in your matchless Flame,
Matchless indeed to any but my Trulove's;
Persuade her you're but what y'appear to me,
You Will find her kind, or force her to be Just.

Wild. You, as my better Genius, I obey,
I never can miss, while that points out the way.

Hon. And may you find it, though I miss my own,
Thou Mirror of a reclaimed repentant Lover;
Oh, Trulove! Could I wish the least of Ill.
To one whose Love so far surpasses mine?
Thus could I wish you, that I might, at least,
Merit you better, or you less deserve me.
Enter Trulove observing. Oh, Trulove! Trulove! Charmer of my Soul!
Thou dear Disturber of my Virgin Peace!
Thou Ever-present Object to my Mind!
Trulove! as constant.
Trulove runs and catches her in his Arms, she faints. As Honoria's kind.
Look up, thou drooping Cherubin! look up,
Thou noblest Compound of True Love and Honor!
Oh! why so pale? Why close you up those Eyes,
That cause my Adoration, sooth my Love?

Hon. And may the Powers be deaf unto my Prayers,
Now deaf, when most I need their piteous Help,
If I don't love you with an equal Flame,
Nay, greater, by my Soul, for it forebodes,
Should I our Ruins grant, join Want to Want,
And then you see the Products of our Loves,
The tender Sprouts of our engrafted Souls,
Nipp'd by the frozen Blasts of chilly need,
Those Flames you now think durable as mine
Would turn to Tears, your Love would pine to pity.
Bat yet if I, which Omen Heaven avert,
Should be reduced by Love to that sad State,
To see those grovelling Infants on my Lap,
Making with Tears their fruitless Signs for Bread,
For want of that expiring on my Breasts,
Embracing. I Would hug the darling Cause of our Destruction,
On his Mouth. And thus sigh out my unreproaching Soul.

Enter Jenny. Jen. So close! Nay, then I Am come before my cue.

Exit.
True. More than enough, thou exquisitely good!
I must desist, for fear so great a Saint
Should bear within her a Prophetic Mind;
Yet, of you Heavens, that never deny what is Just,
Kneeling. My Heart, as humbl'd as my bended Knee,
I crave this mighty Boon:
Grant me but Means to show this generous Maid
How much I loved, how much my Soul adored,
But to requite this Seraphin of Love;
And then, as one, whose earthly Frame's too base
Raving. To rival those that twirle the spinning Spheres,
Rising abruptly. I Will grudging yield to your abstruse Decrees.

Hon. Your Sense seems unconnected, Actions wild;
O stem this raging Torrent of your Passion;
Call up your Reason, Srength, and Resolution,
With all those heavenly Gifts adorn your Mind:
Methinks I see through those condensed Mists,
Through this long, dismal, and afflicting Night,
A glorious Dawn that scatters all the Clouds,
And brings a welcome Daybreak to our Loves.
What if kind Heaven should at the last relent?

True. musing. For you it may, for me it never can.


Hon. O shield him, all ye glorious Sprights above,
Whose Divine Talents are to Know and Love;
Kindly distill into my laboring Soul
Such Charms, as may his wandering Sense control;
Or by the Omniscient Deity I must
Be base, yet still methinks I would be just.
How fare you, Sir?

Enter Jenny. Jenny. Very well, Madam, or he shall be so shortly; I bring that
along with me will cure all Distempers.


Hon. It must be little less, I assure you, that can excuse this unseasonable
Intrusion.


Jenny. O! Madam, I bring that which will atone for this or any other Crime,
yet with Respect; I think I came most opportunely, for if ever Maid helped her
Mistress out at a dead Lift, 'twas my self; I gad, if I had not watched my Cue,
you must have fell to hugging again, for the speaking part was out I Am sure.


Hon. Bless me! the Wench is mad.


Jenny. I must have been, or worse, to have let you run on at this rate, when I
had that in my Eye to reconcile the Difference.


Hon. Worse and worse still. What Difference? or with whom?


Jenny. Why, with Mr. Trulove, as I take it: He doats on you, you dote on him,
and yet you will not marry him, because -- because -- I Have a Notion on it in my
Head, but that is such a new kind of a mad Whim, that there is neither Name nor
Reason for it. Pray, Sir, what do you call this same What-ye-call't?


True. madly. Dim-sighted Maid! I Will couch thy Cataract,
Rear thy Crystalline Eye Balls to the Skies;
Ay, there the -- Hah -- yet higher, higher yet,
Through that transparant watered tabby Veil,
Just by the Star-embroider'd Throne of Jove,
The Strife of Honor, Gratitude, and Love;
Soberly. There Is the Name. Ask the Women the Reason they have monopoliz'd that
to Quilt Petticoats with, and it is Treason by the Laws of the Ladies for Men
but to tread on Pea-hens Trains.

Madly.
Hon. weeping. He raves! he raves! unpitying Powers! he raves!


Jenny, aside. I gad, I think ye both rave: This is the maddest Courtship I
ever saw; I could almost cry my self, to see what Fools they make of one
another.


Hon. giving her Hand. Here, take this fatal, forced Restorative.


Jenny, aside. Ay, right; if the Operation of that don't fetch you both to your
Senses before to Morrow Morning we must proceed to Hellebore.


Hon. What, yet unmoved!
Trulove kisses Honoria 's Hand. No, Thanks to Heaven, he mends.

True. weeps. See the Distemper purging at his Eyes,
And the Sympathick Virtue moist'ning mine;
This sure, of all Extremes, must be most sad,
Both by Love perish, or for Love be mad.

Jenny. There Is no Occasion for either, Madam, that I know; but one retire into
the next Room, if I don't give you an Antidote against both, may I not have the
licking of the Gallipot.


Hon. Surely the Disease is catching, the Girl talks like --


Jen. Like an Apothecary, who has a Most Excellent Elixir Salutis within, I
assure you, Madam.


Hon. Be plain, or I shall have fresh Straw and a dark Chamber provided -- What
is it you talk of --


Jenny. Why, Lands, Lordships, Pounds by Thousands: Nay, Madam, I don't dream,
nor is there any Enchantment in the Case.


Hon. Defend me! My Uncle turned honest!


Jenny. No fear of that neither; but he is turned Fool, and that is as good for
your Purpose. In a word, you have heard, I suppose, of an Estate left you by your
Father, Sir Roger, your Uncle has: I Am sure Madam Letitia told him often enough
on it.


Hon. And loud enough, that I know: But that was but Presumption, though violent
enough, I must confess.


Jenny. Then hear the Proof: Your Uncle, for what Reasons Jonathan will tell
you, has committed those very Writings to his Keeping, and he has them -- as
fast as I have him.


Hon. Propitious Heavens! How can this be true?


Jenny. Bless me! Madam, go in and see; there is Mr. Wildman capitulating with
him, he stands upon some small Consideration, 'twill make the Gift more valid,
as he says.

Lord! how my Heart leaps to see this happy Hour!


Hon. Your Heels you mean.


Jenny. Strike up, I have no Power --


Dance. Hon. Now, my Dear Trulove! Heavens, at last, you see
Have heard my Sighs, and melted at my Tears --
Honoria would be proud you would call her yours.

True. The Heavens are just, and I am proud to serve you.

Exit Trulove.
Hon. Hah! did mind, Jenny, or am I deceived,
His Strangeness and his quick Departure hence?

Jenny. For Love's sake, Madam, invent not ways to vex your self; nothing but
Honor harbors in his Breast.


Hon. Nothing but Honor, say! Yes, Love does sure,
Or else --
But these, at best, are but superfluous Thoughts,
Or Grudgings of my late distempered Mind,
Which the vast Blessing of Trulove's being mine
Will soon disperse:
As when some anxious Pilot, all the Day,
Tossed by unconstant Winds, and angry Sea,
Would fain take shelter in some neighboring Port,
And tacks, and veers, but still is made their Sport;
At last some pitying God rewards his Pains
With welcome Safety, and more welcome Gains.
Exeunt.
The End of the Third ACT.

ACT IV. SCENE IV. Moor-Fields.
Wildman and Trulove meeting. Wild. OH, Mr. Trulove! you're as welcome as
unexpected; I Have had you once or twice in view, but I never, before this, could
give you the Turn.


True. Like enough; for I Have so cunning a Sportsman to deal with, that I am fain
to cross double, and use all the Subtilties I can imagine, least he should
unearth me, and cast me out to the Hounds. Nay lately, when (as I after heard)
it was you that was coming to assist me in capitulating with that same Rascal
Jonathan, your very Tread struck me into such a Pannick Fear, that in a manner,
nolens volens, I was fain to scamper and take to Covert --


Wild. In your Mistress's Apartment, I suppose.


True. You may; I need make no Secret on it to you. You unharbour'd a Do, I
hear, that is like to give you sufficient Sport without poaching in my Purlieus.


Wild. Do, do call her? S'bud, had but seen her, when instead of flying
end-ways, with what Resolution she stood at bay, I gad, you would have rather taken
her for a Sangler -- But I expect that shortly will make her gentle, if any
thing can do it.


True. Fie! it is unmanly, I Would almost said, dishonest, to win a Lady by
Compulsion.


Wild. Nay, prithee, none of thy nice Moralities, and Punctilio's of Honor.
Pox on 'em, they have undone more Gentlemen than Drinking, Dicing, Drabbing,
and all the other expencely Pastime of the Town together -- Take your own
Conrse, leave me to mine, it shall be as Honorable as Safety will permit.
S'life! see here they come; Fortune for me this once I beseech thee.


Enter Jonathan with a Trunk upon his Shoulders, followed by Letitia, Honoria,
and Jenny. Jon. Servant, Gentlemen. Come in, come in, Damsels, here are your
Knight-Errants,

pitches down the Trunk: So lie thee there, my Charge. Pray, Masters, remember
the Porter.


Wild. True. give Money. Ay, ay; here, here.


Jon. aside. Gold! by the Cap of Maintenance -- Now to you Gentlemen, for I
suppose you would be the Joint-Purchasers; though, now I think on it, I Would best expose
'em by way of Auction.

To Wild. Pray, Sir, do so much as give my Master a Call, perhaps he may have a
mind to some of 'em.


Jenny. Come, my Jonathan, prithee no Delays, slip not the Opportunity; for the
Goods, now they are once exposed to Sale, may perhaps not serve my Master's Turn
so well.


Jon. to Jenny. I know that, you Jade; but I Have two Ends to tantalize him,
Lucre and Revenge, the two Idols of your Heathenish Sex.

Well, Gentlemen, what say you to the Matter? --


Let. What, unsight, unseen?


Jon. O, Madam, there is a whole Farrow of Pigs in the Poke, fat ones, IN faith,
I Will secure you that. Well, Sirs, some few Hundreds, or so, you may spare, for
I would be easy; I Am not for extorting, not I, upon Honor.


Wild. Hundreds! Nay, then you are too reasonable, and I scorn to be outdone in
that -- S'foot! now I think on it, here is the Barbado's Fleet safely arrived,
I Will buy the whole Cargo at a Lump, and present thee with it; Would have any
thing else?


Jon. No, no, that is enough in all Conscience; for you Sparks are large
Promisers, that I know, but bad Performers, or the Women foully belly you: But
consider on it, Gentlemen, a Thousand Pound a Man will be fair on all sides.


True. That I Will give thee freely, for my part, if the Sale of my wretched
Annuity can raise it; here is my Hand, shall have all farther Security I can
give thee.


Jon. O Lack-a-day! Sir, you're a Man of Honor -- Come, Mr. Wild-man, what say
you? Will you follow your Leader, and leave the Merchants their Goods to solder
up their Cracks.


Wild. Well, if it must be so, though I confess --


Let. Nay, Sir, I Would have you make as cheap a Bargain as may be, especially for
Goods that may stand you, possibly, but in little stead. Women, you know, are
changeable.


Wild. I hope so, Madam.

Aside. What Bear-like Entertainment is this! a snap of Comfort, and a polt on
the Pate.


Jon. to Wild. Come, Sir, come, I Am in pain till I have discharged my Trust.


Let. Nay, prithee, Patience; What, give the Gentleman leave to consider a
little.


Wild. That Is needless, Madam; for though I have felt the Severity of your
Disdain, yet your Honor I never called in question.

To Jon. Come, Trulove's my Security, if you question my own.


True. I am, I am; come, prithee, dispatch.


Wild. going to the Trunk. No, no, I Will --


Jon. interposing. No, no, but you shall not; fair and softly, by your Leave, Sir.
Think not that a trifling Sum, which here is one will share, has induced me to
this: Know, Sir, it is the Honor of the Deed, and that I Will reserve entire to
my self; the Honor and Danger shall be mine, and mine alone.

Opens the Box. By your Leave, Madam, let me peep into your Stomacher.

Takes out a Paper. So, here a comes.


Wild. Let. Let Us see it, let us see it.


Jon. Three moments Patience, Mr. Wildman, and then -- Hey toss! what have we
got here? Mynheer van dunc van dunc Vanduncart's Bond, I think -- Pho pox! it is
a Dutch Man's Bond, not worth a Butterom.

Takes up another.
Omnes. Now! now!


Jon. Three Moments Patience, Gentlemen, and then -- Hum --

Reads. A Settlement upon my Man Jonathan of Twenty Pounds per Annum, after my
Decease. Griping Dog! What intended he to do with the rest? Sure he has some
Correspondence in Hell, that he designs to draw Bills upon.

To Trulove. Faith, Sir, I see 'em on the right side of the Style, as it
happens.


Hon. Nay, prithee, no more preaching; you will tire my Patience presently.


True. Come Jonathan.


Jon. Coming, coming, Sir. (Tumbles the Papers.) Oh! have I caught you? (Stands
up, shuts the Box, and puts his Foot out.) Hum, hum, hum. (Reads.) My Brother
Sir Roger's Settlement upon Niece Lettice. Ha! Sir, is this it?


Wild. Ay, honest Jonathan, this, or nothing.


Jon. Here, Sir.

To Letitia. And give you Joy, Madam.

Aside. And there is two; for when the Man has the Fortune, the Woman's his of
Course.

To True. Here, Sir, here is your Honoria's as close as --


Wild. Come, no more Similies, but to work; let us see what else.


Jon. Else! What in the the Name of Balzebub would you have else? You Would make the
Devil of a Farmer -- Crop and Gleanings too! Why, in the Name of Avarice, will not
a Thousand Pound (points to Let.) a Year, besides so neat, tight, convenient a
Pleasure-House upon it, serve turn? Enough, Enough --


Wild. In all Conscience, but only Curiosity --


Jon. Nay, I must confess that is a plaguey itching Distemper. But if you want a
Rasp, a Rubber, or a Scratcher, (points to Let.) she will --


Omnes, preter. Wild. Ha, ha, ha.


Wild. To the Trunk, you Dog, and cease barking, or --


Jon. Sir, I Would have you to know I am none of your barking Currs: Indeed, I do
bite sometimes; I have Teeth, Sir, as shall appear when you will give me leave to
employ 'em.


Wild. Sirrah!

Going toward him, Trulove interposes.
True. Nay, prithee, make an end; for I see you will be the Disturber.


Jon. Ay, ay, Sir, you see I love to distribute my Favors.

Goes to the Trunk, and stumbles over it, rubbing his Shins and Nose. Madam
Letitia! cry your Mercy -- Pox on it, I thought it had been her by my Nose and
Shins.


Wild. Hellhound! let me come at him.

Trulove interposes again. Omnes, preter. Wild. Ha, ha, ha.


True. Sirrah, dispatch, or I Will be gone, and leave you to his Mercy.


Jon. squatting down before the Trunk. Nay, then it is time to be serious.

Aside. I must dispatch before Afternoon's Luncheon-time, or he will have the
whip hand of me, and make me languish till Supper.

Jon. pulls out several Papers, slings 'em by slightly, while he sings. And
when I was a little Boy I washed my Mother's Dishes,
I put my Fingers in the Pail, and pulled out little Fishes.
(Pulling and heaving.) Ho, up, Mass. This should be a swinger by the weight
and gills. (Pulls out a Parchment, with Labels.) If this been't a Deed of
weight, the Devil's in it. Oh -- (Reads.) Securities for the Thousand Pound left
by my Brother Sir Roger to -- (Overturns the Trunk.) Here, take 'em among you,
for I Have neither Encouragement nor Patience to stay any longer. Oons, here is
Money enough to redeem the City Charter -- Save ye, Gentlemen; and pray
remember the Civility-Money.

As he is going out, enters Lurcher, who over-runs him almost. S bud, you blind
Mill Horse, cannot you see where you stumble?


Eurcher. Make off, Gentlemen, and Ladies, all of you; here is Sir Fickle coming
this way, and in a damned bad Humor, I can tell you so much.


Jon. Nay, then, all Friends, come all Hands aloft.

They put in all the Papers, except one left on the Stage, Jon. takes the
Trunk. Away, away there, here a comes, and in a plaguey Chafe I Will warrant him,
or else he wears no Socks to Day, I smell that alleady.

Exeunt Omnes.
Enter Sir Fickle Solus. Fickle. Well, now Sir Fickle you're like to be fitted
with a young, brisk, gallant Lady -- Marry send you good Luck, for it is a
shrewd Undertaking for one of your Years and Constitution; and let me tell you
so much, Sir, there are many in better Circumstances than your self that would
be plaguily afraid of sore Eyes for all their Golden Thumb Rings. Well, Look
before you leap, And what is done cannot be recovered, are Proverbial Saws as old
as Aldersgate, therefore, methinks, 'twere worth Time to consider -- Hum! She Is
young, I (Coughing.) o-o-old as her Grannum: She Is brisk; ay, pox! brisk
enough, enough, and too much for me. Then for her Gallantry, the Girl, I
percieve, is pretty well inclined; and, for all her Country Breeding, would
make shift, in a very reasonable time, to reduce the East India Stock into a
Pedlar's Pack. Hum, methinks our two Qualities agree like Dogs-Turd and Honey;
and I should be most plaguily deceived, if, instead of a Lenitive for the
Spleen, I should meet with a Caustic for a sore Throat. Well, I Will to Council;
two Heads are better than one, as Neighbor Wrangle says, and all the City
acknowledge him for the Pro-po-potatripes, I think they call him, of Learning
and Sense. Well, I Will to Graves's, this is the Hour of Audience; if I can but
meet with him in the Humor of talking Sense in English, he will dispatch me in
as few Words as a Lawyer his Client that comes to him in Forma Pauperis.

Exit.
SCENE Changes.
Enter Wrangle, Sobersides, Fickle aloof off. Wrangle. Fool! Blockhead!
Incomprehensible Dolt! Thou Ox in an Ass's Skin!


Fickle. Oh here he is, and Neighbor Sobersides too! piping hot from the
Coffee-House, I Will warrant 'em, by the profoundness of their Talk.


Wrangle. Get you gone to School again, and learn the Meaning of the Word
Ratification before you pretend to dispute the Legality or Essential Formality,
requisite to the Constitution thereof; for I tell you once more, thou
impertinent Headpiece, Ignoratis terminis, Ignoratur and ars!


Fickle, aside. Oh, I understand this a little.

To Wrangle. Ay, ay, Sir, so he is an ignorant termegant Ass, to pretend to
argue with you that can read, write, and Latin -- But I come, Sir, to advise
with, not to dispute, your Wisdom.


Wrangle. Dilate energically, concisely, and uninaegmatically.

To Sobersides. Oph.


Fickle. Sir --

Aside. Pox! now his Learning has got the upper-hand of his Sense, there will
be no understanding of his cramp Language for Men of my Capacity -- Sir, I did
not understand --


Wrangle. Oh ye pellucid Stars! whose Influences are subservient to Sapience,
deconglommerate me from these unzodiacal, uncerebrated, circumambient Gemini.


Fickle. Nay, an he be got up to the Stars already, O Gemini too say I -- Save
you, Sir, and pray give me notice of the next Thunder; I have a Stock of Beer
in my Celler.

As he is going out, Wrangle siezes him.
Wrangle. Arrest! ( Fickle starts.) I will descend, the Gods themselves have
deigned to cope with Mortals.


Fickle. With Grocers, Sir!


Wrangle. With their Inferiors far, with Milkmaids! Europa was one, Jove
courted her in the Shape of a Bull, and had Issue by her, a Proginy of
Cuckolds, autockthonical, aboriginal, demi-deify'd Cuckolds.

O Felices nimium si sua bona norint!


Fickle. aside. A pretty Account, Faith, of the Rise of Cuckoldom, a Bull, and
a Milk-maid! Doubtless hence come the Proverb of sucking a Bull -- But, Sir, be
pleased to hear my Sense of --


Wrangle. Sir, I tell you both Sense or no Sense, Ratification is an Overt
Subsequent Act to a Precedent Covert Transaction.


Fickle. Overt! Covert! Precedent! and Subsequent! What Trade do these Terms of
Art belong to? What a Devil, do you banter? Or are you a conjuring?


Wrangle. I Will be plain: For Example, I owe you a Grudge; that is a Covert, or
Secret Transaction in my Mind.


Fickle. Good.


Wrangle. Then (Kicks and cuffs him.) This is an Open, Public, or Overt Act or
Declaration thereof -- Now I hope you understand this is demonstrative.


Fickle. O most sensibly, Sir.

Aside. Pox on him! I could give him a Suit of Second Mourning too, as Wildman
says, for Example's sake, but that he is such a Royster.


Wrang. to Sobers. And you, I hope, have your Intellectuals meliorated when
this -- (Points to Fickle.)

Fick. making to him. This, what, Sir? This, what? I Would have you to know I Am in
as fair a way both to a Chain and a Clog as --


Wrang. But I lose time amongst a Brace of Owls.


Fickle. Owls! Pox, Owls! Owls in your Throat, Sir; Owls in your Belly, Sir;
Owls in your -- Pantiples, Sir. Pox! if hard Words, dry Blows, and Affronts, be
all the Counsel I must expect, Exit my Riddle-me-ree, Exit. (Turning him out.)


Wrangle. (Fickle at the same time.) Then will I leave you, as I found you,
obfuscated by Poetic Dullness and Palpable Calliginosity.


Fickle. Bur-r-r, Buz-z-z, Gingiber and Lacer Cicer Pepper atque Papaver.
(Turns him out.) Owls! Pox, Owls! I don't know but I may be as good a Scholar
as himself. Pox! I begin to --

Re-enter Wrangle.
Wrangle. And Cimerian Tenebrosity.


Fickle. Hey! here again with his Tenebrosity? Hey, Noun, (Runs to him.)
Pronoun, Preposition, Conjunction, Participle, Interjection; Haec aquila, an
Owl, both he and she. (Like an Owl runs at him.) Or-ro-o-o-o-o-o -- (Looking
after him.) Huzza! Victoria! So, it is but a little Resolution, and these
Roarers are soon tamed. (Spying Sobersides.) O, Sir, cry vour Mercv. This same
passionate Puppy has so what-ye-call't my Intellectuals, I protest, I
overlooked you.


Sobers. gravely. That might be, Sir.


Fickle. mocking. So it might, I vow, Sir. Now shall I be as much plagued with
this Fellow's formal Preciseness, as I was with the t'other's blustering
Bombast -- Deliver me but from this Piece of stiffn'd Tiffany, and if ever I go
to Counsel to a citizen again, may he take my Nose and Ears for his Fee.

To Sobers. But Sir.


Sob. formally. Sir.


Fickle. Why, Sir, what I intended to have discoursed this same tasty, old,
positive Puppy about, was Matrimony; I Am a going to be married to a brisk,
young Country Virgin, her Fortune, it is true, is but small, but my Inclinations
are great; you know me, let me know your Opinion.


Sob. That I believe I shall give you; but first, by way of Advice, reprehend
not that Positiveness in another, whereof you seem to be so well provided; for
you seem positively to affirm that you are going to be married, which, if you
consider the Mutability of sublunary things, I esteem that you might with more
Modesty say, that you conceive, or think, judge, or suppose your self upon the
Matrimonial Point.


Fickle. The Man's in the right on it there; for we are farthest off sometimes,
when we think our selves nearest to the Blank: And I remember, Neighbor Horner
going once to view a She-Tenement he was about purchasing, found a Copyholder
making forcible Entry into the capital Message of the Manor, and so flew off;
and Reason good, was it not, Sir?


Sob. Not unlikely -- Then, Sir, as for her Briskness, it may possibly be
Levity; her Youth artificial, and her Virtue and Virginity as slender as her
Fortune.


Fickle, angrily. How, Sir! No Virtue! No Virginity!


Sob. Possibly none; for I am of the Sect of the Scepticks, I think, I affirm
nothing.


Fickle. But I am not, and do positively say that Man's a Villain that dare
call her Honor in question; therefore, Sir Dubious, pick up your Awls, or, now
my Hand's in, I can promise you no better Entertainment than your
Deconglomerating Predecessor; the Example's fresh, my Passion rises; therefore
once more walk off, or I shall Overtly ratify upon your Morrion.


Sob. Fortune I contemn, Examples I defy, and will maintain my Opinion, spite
of Passion or Ratification.


Fickle. Nay, Pox, if you begin to be positive, walk, walk, my Philosopher.

As he turns him out.
Sob. I Will have Satisfaction for this Affront done to my Person and Opinion;
I Will be revenged, look to it.

Fickle thrusts him out.
Fickle. No, no, you only conceive, think, suppose, or believe so: Ha, ha, what
a pair of Issaker's Asses have I turned out to Grass! That Men should be such
Fools, as to believe that a hard Word, or mysterial Nod, should be the only
Ingredients to the making up of a wise Man! Though, I must confess, this same
Scipstick Philosopher has put twenty Cunnundrums into my Head. Well, Time will
clear all; therefore Patience, say I.


Enter Wildman, pulling in Eugenia. Eug. Nay, prithee, Wildman, whither would
you draw me? Come, you will never forget your old Tricks.


Fickle. Ha, old Tricks! and so familiar -- I Will retire, this Spark may inform
me better than Old Sir Grandsire Grey-beard, with his Scythe and Hourglass.


Wild. No, never sear, I Have had enough of that same hoity toity Business; I
come to read you a far different Lesson, for you have been plaguily out of
late; and for all your Philosopher's Stone you brag of, Lettice has discovered
you to be but of base Allay: I gad, should the Old Man discover the
Counterfeit, you may e'n shift for your self; I have done my part every way, if
you spoil all, your Ruin be upon you; I wash my Hands of it and you: My Mind's
changed with my Fortune, and I Am resolved hereafter to feed upon one Dish; it is
wholsomest, you know.


Fickle, aside. A good Beginning, truly! Where will this end, trow?


Eug. For that matter as you please; I believe you may find Employment enough
at Home. If my Cornuted Cully to be has too much, if his kind Neighbor will
but lend him a hand, they will find me both Reasonable and Civil.


Fickle. A very civil Resolution indeed! Oh, my Head! My Horns are cutting
already.


Wild. That as you can agree, mean while be more circumspect; when you have
spring'd the Woodcock, why then cook him to your Palate; he is ready plumed to
your Hand, so much I can assure you.


Eug. Plumed! What mean you?


Fickle. Ay, that, that, my Heart misgives me most confoundedly.


Wild. No Questions, for Safety sake. Women ought to be trusted with Secrets,
as Mad Folks with Daggers; you may give 'em the Scabbard to please 'em, but be
sure to keep the Weapon close and fast. (Treads upon a Paper.) So, what have we
here? Some Grocer's Bill, I Will warrant ir. (Takes it up, and looks on it.) No,
Faith, it is Vanduncart's Bond.


Fickle. Oh, Oh.


Wild. Left out for have, in the last Surprise; I wish there he no more: For
though I Am pretty sure of my Point, yet things are not yet ripe enough for a
Discovery. Let Us see. (Looking about, spies Sir Fickle, who makes up to him.)


Fickle. Hem, hem; yours, Sir, yours.


Wild. Oh, Sir, you're a diligent Courtier. Indeed, were you not a truebred
Englishman; one would take this for Italian Jealousy, but it is too soon for
that Man, ha?


Fickle. Why, truly, Sir, I am somewhat of a different Opinion, as a Man may
say; I think it is rather of the latest; for --


Wild. Right too; for when things are so far advanced, Jealousie's as
unseasonable as a Song or Dance brought in Head and Shoulders, to lengthen out
or set off a scanty-witted Bear-Play.


Fickle. Gently, gently, Sir; not so neither. My Farce is but a Rehearsing, and
I find it so far below my Expectation, I Am afraid to venture it on the
Theater, for fear of being hissed off the Stage.


Wild. aside. The Devil's in him, sure -- Sir, you're mysterions; pray, be
plain.


Fickle. Why then most plainly thus: My Love, Thanks to my Years, has been so
moderate as to leave me some few of my Senses, with which I have considered,
that at the best it is but Folly, but in old Men mere Dotage. I find all other
Passions increasing, this only dwindl'd to nothing, which makes me judge my
self unfit for a Lady of her Qualities. These, and some other private ones,
have abated the Violence of my Frenzy, and inspired into me the Resolution of
gaining in Statu quo, as a Man may say, till I see better Reasons for a Change
-- Now I hope you're both satisfied.


Eug. weeping. Oh my Heart!


Fickle. aside. Oh my Head a!


Wild. Satisfied! No, but I will expect it
For all th'Affronts you have put upon my Cousin,
Poor though in Fortune, yet in Virtue rich;
For all those Tears, thou stony-hearted Beast!
Your Barbarity now causes her to shed.
Her Presence now protects you from my Rage.
But set a better Price on Innocence,
Or Fell Revenge shall follow you with speed.
Come, Cousin.
Exeunt. Fickle manet.
Fickle. Ay, ay, I Will prevent that; I Will swear the Peace against him: First,
for endeavoring to top his Whore upon me; and then for threatening to Fell me.
If I don't, believe her honest. Many a Man has cut a Caper, and never come down
alive again, for less than this, that is certain. I Will trounce the sly Dog; I Will
bind him to his good Behavior, I will a -- O plague of the Devil! now I talk
of binding, the Bond! the Bond! how come that there? I Am sure it was in the
Trunk I entrusted Jonathan with. I gad, if he gets the rest, I Am like to be
hampered my self. By Cheapside Conduit, I Am running mad; Horn-mad, by Bedlam
Weathercock. But Necessity has no Law. I must secure my Youngster and my self,
and take the best Order for the rest the little Brains I have will permit;

And if I frustrate all their poisonous Arts,
Why then Sir Fickle is a Man of Parts.

The End of the Fourth ACT.

ACT V. Trulove and Wildman meeting.
True. ONce more well met, I Have been getting the Writings. Oh! I see you're
likewise in Possession, you have lost no more time then my self.


Wild. Not a minute. Delays in these Cases are as dangerous as Diligence
necessary. Had I not been assiduous, the Rogue might have relapsed into
Villainy, and been true to his Trust -- But now for my Spouse to be, methinks I
would soon put an end to this same Affair; for I shall never think her secure
till I have her in the Lash of Matrimony; besides, Faith, I long to give the
poor Rogue some hearty Proof of my Affection.


True. Somewhat too I have resolved, which makes me uneasy till it be put in
Execution.


Wild. How, you! -- Why, you have been so long used to dance Attendance, I dare
have sworn you would have served your full time, without repining, to have been
made Free of the Corporation.


True. You're wide, Sir, you're wide.


Wild. Or rather short, I believe; for you Archers of the Honorable
Confraternity of blind Cupid, have such damned long marks, that we poor Bow-men
cannot reach within a Score of your Butts --


Wild. Troth, like enough.

But here comes my Snow-ball rouling to way. Would to Chance she would pick me up
in her Passage, I Would thaw her with a Vengence, or she should freeze me to her.

Enter Letitia.
Let. Your Servant, Gentlemen, how is it with ye since the last Surprise?


Wild. aside. Gentlemen, sure I Am deaf, or she is dim-sighted.

To Let. As with a hungry Guest, when Dinner's on the Table, that curses the
grateless Chaplain for being out of the way, Madam.


Let. O! Sir, it is but a short Collation of cold Meat; and there needs not so
much Ceremony for that.


Wild. aside. I know that, if I had but the Courage to fall on; but there is
such a damned many little Bones in the Pie, I Am afraid of being choked.


Let. over-hearing. Therefore chew well before you swallow for good and all,
Sir; Ha, ha, ha.


Wild. Chew, what, Madam? Oons! I Am none of your Camelions, to feed upon the
Cud of a Wind-cholick Air.


Let. But, by way of Pastime, you might stand a little, and bite on the Bitt --


Wild. Like a Horse, and break my Teeth like an Ass -- Consolation and
Preferment in abundance! Trepan my Pericranium -- Madam, since you have no
other Employment for me, than as a Post to fix your Jests on, I think I may,
without Incivility, make bold to retire.


Let. Bless me, Sir, why so hasty? Why, this is Volunteer-like; serve till
you're on the Point of Promotion, and then quit your Post.


Wild. That, Madam, you cannot blame me for, since the Fatigues I Have under gone
have disabled me for further Service.


Let. Nay, then indeed I must look out for a fresh Man; yet, through
Compassion, I Will not quite cast you off, but keep you by me. Let Us see, (opens
his Mouth;) ay, in quality of a Nut cracker: Your Teeth are sound enough yet, I
see, if your Breath be but sweet.


Wild. Oons, a Nut-cracker! what do you take me for a Monkey, Madam?


Let. What, still complain! Why, I Have known many a Woman has put her Husband to
a far worse Employment.


Wild. Well, Madam, since you're in the vein, pray please your Fancy entirely;
I have done.


Let. And I, for this Bout.


Wild. aside. I shall prevent the next.


Let. to True. How, Sir, Pensive! when your Happiness is so nigh. Sure, your
overfasting has spoiled your Stomach; if so, I Will give you a Cordial shall
retrieve it -- Here, (Enter Singer) sing the Song my Sister made the other Day.


SONG.
(1.)
HOpe, thou Friend to the Distressed,
Kind Reviver of the Mind;
None that Hopes, can be oppressed:
Though Fortune frowns, you are ever kind.
(2.)
Hope, thou sovereign Ease to Grief,
Blessed Encreaser of our Joy,
Thou should have Proof, thou best Relief,
Against what would my Love destroy.
(3.)
Welcome Hope, Adieu Despair,
The tottering Wheel at last will turn;
Though I languish for my Dear,
I Will not consume, but ever burn.
Twice. Though I languish, etc.

Let. Well, Sir; this, I hope, has some Effect on you.


True. Medicines, Madam, are but at best cast away, where the Malady of the
Patient is misapprehended.


Let. Nay, Sir, I must confess your late Symptoms have been so strange, that I
cannot but guess your Distemper to be of the most unusual.


True. True, Madam, in the Age we live, but I have reaped this Benefit by my
Misfortune, to find the strongest Passion too weak to withstand a generous
Resolution.


Let. Your Words, Sir, are as mysterious as ever; but here comes your
Cathollicon: If that does not work effectually, your Condition's deplorable
indeed.

Enter Honoria, who runs and embraces Trulove.
Hon. O, my dear Trulove! thus let me embrace thee,
Thus let me clasp thee in my longing Arms,
(Kissing.) And thus cement our Hands, Lips, Hearts, together.
Pardon, if Love overcome my Modesty;
For now I count you as my better Part.

True. Look down, ye Powers, and view this matchless Love.
Steal my faint Heart, direct my trembling Hand;
Assure my fault'ring Tongue, grant Strength of Mind
To act that which you only could inspire.
Gives the Papers to Hon. With these take back your Vows; and with them mine,
May you be happier in a nobler He,
As far 'bove me, as is your Love and Honor:
Nay, by the Pains I feel, if it might be,
I Would wish him so divine as to deserve you.
Then when I see you circl'd in his Arms,
Ravished with Joys, dissolved in Exstasie,
I Will send up Vows unenvious Vows to Heaven,
To make them infinite, your Loves eternal.

Hon. What can this mean! O my Prophetic Fears?


True. I mean you have trusted such a Stock of Love
With one so far unable to requite it,
That it were Baseness, beyond all Excuse,
Still to run on when so much is unpay'd:
I mean to teach the admiring Powers above,
My Gratitude's as great, more generous than your Love.
Exit Trulove.
Wild. Hum -- Why, I must confess this is somewhat surprising. However, I shall
rather imitate than discommend it -- Here, Madam, (Gives the Papers to Let.)
receive your own, and with them all I can call mine. My Heart's disengaged, my
Affection entirely yours to bragg of; more, would be but to relapse into what
you have so severely, but justly, reproved.


Let. Nay, now you're serious somewhat may be done: But I feared Capitulations
before Surrender; which, if they had happened -- But no more, hope well; you
know I hear you're not indifferent to me, it is with Joy I own it.


Wild. This is too much -- But see the fair Honoria
Bedewed, and silent, as a Summer's Night.

Let. Come, cheer up, Sister: What, a-la-mort Woman, whining for a lost Lover,
when you have wherewithal to buy a Score of Husbands! But three Days Patience,
and on my Life you will have more Suitors than you will dispatch in three Months.


Hon. No; may I live by all Mankind disdained,
And die a wretched Object of Despair,
If ever within this Heart I entertain
A second Thought for any but my True Love.
What though to you perchance he seem unkind,
Yet I, that view the Treasures of his Mind
Adore him still, as from the Powers above,
Take this Correction as a Sign of Love.
Nay, by my fleeting Lovesick Soul I swear,
Should he be cold, nay farther yet severe,
The little space then doomed me for to live,
To the pleasing Thoughts of our past Loves I Would give:
Then, when you would think that I forsaken lie,
You Would see my Trulove beg me not to die.

Let. Cold Comfort, by my departing Maidenhead, Sister, if this be all; but I
hope there is warmer in store.

To Wild. You know, Sir, your Obligations to my Sister; I need not tell you the
Occasions present, to require them, and oblige me.


Wild. Madam, I do as well as I am acquainted with his Temper. It Is honorable
to Obstinacy, but not perverse to Reason. So good a Cause can never want a
happy Issue -- I go with Confidence of good Success to serve you.

Exit Wild.
Hon. Unhappy Maid! what Crimes have I committed,
Doubly to suffer by Excess of Love?
Whom shall I accuse? The Gods? Oh no,
They Are Just, and Trulove is in Honor next 'em;
No, it is my Self, my Frowardness, my Pride,
Nay worse,
My black Ingratitude to so much Love,
Has forced this unexampl'd Judgment on me.
Yet still, methinks, I did but that which he
So lately and so strictly did pursue,
As if h' had taken Copy from my Actions;
And he is too wise, nay, too divinely good,
To act or follow ought that is amiss.
Heavens! in what a Lab'rinth am I got,
Lend me the Clew, or kindly end my Pain.
Enter Wild. with True.
Let. I hope they have heard you, look back.


True. kneeling. Thus stubborn Criminals that Grace refuse,
Trembling when late the proffered Mercy crave:
Sure 'twas some Evil Genius led me out
From Paradise, thus to run to my Destruction.
Yet you can pardon.

Hon. raising him. Unkind! thus to upbraid me with that Act,
That first was mine, by you but faintly traced;
Pardons for Crimes! You may command my Love;
If in Exchange you grant me yours, I Am blessed.

True. Then, ye propitious Powers, smile kindly on us,
And yet prepare your direst, worst, Revenge,
If ought, save you, I like Honoria prize,
If next to you I do not her adore;
If her, whilst Life, nay, after Death, I love not
With the same Passion that now fills my Breast.
And dart it down; nay worse, be she unkind.

Wild. So much for that. Now, Madam, it is my turn;
If I perform it not with so much Zeal,
It Is want of Words, not Passion, pleads Excuse.
Besides: Faith, to tell you neatly my Mind, these far-fatch'd Expressions, and
new-fangl'd ways of Courtship, become a Stage far better than a Lady's
Bedchamber.


Let. Well, that I expect not, but this you must,
If I catch you in the old Haunt, or any where else.
But --

Wild. Ay, ay, if I elope, bar me of my Thirds. I Am content, as to that Point,
to reinverse the Law, and become Baron-Covert.


Let. Of your Thirds! Don't so much as expect a bare Allimony.


Wild. And, Faith, I Will say so much for my self; if we are once joined, I shall
never hope for a separate Maintenance -- Come, agreed, agreed.


Let. As for the rest, I bring you a plentiful Fortune; and, as Jonathan says,
a tite, neat, and convenient Tenement. Use me like a Gectleman, I entirely
trust in you.


Wild. Come, give me your Hand --


Let. giving it. And Heart are yours, from this Breath to my last.


True. So, now the Storm's blown over, Sky's serene.


Fickle. within. Come, no more Words, but produce.


Wild. Not yet, Faith, I hear a grumbling thereaway; and I have a plaguey
Opinion the Clap will fall somewhere hereabouts -- Oh, here it comes with a
Vengeance. Retire Trulove.

He goes aside, and Enter Fickle and Jonathan.
Fickle. Tell me not of safe Custody, or honest Hands; mine are the safest and
honestest too for my purpose. Therefore once more produce, or -- (spies them.)
-- Oh Niece, have you considered? And you, Mr. Wildman? I hope your Passion's
over; How is it, ha?


Wild. Well, as my Wishes, but you seem somewhat troubled.


Fickle. Ay, ay, a little, not much neither. But this same Rogue, Dog, of a
Jonathan would move a Saint -- Your Mortgage, Sir, I Will resign you up, as soon
as that -- will give me leave. Swine's Snout, be gone, and fetch it; no more
grunting.

As Jonathan is going out, Trulove whispers him; and Exit Jon.
Wild. Sir, I shall receive it with Thanks. One more Request I must repeat; I Am
sure you have too much Good Nature to deny me. (Enter Eug.) Oh! here it is, you
know my Meaning, Sir.


Fickle. Oh, the Devil! she here! -- Why, Sir, and you know mine; you will find
me no Changeling, though you designed me for an aboriginal Cuckold, as Neighbor
Wrangle calls it.


Wild. Nor me so tame a Coward to put up such Affronts both to my Cousin and my
self! I Will wash 'em off in thy degenerate Blood. ( Wild. draws, the Women all
run out, shrieking Murder! except Eugenia, who interposes.


Eug. Oh! spare my Love, or let us die together!


Fickle. Die together! No, nor lie together: If ye do, it may be in Bridewell,
or Little-ease --


Wild. Come, Sir, resolve to --


Fick. Why so quick, Sir? If I must be executed, methinks you might grant me a
Reprieve. Pray, Sir, consider; were it your own Case, you would not be so hasty.


Wild. puts up. Nay, if Time be all you ask, take it, provided it be Reasonable.


Fick. O, as for that matter, Sir, I only desire just as much as to -- (Running
off, Wild. catches him) Murder! Murder! Jacobites! Papists! (shrilly) a Rape! a
Rape! a Rape!


Wild. draws, and presents. I Will cut your bellowing Bull's Throat.


eug. laying hold on Wild. O! hold your Hand; for if he bleeds, I die.


Fick. aside. You Lie, you jilting Whore! you Lie.


True. enters, and interposes. Hold, Sir! What ever it be, it cannot be brave,
thus to assault a naked Man: If his Cause be Just, he shall not want one to defend
it.


Fickle. Ay, ay, (to him) Mr. Trulove, he is a Rogue, if not a Coward; here I Have
given him my Niece, and his mortgaged Estate back, and he in Recompense would
stick me like a Pig.


Wild. Then hear me too, since you will needs be Judge:
This Flattering villain! For he is no better,
With Gifts, Oaths, Courtships, has allured my Cousin;
And now he finds she loves, he slights her.

True. Nay, there I leave your Cause, it is so unjust,
My Life I never will venture to assert it;
Yet, that you may not die defenseless,
I Will lend you this.
True. proffers his Sword.
Fick. Lend me your Sword! I Would as lieve you would lend me a Halter. Sir, I Would have
you to know I Am a good Christian, and will keep the King's Peace. I fight! I Will
be hanged, nay, marry as soon.


Wild. Nay, then, thou Cheat! thou ignominious Knave!
Know I have found you out, and am possessed
Of all Sir Roger's Papers, and my Mortgage.

Fick. Ruined! undone! like a Bundle of Licorish.


True. Not all, Sir, by your Leave: I have my share, and perusing 'em over, I
find an Account to be made, some Arrears of Inrerest, and so forth, you know;
and look to it, for I shall be severe.


Fickle. Accounts to you! Why, what are you?


True. Honoria's Husband; and consequently, as I take it, your Nephew.


Fick. Over-reached again! (Aside.) I knew, though I winked at it, he was playing
thereabouts; but now the sharking Dog has bit to the purpose, Hook and Bait, IN
Faith, he has cleared me of my Tackling.


True. Not yet; but I think I shall, before I Have done, come in there.

Enter Lurcher and Jonathan, disguised, like Bailiffs. Now do your Offices.


Jon. Sir, I arrest you in an Action of Account, at the Suit of Mr. Trulove.


Fick. Oh!


Lurch. And I, Sir, in the same, at the Suit of Mr. Wildman.


Wild. aside. Mine! What means this?


Fick. Rum dun done! Broke like a Barrel of Figs! For Pity sake, hear me but a
Word.


Jon. Be short, Sir, I lose time, and I Have half a score of your Neighbors to
arrest upon Change. Come, quick, Sir.


Fick. Why then, Gentlemen, I acknowledge my self a Villain to my Nieces, and
not much better to Madam Eugenia: You have made your self, in part,
Satisfaction; but a little Patience, I Will endeavor to complete it. Here,
Honey, Honey; Why, Lettice? Lettice?

To Lurch. Pray, give 'em a Call. (Exit Lurcher.) Mean while I take this Lady
to my Wife, if she can forget my Ingratitude, it will be some Comfort in my
^isfortunes to say, I was once Just in my Life.


Eug. And to me to share in 'em as I have done in your Prosperity. This, Sir, I
hope, will convince you that I love.

Aside. Better half a Loaf, than no Bread.


Fickle. I believe it, my Cinnamon-stick, though my Seeing and Hearing would be
so impertinent as to convince me to the contrary.


Wild. Oh, Sir, in matters of Faith and Love, we ought never to trust too much
to the Senses. Curiosity and Jealousy are good for nothing but to promote
Herisie and Cuckoldom.


Fickle. Then, Sir, let the Simplicity of my Belief show the vehemence of my
Affection. Come, my All-spice, come.

Takes Eugen. aside. If she ben't as chaste as her Neighbors, she must feed
upon Cantharides, and spend her Pinmoney in Chocolate.

Aside. Enter Lurcher with Hon. and Letitia.
Wild. And my Liberality be the mark of my Affection: In Consideration of your
Complaisance, and of Eugenia's Fortune, I freely forgive what Accounts may be
between us; you shall have a Release upon Demand, so my Letitia consent.


Let. With Pleasure, Sir; and not only that, but I Will join with my Sister to
mollify Trulove.


True. Your Entreaties, Ladies, would be needless; his Consent is all I shall
desire in Requital.


Fickle. Sir, you have it as freely as I can give it.


Jon. aside. And there is Four: What bloody Doings will there be to Night!


Fickle. So this is pretty well, if it were not for those Rogues the Bailiffs,
that will blaze all about.


Lurch. Who I, Sir?


Fickle. Yes, you, Sir.


Lurch. Not I, Sir.


Jon. Nor I, Sir.

Lurch. unmasking. You lie, Sir.


Jon. the same. Nor I, Sir; by the Sky, Sir; let me die, Sir, if I lie, Sir:
Why, Sir, I am no Mag-pye, Sir.

Omnes praeter True. Jonathan and Lurcher!


True. The same; I fearing Mr. Wildman would have been in earnest, took this
Course, both to surprise you agreeably, and prevent further mischief.


Wild. Nay, I must confess your Fate would have been somewhat severe, had you
not been reasonable -- But I Am glad all is ended so fairly. As for them, a small
Spell will stop their Mouths, I don't doubt: Or at worst, it is no stranger a
thing for a Citizen to be a Cheat than a Cuckold.


Fick. aside. Gibing!


Jon. Ay, ay, Sir, Forgiveness and the Twenty Pound a Year, is all I ask; you
shall find me hereafter so faithful to deserve it -- But as for this slip, I
protest, Sir, what with Over care and Over-fasting, Idea's of Stocks,
Pillories, Whipping-posts, and Qualms of Conscience, I was so tormented in the
Spirit, that it run me almost mad. Blanch me like an Almond, Sir, if I remember
any thing of the matter, but the Twenty Pound a Year aforesaid.


Wild. And the Civility-Money, Jonathan.


Jon. Sir, I have been told since, that I raved mightily of the Barbados
Fleet, and Bird in Hand.

Omnes praeter Fick. Ha, ha, ha.


Fickle. Well, Friends of all sides, I have yet Ten Thousand Pound left me, out
of which I Will allow you as I had determined, and put thee in present
Possession. Hang Dirt, I was almost choked with it, and now I Am eased,
methinks I Am as brisk as --


Jon. aside. Bottle-All, all Froth and Settlings.


Wild. We shall see that presently; I Will put your Agility to the Test for once.
Strike up there.


Jon. Nay, pray Gentlemen, not so hasty, I want a Companion: I Will out and lure
her, she will come to Fist in a trice, and there will be no sport till I come, as
the Man said when he was going to be hanged.


True. That Is but reasonable, the have been so instrumental in the last Comedy,
'twere Ingratitude to leave thee out, now its come to a Conclusion.


Jon. to Lurch. And prithee do you in and hasten Supper: I never could work
well on an empty Stomach.

Exeunt Jon. Lurcher, severally.
True. Mean time, if you please, I Will entertain you with a Song I lately
composed, which is both instructive, and suitable to this present occasion. Here

Enter two Musicians here, sing this.


Fickle. By all means come; one Hawk, two Hums, and start fair.

Whilst the Song is a Singing, Enter Jon and Jenny.
A SONG. To be Sung betwixt a Man and a Woman.
Man. WHY so cruel to your Lover?
Oh, the hidden Cause declare!

Wom. 'Twou'd be more cruel to discover
What must bring you to Despair
Men, like Salvage Beast's, Love ranging,
Here to day, and there at night;
All our Fears are in your changing
That your darling chief Delight

Ambo. All our Fears, etc.

Man. But so fresh a blooming Pasture.
Me for ever will enclose;
You need fear no such Disaster
When I change, I Am sure to lose.
He for ever will be kind,
Who in Love his profit finds.

Ambo. He for ever, etc.

Wom. But when Envious Age at lost
Has made all my Beauties bare;
Then, like Land, that lies at wast,
You Will not judge me worth your Care,
No man thinks that worth his Pains,
Where Is all Labor and no Gains.

Ambo. No man thinks, etc.

Man. To convince you I Will be kind,
I love where Time has no Control,
It Is the Beauty of your Mind
That has Charmed my doting Soul:
As frail Beauty does decline,
Worth and Virtue briter shine.

Ambo. As frail Beauty, etc.

Fickle. Come, once more all Friends; and to show you how light what is past
lies on my Heart, we'll have a Dance, and then --


Jon. aside. Et caetera.

To Fick. Sbud, Sir, what do you mean! Let Us Sup orofs the Water, and
Consummate, or we shall set your Prentices so agog, they will go out in a Party,
and plunder all they meet, or run away from their. Aprons, and forfeit their
Indentures.


A Dance. True. Briskly performed! Honest Sir Fickle, Igad, you are twenty Years
younger than thou was it an Hour ago. Ah! this same Honesty is Sovereign Geer!
It Is the Best Hearts-Ease in Nature.


Fickle. True.


True. Then let those that gluttle with their Store,
Strained from the Tears of Orphan's Blood of the Poor,
Suck on, and Leeches like, when over crammed --

Fickle. Crack in this World, and in the next be damned.


True. And those that would be just, may Learn by thee,
That Honesty's the surest Policy

FINIS.

