Usury Stated: Being A REPLY TO Mr. JELINGER 's Usurer Cast. Whereto are
adjoined, some Animadversions On Mr. Bolton 's and Mr. Capel 's DISCOURSES,
Concerning the same Subject.

Written By T. P.

Cicero de Offic. l. 2. p. 89. In illo autem altero genere largiendi, quod a
liberalitate proficiscitur, non uno modo in disparibus causis affecti esse
debemus: alia causa est ejus qui calamitate premitur; and ejus, qui mellores
quaerit, nullis suis rebus adversis.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
1679.

THE PREFACE.
THere have been in these latter days many nice and curious inquiries brought
upon the Stage, which tend to strife (beside some other that directly lead to
ungodliness) and therefore may be referred to that vain Jangling censured by
the Apostle; as no way conducing to the enlightening of the Understanding, the
reforming the Life, or directing the Practice.

To these appertains not a modest inquiry concerning the making gain of Loan,
Whether, and how far it may be Lawful? Practice relating thereto being so
common, and the most of Professors one way or other Interested therein; a due
and right information seems very requisite, and the just stating of the
Question of no small importance; both extremes being of ill consequence: the
danger on one hand is, lest by setting the bounds too wide, the Floodgates to
many unjust and unchristian practices be drawn up, which of their own
accordbreak in too fast. On the other hand, by a too rigid and severe
prohibition of Usury in all its kinds and degrees, be they never so moderate,
there is danger, lest the Interest of the Nation be prejudiced, the Consciences
of many be wounded, and the Credit of more blasted. The vindication of either
of these were enough to justify me in this design and attempt (whatsoever the
success be) much more where there is a concurrence of all three.

The Advantage and Interest of this Nation is not a little concerned in the
matter of Lending for gain: This way many Thousands of Pounds come to be
employed in Trading and Merchandising, which would otherwise be diverted to
other uses, or hoarded up to no use, whereupon would necessarily follow the
decay of that which is the support of this Island. Lending being on all hands
acknowledged necessary to the upholding of the Common wealth, there is little
reason to imagine this Lending would be so constant and common, without some
encouragement to the Lender.

The Conscience of Christians, as well as the welfare of the Nation, is
concerned in the Question of Usury: the practice whereof having gotten an ill
name, and much decried, and constantly battered by objections taken from
Scripture and Fathers, by Men of Note, Eminency, and Learning; and there having
been so little written by way of vindication in our English Tongue; I think
there is ground enough to fear, that there are diverse found, no Strangers to
the practice, who do it with a doubting Conscience, as not fully satisfied in
the Lawfulness of the thing practiced. There are some also that lay scruples in
the way of the Giver, as well as Taker of Use, condemning both the one and the
other.

And seeing where Conscience is engaged, Credit and Reputation cannot be
unconcerned; there are many sober and Conscientious Christians, Lending for
gain; that deserve to have their Innocence cleared up, and Names vindicated
from those foul aspersions that are cast upon them by such as are
contrary-minded, and by none more than by the late Author of the Usurer Cast:
The which bears in hard upon Men's Credit and Consciences, charging every one
with damnation that takes any thing by way of gain or recompense for Money
Lent. A heavy charge indeed, if true; but whether so or no, is the design of
this following Discourse to inquire.

The handling whereof has been designedly managed with that plainness and
familiarity of Style and Language that was requisite to suit with the
Capacities of those that mostly need satisfaction in this Controversy.

I have all along called in the help of several of our modern Learned Writers,
both Divines and others: And probably I may incur censure for Larding my
Discourse with so frequent Quotations, but I thought I could do no less, to
counterballance the opposite plea that is usually taken from numbers and
Learning: thereby to make it appear, that the opinion I plead for, is neither
so strange nor uncouth, as some would obtrude upon the Worlds belief: And that
there is no such cause of being ashamed of owning that Judgment or practice,
the which has been pleaded for by Men of such Renown and Eminency in the
Church of God, both for Piety and Learning. It was a Sage Observation of the
Roman Orator, That it often comes to pass, that what was generally counted
disgraceful, may intime be found not to be so.

I have now and then made use of the testimonies of Cicero and Seneca, two of
the Learned of the Roman Moralists, to rebate the plea that is made from the
Light of Nature: but I have sought for no help from Monkish stories, such as
that of Friar Bertoldus, or Don Antonio. Neither shall I Court the Patronage of
Greatness, a Privilege that lies as open to Error as Truth: but let Truth
stand upon its own Basis, and be its own supporer: it being every way
sufficient thereunto, provided it obtain liberty for self-defence, and a fair
hearing.

If after all my care to prevent it, any shall think or say, that I have taken
on me the defense of griping Usury, unchristian dealings, or uncharitable
practices, the Book it self will prove a sufficient witness against all such
Calumniations: The main design whereof, is not to decrease Charity in lenders;
but to give check to the increase of uncharitableness in Censurers.

I have also made some inspection into Mr. Bolton's Discourse of Usury, whither
the Author I Reply upon, is wont to go to sharpen his Weapons. I have besides
examined some passages of Mr. Capel, in his Book Of Tentations, relating to the
same Subject: And all these finished for above a Year since, as here
represented; saving some few alterations (mostly omissions) thought good to be
made in the last Transcribing.

Concerning the whole, I can say; that I have done it in the integrity of my
heart; with a true desire to further the light, comfort and satisfaction of
Christians; the which, if attained by any, in some measure, Let him give God
the Glory, whose Right alone it is.

March 11. 1677.
A REPLY TO Mr. JELINGER'S Usurer Cast.
THE Philosopher says, The way to teach well, is to distinguish well:
whosoever then distinguishes ill, or not at all, teaches ill. This I observe
is one grand defect in The Usurer Cast; as proving an inlet to all those
uncharitable Censures, running (like blood in the body) through all the parts
thereof: In that, with the grossest oppression and most griping exaction, he
blends and huddles up the receiving or expectation of the least gain on the
account of Money lent; bringing the persons that do the one and the other, under
the same censure and condemnation; and within his circle taking in the greatest
part of the Nation; few escaping (as he says) his Anatomy. Epist. Dedic.


With a more tender hand, and candid spirit did Pious, Of Sacraments p. 213.
Learned Vines write, whose words are these:

To render a sin manifest and notorious, I suppose, first its requisite, that
it be manifestly a sin, and this is Quaestio juris [an enquiry of what is
right] for a thing may be commonly cried down under the name of an enormous
crime, and yet indeed be very doubtful: I instance in Usury; where the question
is, what it is? then, whether this in question be Usury? then, whether all
Usury be sinful? for there are great Names of Learning and Godliness, who upon
considerable reasons do deny it, etc.

Such expressions as by the Fathers were used as Rhetorical flourishes, or by
them and others designed against oppressive, exacting Usurers, has Mr. J.
taken the pains to collect, and crown the head of others with, that little
deserve them. With him every one that takes gain upon Loan, is a Dog, like the
Devil, an Extortioner, p. 21, etc.
an unjust person, a biter, a thief, covetous, a destroyer, a merciless person,
Murderer, Baptized Jew, made equal with Adulterers, of the generation of
Vipers, is not in case to give an Alms, etc. with other Titles of the like
nature; the which, whether of right they do belong to the persons by him
intended, will in some sort appear by the sequel of this discourse.

For the right stating whereof, and for the timely preventing of prejudices-and
mistakes, lest what is here written should be by any surmised to be designed
for the justifying or palliating extravagant actings, I think it necessary to
premise;

There are several practices of men, commonly passing under the name of Usury,
the which are not only condemned in the holy Scriptures, but have in most Ages
and Countries been deservedly made infamous, both by Laws and Punishments; as
also by Godly Writers in these respective Ages and Places. To which rank belong
a cruel griping of the Poor and Indigent, a rigorous and merciless exacting of
Debts, a taking all possible advantages for to inveigle other Men's Estates, and
exceeding those Bounds that are prescribed by Law, and common Equity; a
devising of sundry cunning sleights in Contracts, that are contrary to plain
and honest dealing, with many other unwarrantable pretenses and cloakes, too
commonly made use of by men for the increasing their own gain by others loss;
all which bear the name of Usury, and under that Notion; taken notice of by the
Expositor of the Catechism used in the Low Countries, By Jer. Basting p. 226.
and in the Dominions of the County Palatine.

In condemning things of this or the like Nature, I dare say, there is none of
his Brethren would scruple to join with him: but whiles he overdoes it, and
under the same condemnation brings all others, that receive any thing back
above the Loan, or that have but an intention or expectation of gain on that
account; it must not be thought strange, if all men are not of his mind herein.

Let it be considered, whether it be not a likely way to strengthen the hands
and harden the hearts of griping Usurers, to join with them a great part of
this and other Nations; and among these too, many sober, serious, pious,
learned persons: I say again, such confused writing of things and persons, as
we find in this Treatise, is a more likely way to harden Oppressors and greedy
Cormorants in their unjust and rapacious practices, than to convince them, or
abate the number of them.

Mr. J. makes choice for the groundwork of his discourse, p. 7.
of Psalm. 15.5. He that puts not out his Money to Usury: from whence he
observes, No Usurer living and dying in the Sin of Usury can be saved. To
counterballance his argumentation from this Text, I shall cite Mr. Dixon's
Commentary on the same. A Sixth fruit (says he) and evidence of faith, is
dispensing with Commodity, when God by a special reason calls for so doing,
albeit otherwise a man might take reasonably more gain; many of such sort of
cases do occur in Merchandise, and in exacting of Rents and Debts, as
circumstances may teach, when and where God calls for most moderation: Such
was the judicial dispensing with Commodity, put upon the Jews for loosing the
Yoke of a Bought Servant, being a Jew, at at the end of six years, and quitting
of Houses and Lands bought from a Jew, at the Year of Jubilee, how dear soever
it cost the Buyer; and not taking Usury of a Jew, wherein the Jew was
privileged above men of another Country: for in all these three particulars,
it was lawful for the Jew to do otherwise with other Countrymen, viz. In
buying a Servant from a Stranger of another Country, and transmitting it to his
own Posterity; and taking Usury of a Stranger, according to the Rate which was
acknowledged on all hands to stand with Equity; which Commodity if an Israelite
did not dispense with toward an Israelite, it made him short of this
commendation of the true Israelite, who puts not his Money to Usury.

Thus far Mr Dixon, who understands the Law concerning Usury, with several
others, to be peculiar to the Jewish Nation and Commonwealth.

To Mr. J. personating David, p. 8.
I shall say, unless he use David's sling with David's spirit, it were better
he let it alone; lest letting flee, as he does, amongst such a heap and
Conglomeration, (as he calls them) such a mixed multitude, I mean, as take
increase, instead of Goliath, he hit some that truly fear God, wounding his
little ones, and making sad those hearts he ought not; and so be brought to
Confession and Recantation with Job's three friends, that spoke not a right of
God, and to the grief of his Servant Job.

The several Names by him mentioned as given to Usury, Chap. 3.
I shall not here concern my self in; there having been, and still is such
rigid exaction and bitter oppression in the world, whereto all his Titles and
Etymologies attending properly belong.

But Interest he will not have called; p. 10.
Why not? Seeing Interest is an Overplus above the Principal, the which he
confesses the Ancient Doctors of the Church call Usury. Let us see his reason
to the contrary. Interest with him is lawful, because properly it is damage
Money to be paid for the keeping back of a Man's Money. Mark the Nicety; It is
unlawful in his Account for a man to receive from another any thing for the
possession and use of his Money; but, says he, for the same Money unduely kept
back it is lawful to receive damage Money. That is, in other terms, if you lend
your Money for a half year only, it is unlawful to take Use for the Money so
lent, whatsoever loss is by you sustained; but if the person to whom the loan
is made, keep it beyond the time Covenanted, then you may take (if not Use,
yet) damage Money for the detaining thereof. If Interest may be paid, why is it
not as lawful for me to give for the Improvement I have made of another Money,
as for the loss he has sustained by the loan?

The weakness of such reasoning with the nicety of such distinguishing, I find
sufficiently laid open by the famous Grotius; Annot. in Luc. 6.35.
Video a plerisque, etc. I perceive (says he) that most of those, who condemn
Vsurary contracts, do not disallow of such Usury as does arise from delay, and
thereupon grant, that unless the loan be returned at the time appointed, I may
contract for Usury; but what other is this, save to affix the Law to words, and
not to things? For, if that opinion be received, it shall be lawful thus to
covenant; unless you repay within three days, you shall give so much for delay;
if so be the mention of those three days were omitted, the Contract would be
unlawful; such are the Subterfuges of words, whereby the subtilty of the
Schools defends it self, which when applied to things, then its vanity appears.

In Grotius his Account then, this legitimating, paying for delay, by such as
plead against all use, is but a hard shift they are driven to, a playing with
words or a mere evasion.

I would be satisfied, if Mr. J. please in these following Inquiries; 1.
Whether it be lawful for one that lends, to Expect something for his loan, upon
a supposition of this delay? 2. Whether it was lawful for a Jew lending to his
poor Brother, to receive this Damage-Money? 3. Whether, if Damage make the gain
thereupon taken lawful, one that puts out his Money for a year to his damage,
may not as justly receive satisfaction for that years damage sustained, as for
what accrues in the years following, when the time is expired and payment
delayed? with what balances do they weigh, that hold it lawful to receive
Interest-money either upon the Account of gainceasing, or loss sustained; and
yet condemn the receiving any profit for a certain sum lent for several years;
seeing it is so hard to make an universal Distinction between the one and the
other?

I attend his motion onward: Damage-money (says Mr. J.) is to be paid for the
keeping back of a man's money; when it was due Whereas, say I, it was by the
Lenders voluntary consent, that the Money was at any time undue; being he might
have kept it at first in his own hand if he pleased; and by the like voluntary
consent it might have continued undue for a longer season.

I come to the Definitions of Usury produced by him; some whereof place it, p.
11.
in Exacting gain, others in the Compact or Covenant, he also in the
Expectation; Though Mr. J. frequently boasts of the numbers standing on his
side, yet he produces very few, that go hand in hand with him, in stating it
so high, viz. in the expectation or hope of any gain.

His own Definition is this, Usury is a certain and absolute gain, compacted
for, or expected, and taken for the loan of things, which may be consumed in
the use thereof.

I know not whether this Definition be to be taken in a compounded or divided
sense; I mean, whether this gain, to make it complete Usury, must be both
certain and absolute, compacted for, expected and taken, etc. or else any one
of these differences added unto gain, as the Genus, may be enough to make it
Usury, provided it be, for the loan of things, which may be consumed in the Use
thereof. If it must be taken in a divided sense (as the disjunctive particle
would enforce) then some terms are redundant and superfluous; but if it be
taken in a Conjunctive Sense, then whatsoever gain so taken or expected, is not
absolute and certain; but uncertain and conditional is not Usury; so also, when
the same is expected, but not compacted for. Besides, This limitation of
absolute and certain (whatsoever the rest be) is not scriptural; but added
('it is like) on purpose to salve Adventuring from being Usury; For all the other
parts of the Definition agree thereto. So does his second Definition, which is,
Whatsoever is more then the principal, compacted for, or expected, and taken
for the loan of things, which may be consumed in the use thereof. The like does
that taken from Ambrose, viz. Whatsoever is more than the Principal is Usury;
as also that other Definition, which he says is generally received, viz. All
that a man takes over and above the Money lent; Such, I say, is gain upon
adventure.

The which being denied by Mr. J, let us examine his Reasons; The gain of
adventuring (says he) depends upon the Ships safe coming and going.

And so does the gain of loan, and principal too, depend on many men's single
honesty, ability and integrity; or if it did not, there is in the former
proportionable gain that answers the hazard, in that the adventurer takes three
times the gain (or more) that the other takes, who lends upon Use.

He adds, Because the Principal is lost, if the Ship be lost. I Reply, so the
lenders principal is lost, if the Debtor break; and so too the Adventurers
gains be great, if Ship or Bills return.

He goes on with Explaining the Term of the Definition; It is gain compacted
for; -- thus much thou must pay me for Use.

Reply, He is not ignorant, that some lend without such a Compact, the which
yet escape not his censure. It shall suffice here to say, that it is the law
that bounds and limits the sum to be taken; and ordinarily to take, what the
Law (grounded on Equity) allows, I see not the Injustice; for if it be the Law,
that distinguishes propriety, and in some cases, with us of this land, states
the price betwixt buyer and seller, why it may not do so here in our Case, I
understand not. Or Expected or Intended. Mr. J.


This is pleaded from our Saviors Injunction, Luke 6.35. And lend hoping or
looking for nothing again. This being the place of Scripture he builds so much
confidence on, and so often quotes to prove their state damnable, that expect
any the least gain from Loan: In the sense hereof, if he be mistaken, (as I
doubt not to make it appear that he is) then down totters his Definition, with
all the harsh censures built thereon.

For his two Divines here cited by him to strengthen his Interpretation of this
Text, I shall give him by and by several others, that put other senses upon the
same, and these more probable.

In the mean time I shall demand, whether this intention, or expectation of
gain were Usury under the Law, a ore these words were spoken by Christ; or was
it unlawful under the Law to lend hoping for any thing again, from any hand
whatsoever? if yea, where was the same prohibited? produce the Text: But the
contrary can be shown, in that lending to Strangers for gain was allowed; and
therefore gain expected, did not universally lay open the the expectant to
censure. But if this be only a Definition of Usury under the Gospel, then he
necessarily falls in with those which hold, that Christ did not only interpret,
but added to, and perfected the Law by new Counsels.

He asserts, And taken, as part of the Definition, yea, enough to make it
Usury, if Jerome may be judge, whom he brings in saying: Whatsoever it be that a
man takes above that which he gave or lent, is called Usury or an overplus. If
this be true, it makes against Interest and a free gift too, (which are yet by
Mr. J. allowed) for both these are taken. We understand farther from him, that
this taking must be neither directly nor indirectly, neither by himself or
another, as if it were some bribe or Simoniacal Contract.

He superadds, for Loan; for that is the Ingredient that poyfons all. I may
then receive a free gift from a rich man, be it Money, House or Land: but if I
expect, or receive any of these from him upon the account of Loan, this is the
sin of Usury.

But why may not any thing be taken for Loan? because Loan ought to be
gratuitous: Mr. J. p. 1.
Of a truth this is a free borrowing, or rather begging the question, taking
that for granted, and using it as an argument which is the very thing to be
proved. How proves he that taking gain for money lent is unlawful? his reason
is, because all Loan ought to be free. How does he prove that all lending even
to men able to make recompense ought to be free? that of Luke 6.35. will prove
no more but that we ought to lend freely to some persons there intended, viz.
the Poor; so say most Divines that I have met with on this Subject; at present
I shall name but one, viz. Mr. Tho. Tailor: On Tit. 2.12. p. 471.
Thirdly, (says he) be ready to distribute and lend freely to the Poor,
looking for nothing again; for there is injustice as well in withholding that
which Gods Word has made another man's Due, as in purloining his Right from
him: Now the Word commanding to give to the Poor according to every ones
ability, and to lend to the Poor Members of Christ, if need require, freely; to
be hardhearted and strait handed in these cases, is to be unjust, etc.

But if all lending must be free, then let this contract pass under another
name, and that sore is healed. Hear Ames;

That all Usury is generally and absolutely unlawful, De Cons. l. 5. c. 44.
can solidly be proved by no natural reason: Not of those who say that lending
of its own nature ought to be free; for neither can this be proved; that all
lending, how soever circumstantiated, ought to be free; and if this were
granted, nothing else would thence follow; but that lending, if it be not
freely done, passes into some other Contract, either named or unnamed; either
simple or compound.

The Opposer for proof of his last assertion, brings in God saying, ( Deuteronomy.
23.19.) Thou shall not lend upon Usury, but that is elsewhere limited, to thy
poor Brother.

The close of his Definition is, for Loan of things which may be consumed in
the use thereof, from Deuteronomy. 23.19.

Reply: If money be consumed in the use thereof; yet Houses, and Fields, and
Land, and Wares remain which were purchased by the consumption of this money
lent. Of no more strength is that argument which is taken from the selling of
Wine and the use thereof: which arguing, I find before hand confuted by Learned
Ames, Ut supra. 8.
saying, It cannot be proved by those who allege, that in such things as are
consumed in using, the dominion is not distinguished from the use, and
therefore nothing can be taken for the use, beyond the worth of the thing, or
the thing it self: for it is answered, the gain is not received merely for the
use of the thing lent, as to its substance; but as to its worth or fruit, which
remains after the substance is consumed, and subsists often in things which are
not consumed in using; as also for the office and act of lending, from whence
the borrower makes his advantage.

Rivet answers the same Objection; Rivet. Explic. Dec. p. 287.
Quod autem instant, etc. whereas they urge, That the use of money is it is
consumption, but in such things, wherein the Use is the same with the
Consumption, in these the Use is not separated from the Propriety; neither may
distinct things be received for both; as Wine and the Use of Wine cannot be
sold apart, because this is the very consumption of the Wine: That is easily
answered, by distinguishing the ambiguity of the Word Use, which signifies
either the Consumption of the Money, or the profit gotten from the Money
consumed; although therefore the Propriety of the Money, and the right of
consuming it, or the Use cannot be separated; yet the Consumption it self is
one thing, and the profit or gain thence arising is another; the consumption is
but once computed, not twice; and the gain also is once computed; an equal sum
is repaid for the principal Money consumed, and somewhat beside is not unjustly
demanded for the undue Office of lending, and for the time wherein the Money
was detained, and for the Creditors missing the means of increasing his own
Estate.

So then the light Mr. J. promises from the Argument of Wine, and it is Use, as
distinct, will prove but darkness; And the Cavil (if there be any) between
things set and let, and such as are consumed in the Use thereof, remains on
his side; for as much as things, that may be set and let are purchased by the
Consumption of the Money.

I have examined his Definition of Usury, p. 14.
his description thereof next falls in my way, which helps us to see what
manner of thing Usury is. In the handling whereof Mr. J. is either himself
misled, or would mislead others by his wonted confusion of things that ought to
be distinguished; for whatever in former Ages was spoken against the grossest
Cheats, Oppressions, Frauds and Exactions, all engrost under the Name of Usury,
or by any Usurers were ever practiced; these he takes in, and distributes, with
the blame and punishment attending equally to the most oppressive Usurer, with
the most moderate taker of use or gain for Loan: with what Conscience let him
see to it.

Mr. J. Usury is a most abominable thing.

Reply: No doubt it is, and has been, as some have handled it; but where is the
abomination or incongruity to Reason or Nature, if one man's money improved by
another pains or skill, prove gainful to them both? In Grotius I meet with a
saying of Andronicus Rhodius; De Jure, etc. p. 238.
The gain that is received by the consent of the Contractors is neither unjust,
nor to be reproved, seeing the Law grants power thereof.

And Grotius himself says; De Jure, etc. l. 2. c. 10.. 2.
Concerning things not extant, it has pleased Mankind, that if thou art made
the richer by my Goods which I have not in possession, thou art so far obliged,
as thou art made richer; for how much the more thou have gained by my Goods, so
much thou have, and I have so much the less, etc.

What is here and elsewhere brought by Mr. J. against Usury, both from the
Fathers and Heathens, respects the practice of it as it was in their times;
which I believe was bad enough, being attended with Rapine, rigid Exactions,
overreaching, etc. Thus says Grotius, thus Rivet: Idem p. 235. Rivet de
Decalogo.


What is cited out of Aristotle, Cicero, Plutarch, etc. against Usury, respects
not so much what is intrinsecal, as what is accidental, and commonly attends
it. The like may be said of the expressions of the Fathers, which are very
bitter against Usury: for they had respect to that Usury which prevailed too
much in all Ages against Equity, Honesty, Charity and Faithfulness; as
Chrysostom upon Matthew said, there was nothing more cruel; nothing more
shameful than the Usury of his time: but it follows not that they understood it
of all Usury, etc.

As for the sayings of the Heathens that are so rigid: I find in Seneca a
general Rule for the right understanding of such like passages.

Some things (says he) are commanded beyond measure, De benef. l. 8. c. 22.
that they may return to their proper and right measure; as when we say a good
turn ought not to be remembered by the doer, we mean this, it ought not to be
published or boasted of. c. 23.
Again, As often as there is little confidence in those things thou requirest,
more must be enjoined than is sufficient; that what is sufficient may be
performed: In this every Hyperbole exceeds, that we may come to the truth by a
lie.

Mr. J. (2.) It is a most dangerous thing.

Reply: Not so, where no Rule of Charity, Equity, Honesty or Fidelity is
broken; as there is not in the thing debated, whiles kept within due bounds and
limits. Says famous Rivet; In Decal. p. 288.
As far as any Contract of Loan does contradict Charity, and hurts our
Brother, we judge it to be forbidden by the Law: but not so, where Equity is
observed, and our Brother not wronged by the Loan; there it is neither
repugnant to Charity, nor to the Law, whose end is Charity.

What is by Mr. J. produced out of Neh. 5. may be hereafter considered: only
this I shall say; Whereas they had promised to leave Usury and restore; I wish
you (said he) to promise so too: A good Rule and necessary to be practiced,
where it is rightly applied: But I perceive we must be content with this
expedient, till he be at leisure to communicate that better one in the point of
Restitution, by him intended to make the work more facil and easy, Epist. Ded
and to keep from dispondency.

Mr. J. (3.) It is a most infamous thing, so as that whereas others in writings
underwrite themselves, either Husbandmen, etc. from their Callings, the Usurer
is ashamed to call himself an Usurer.

Reply: This (and it may be the rest of his description) concerns only such as
make a Trade of Usury, and have no other Calling or Employment to lay out their
time and thoughts on: Such were they whom Austin called scabbed through
Idleness, and Chrysostom likens to Asses. Let Rivet answer him: -- But such as
lend to the wealthier; p. 283.
if they lend only out of an idle or lazy humor, because they will not employ
themselves in a Calling, nor exercise any honest Function, they are
unexcusable, because they propose to themselves an evil end, and contrary to
the Divine Will: but such as out of an inability for trading, or necessiry; as
Widows, Orphans, Aged, Students, and the like, who are otherwise employed, and
taken up with other Functions; if they enter such Compacts, they offend not:
for in that they themselves cannot Trade, whatsoever substance they are owners
of, would be soon consumed, if they live upon the Stock, and take thence for
the supply of all their needs; and not put it out with such as on just accounts
might gain thereby, and call them in to be partakers of the gain.

Mr. J. (4.) A most monstrously increasing thing it is.

Reply: Some of these Monsters he mentions, which we are nothing concerned in;
such as the taking weekly 20 pounds for an hundred, or more: yet he that takes
the least mite for a thousand pounds, incurs as severe a censure from him, as
adjudged to the same condemnation.

Mr. J. (5.) A most cruel thing it is; for it is always biting, -- both day and
night, Winter and Summer, and makes no difference between Lords days and Week
days.

Reply: Such kind of reasoning, minds me of a certain Commander, mentioned by
Cicero, who having made a truce for certain days, was wont to ravage by night,
De Off. l. 1. p. 15.
pretending, that Nights were not included in the Truce. Is it not pity our
Author had been by, to have prompted the Parliament when they were making the
Act concerning Usury, that borrowers might have been discharged from paying
Use, at least, for the Nights and Sabbath days throughout the year?

But does not the Adventurers gain go on at the same rate? and when the Farmer
makes up his Rent for a year, do not nights and Lords days come into account,
and alike fill up the time with the rest? but this reasoning (as the foregoing)
is not his own; he freely borrows, and never tells the World to whom he is
beholding.

The next Chapter begins with an Inquiry, Chap. 4.
How Usury differs from other contracts and dealings; as Inter-Vsury, Interest,
Shiploan, etc. which indeed are but Usury under other names, or Notions
invented to palliate men's Consciences, that they have no hand in Usury, when
they really practice it: not that I assert either of them unlawful; but that
Usury regulated (as its requisite the other should be too) has the same plea
from reason that either of them has. Seneca.
Ita sublato alte supercilio, in eadem quae caeteri, descenditis, mutatis rerum
nominibus: Thus some men can look alost, and yet stoop to the same practices
they condemn in others, only changing the names thereof. Review the three
Definitions of Usury, mentioned by him: Whatsoever (says Ambrose) is more than
the principal, is Usury: says the Council of Agatha, where more is required
than was given: And all that a man takes over and above the money lent: which he
makes general. Take either of these three Definitions without supplement and
postils, and examine Inter-usury, Interest and Ship-loan by them, and they will
appear to be Usury, each of these being somewhat above the Principal, etc.
Concerning those Exactors mentioned Neh. 5. I have a desire to know, seeing
they might not take Usury of their brethren; Whether they might not have taken
Inter-usury? for it is like they came under some incommodity through the
borrowers default: or whether they might safely have taken Interest for the
payment of their money due for a day delayed, or neglected, as Mr. J. speaks?
I shall trace him in each of these.

Mr. J. Inter-usury is money received only for an incommodity, etc.

Reply: As if many that lend Money did not feel the same incommodity in the
absence or want thereof for months or years; or what other incommodity can be
meant, besides what is occasioned by the want or absence of his Money, except
what may be spent in Law for the recovery thereof, I know not.

Mr. J. Interest is taken for the payment of Money due for a day delayed, or
neglected.

Reply: That it was for any time undue, was by a free Contract on the lenders
part, who might have stated the day for return of payment, sooner or later, as
he thought behoveful for his own convenience: it seems then, for money delayed
beyond the day of payment, I make Interest; but for Money lent this side that
day, I may not take any thing with a safe Conscience: this is such discourse as
will puzzle a man to find out the reason of.

I shall borrow help from Learned Rivet to answer this. -- Add, p. 282.
that they who otherwise are wont to reject all other Contracts of whatsoever
sort, wherein for money lent, any one bargains for a sum above the Principal;
yet with common consent, they do propose diverse Causes for which they determine
such a sum may be taken. 1. If the Debtor be in delay of payment, for then, if
he pay not at the set time, they think that somewhat beyond the Principal, as
they call it, may be exacted by way of punishment; because this delay may prove
hurtful to the Creditor. Moreover, when any one suffers damage on the account
of his money lent, this damage, which arises from the laying out of his money,
he may by right demand some recompense, which they call gain from
damage-arising: as when one with the same money which he delivered to another,
at the same time, could and would have gained somewhat himself, they judge it
lawful to covenant with another, and to require somewhat beyond the Principal,
because it is unlawful for one man to gain with another money to his loss,
arising from gain-ceasing: yea though it be not certain, yet when loss is
probably feared, may the Creditor lawfully covenant, before it happens, says
Tolet. l. 5. de instruc. sac. c. 34.

Mr. J. Ship loan is differenced from Usury, in that, this is a certain gain
without adventuring; but Ship-loan is upon adventuring upon a Ship, Principal
and all; so as that if the Ship be lost, all is lost.

Reply: Whereas he is wont to send us to Scripture for a proof of the
lawfulness of lending to the rich, let him expressly prove from the same the
lawfulness of this Shiploan: and as I have said before, let him consider how
the greatness of the gain, compacted for and expected, may serve to
counterpoize the hazard that is run.

Hear Grotius: De Jure, etc. p. 236.
That one of the company be partaker of the gain, but secured from loss, is
indeed beside the nature of fellowship; yet it may be so agreed on without
injury: for the Contract will be mixed; of fellowship, and of the Contract of
Insuring; wherein an equality will so be preserved, if he receive by so much
the more gain, then otherwise he should receive; if he had not taken the loss
upon himself.

Rivet writes thus: p. 282.
Neither does this Contract of Usury differ much from the Contract of
Fellowship, as they call it; when one man can trade, but wants money; another
has money, but cannot trade: if these enter into fellowship, that the one shall
bring his money, the other bestow his labor: which contract is also counted
lawful on both sides; for what is wanting of money is supplied by industry, and
on the account of gain resulting from the use of the money, there is somewhat
given instead of a recompense to him that laid out the same.

Mr. J. Usury is different from liberal increase, in that this comes unlooked
for, and not the other.

1. Reply: Whoever has gained by money lent him, is by nature it self bound to
be thankful; yea, (upon due supposals) to make some requital; unless he would
be found to have less of humanity, than the sinners of whom our Savior speaks
in Luke 6.32, etc. who love those that love them, and do good to those that do
good unto them. It will be easily granted, that he which partakes of the
benefit (if able) is bound to some requital; but for the benefactor so much as
to expect, or look for any returns, is, say they, an horrid sin. Strange
Doctrine!

2. That one benefit ought to be answered with another, yea greater, may be
learned from Cicero, De Off. l. 1. p. 21.
in these words: If so be Hesiod do enjoin to return the things thou have
received to use, with a greater measure, if thou can; what ought we then to
do being provoked by a greater benefit? should we not imitate fruitful fields
which bring forth more than they received?

3. Says the Law, Thou shall not lend upon use to thy brother that is poor by
thee: I would hereupon be informed, if Mr. J. please, whether it were lawful
for a rich Jew then to take somewhat by way of gratuity from such as the Law
here forbids lending upon use too?

4. I appeal to godly Perkins, Vol. 1. p. 63.
who pleading the lawfulness of taking somewhat above the Principal, gives
these reasons to prove it.

1. That which the Debtor may give, having himself an honest gain besides, and
no man any ways endamaged, that the Creditor may safely receive. 2. It is
convenient, that he which has money lent him, and gains by it, should show
all possible gratitude to him by whoses goods he is enriched. 3. It is often
for the benefit of the Creditor to have the goods in his own hand which he lent.

5. Rivet speaking of this gratuity, proves that men may by Contract be bound
to return it: That (says he) which by the law of gratitude is due from others,
is not unjujily received: but they that receive great profit by another undue
loan, owe somewhat by way of gratitude; therefore it is justly received. -- If
any shall except; the wealthy Debtors are indeed obliged to gratitude, but that
ought to be free, and they are not to be bound thereunto by a Writing given
under their hands: I deny, that in this case such a gratitude is so free, as we
call those things free, the which it is in our power either to do, or not to
do; seeing then it is a natural obligation, which may not be omitted,
covenanting for the same will not contradict natural right: like as every
Debtor, although he be bound by the law of Nature to render the Principal, when
he is able; yet it follows not, that he ought not to be obliged so to do by
Bill: the like we say of that debt of gratitude, which is contracted after that
manner we have spoken; for since from an inbred corruption, a great ingratitude
possesses men's minds, so that unless they be tied up by special bond, they
seldom think of making returns, much less of an equal recompense: the which is
complained of by the Son of Syrach, Chap. 29. v. 4, etc. It is fit that the
Debtor be not only bound to an insuring the Principal; but also to a recompense
of the kindness; the which if moderately stated by Public Authority, he seems
not to offend against the Law of God, that enters into a Contract with the
Debtor for it, that is not indigent.

6. Seeing then the wealthy borrower, by the law of Nature and common Equity,
is obliged to make some recompense for the gain he has received by another
money: to say, that he ought indeed to do it; but that the Creditor may not so
much as hope or expect the same, is in effect to say, the Creditor may not hope
or expect that the Debtor will prove an honest man, or do that which by Nature
and Rules of Gratitude he is bound unto.

7. I think it not out of my way to transcribe some passages of Seneca, of the
like import: De ben. l. 5. c. 22.


There are many who neither know how to deny what they have received, nor to
requite it; who neither are so good as the thankful, nor so bad as the
unthankful; men slow and backward, persons sluggish, not wicked: those I will
not accuse, but put in mind, and when otherwise employed, I will bring them
back to their duty; from whom I shall presently receive this answer: Excuse me,
in truth I little thought you expected this of me, otherwise I had done it of
mine own accord; I pray think me not unthankful, I remember well what kindness
you did me. Why should I doubt, to make these better to themselves and to me?
whomsoever I can, I hinder from sinning; especially a friend, both that he may
not sin, and chiefly that he may not sin against me: I do him a second good
turn, if I suffer him not to be unthankful: neither will I harshly upbraid him
with what I have done; but monish him as gently as I can: that I may set him in
way of returning thanks, I will rub up his memory, and ask a benefit, he shall
understand me to to fetch it back; sometime I will use harder words, if I have
any hopes he maybe amended.

Mr. J. Usury is differenced from setting and letting. 1. That such things are
(properly) not lent, as Vsury-money is, but hired, or put out to be occupied,
as ground, etc.

Reply: I shall answer him in the words of Rivet: Hither belongs the argument
taken from the likeness of other Contracts; For 1. By the Contract of Farming;
if any buys a Field, and letts it out to another to be tilled on that
condition, that for the taking up the yearly profits, he pay the owner a
certain sum of money, or some bushels of Corn; there seems to be no great
difference, whether one buy the Field himself, and let it out to others, or
lend the money to another, that he may buy or redeem the field, and for the
fruits received pay yearly a moderate sum.

I add Windeline: If thou buyest a Farm, Ethic. Vol 1. p. 801.
(says he) from whence thou may yearly receive the profit of an hundred
Crowns, and for the same sum thou set it out to another; none can accuse
this Contract as unjust. If to buy the same Farm thou lendest money to another,
and receivest the same sum from another: is it not all one whether he pay thee
yearly an hundred Crowns for the Farm, or for the money lent.

Mr. J. 2. That things let and set are not consumed in the use thereof, as
money is and other things lent.

Reply: This has before received an answer: If money be consumed in the use
thereof; yet such things as may be set and let are procured by the
consumption thereof: and is not the Adventurers money also spent in the use
thereof? and yet upon the Ships return he receives the Principal with plentiful
increase. The last named Author answers also this objection: Ut supra p. 802.
Obj. The proper and primary use of money is its consumption, therefore it is
unlawful to receive any reward for money lent, which is Usury: Thomas urges
this as the primarie argument. -- I answer, 1. The Antecedent is not simply
and exclusivelie true, and the proof is inconsequent. The primarie use of money
is not so much its consumption, as the procuring of something else by its
consumption: for by exchange something passes from another to us, and back
again something passes from us to another, whence we lose or part with the
right we had to our own, and obtain the right to some other thing. 2. The
consequence is false, that is not sold which is not; but profit is received by
that thing which was procured by our money; which often consists in such
Commodities, which are not consumed by the Use: Neither is it simply unjust,
that two recompenses be required for two things: one for the Principal, which
is restored; the other for the profit which the borrower has gained by our
money; for it is meet that some part thereof redound to us. Neither is the same
twice sold: for money is lent that it may be repaid, and somewhat ought
moreover to be restored for the gain: for seeing our money proves gainful to
another, why not also to our selves? especially if more gain accrue to that
other, than to our selves.

Stipulation is the last Contract that Mr. J. differenceth Usury from: p. 17.
but wherein the difference lies, I am yet to seek, notwithstanding what he
says. If stipulation be of larger extent than Usury (as he asserts) then why
should it not include Usury within its compass, as the genus includes the
species? Is Stipulation made sometimes before a Judge? so is the usurary
Contract made under covert of, or in the prefence of the Law. In Stipulation do
both parties equally oblige and bind themselves to the doing of something? so
do both partys concerned in Usury: so that we are still at a loss where the
difference lies.

Mr. J. 5. How old is Usury? 6. What generation and kindred has it? for its
Father, it has the Devil, whose work it is; being Murder.

Reply: Whether he that takes any thing beyond the Principal from persons
sufficient, be a Murderer, will admit of his new coined use of Addubitation.

Mr. J. The Devil was a Metaphorical Usurer from the beginning, to Adam and
Eve, as two of the Ancient Doctors of the Church do make him.

Reply: Strange arguing! does he not know and confess so much too, that
Metaphorical Divinity is not argumentative? Must all taking increase upon Loan
be murder, because the Devil at first by drawing our first Parents into that
one transgression, thereby made way for the ruin of them and Posterity, by
letting in also an Inundation of Sin? And may not our Savior himself be styled
a Metaphorical Usurer too, from a stronger proof than what he brings, I mean
from Christ's own mouth in the Parable mentioned, Mat. 25, 27.

As for what follows concerning Mother, Sisters and Daughters; I think it not
worth spending time and paper on; as carrying no weight in them, save what is
fetched from the froath of uncharitableness; if intended to fit all those who
take any gain whatsoever upon loan: otherwise it will not reach his design, nor
prejudice what I am concerned to plead for. Only a word to what is said of
Greedy's telling her Sister Usury still, we must not let our Money lie idle.

Reply: I wonder how he finds greediness in this inquiry it self; wherein there
may be so much charitableness to our selves and others; If he that has nothing
but his hands to live on, Ephesians. 4.28.
be by the Apostle enjoined to labor, working with his hands the things which
is good, that he may have [not only enough for his own comfortable subsistence,
but also] to give to him that needs. Should he whom God has blessed with
somewhat of this Worlds Goods, hoard the same up, or let the same lie by him
idle; and not rather make careful improvement thereof, for the preservation of
himself and his; and that he may have to give to those that need? for if the
Stock be exhausted, it is easy to think what will become of the Streams that
are to be sent abroad for the watering of others. And I shall add further, that
I dare avouch, such as having Wealth in their Coffers, and there let it lie
idle, having fair and honest opportunities to bring the same forth, are none of
the best Members in the Commonwealth. Such Riches thus Coffer'd up bringing no
more advantage to the Public Good, than if it were back in the Mines: So
impertinent is the tattle passing between those Sisters; of little more weight
is what follows:

Mr. J. In Lev. 25.37. and Deuteronomy. 23.19. over Brother and Money there is an
accent put, that the Hebricians say, shows that the word must be sung with a
low voice, because Usury afflicts and brings low.

Reply: To one contending about a word, it was replied, That Caesar's Fortunes
did not depend upon it: Let this accent be what it will, I hope that the souls
welfare and eternal Salvation does not depend thereon; such Rabbinical
Criticisms being too slight to bear a weight of such consequence.

Mr. J. His seventh Inquiry is; Chap. 5.
What reach Usury has? It reaches (says he) very nigh all the World over:
For, 1. The Jews who are scattered -- are great Usurers. -- particularly, 1. It
reaches to some great Scholars, as Seneca: And to Learned Men in the very
Church; even in Chrysostom 's time. 2. Some Princes and great Lords in Germany
do espouse it: some whereof were well served in the German- Wars, when they
lost their Vsury-Money, etc.

Reply: I know not their practice, and therefore shall not plead for them: only
where is the wonder, or what remarkable Providence is it; if they smarted by
those Wars, under which so many thousands of honest and good men, himself in
that number, with the whole Country, and Neighbor Nation too groaned?

Mr. J. It reaches also many great Professors of Godliness; whom he sadly
deplores, as plunged, with their Posterity, into the same Gulf of this damnable
Sin of Usury.

Reply: I could wish that the excess of his Pity, were not from the defect of
his Charity.

Mr. J. Q. 8. What reasons has this Doctrine? How we come to try his strength;
all that is past having been but light skirmishings: of a truth there is need
of strong reasons to bear the weight of such assertions as are by him laid
down, Viz. That all taking above the Principal, is Usury, and all Usury is
damnable: his principle reasons are two: the first condemns Usury: the second,
Usurers for their usury: how distinct these are, I shall not stay to inquire.

Mr. J. 1. Reason, Because this Usury treated of, is condemned in both
Testaments. 1. In the Old, Exodus 22.25, Lev. 25.36, 37. Deuteronomy. 23.19.

Reply: 1. To these I answer in the general: It will be hard for him to prove
his Definition of Usury condemned by him, from these or any other Texts in the
Old Testament.

2. I say, That these Texts forbid lending to the Poor upon Use, either
expressly or implicitly; and therefore hitherto we see no reason to extend them
further. If this be not enough to satisfy, then I add:

3. The Law was Political, the National Interest of the Jews being peculiarly
intended by it. These things are here asserted; but shall be vindicated, when
he calls us to it again, by answering the Objections in his way.

Mr. J. -- 2. It is forbidden in the New Testament, Luke 6.35. Lend, hoping for
nothing again.

Reply: (1.) If this Text be understood of free-giving, it quite spoils his
Market, and overthrows his Definition. So I find Learned Divines understanding
these words; without any wresting of them: To this sense our Translation seems
to have respect; Lend, hoping for nothing again; i. e. neither principal nor
overplus: for though men should fail; prove unthankful; make no returns: yet
their reward should be with God, in Psalm. 37.26. He is merciful and lends;
the which I think is the same with what we read, v. 21. The Righteous shows
mercy and gives.

If thou would imitate the Gods, said Epicurus, do good turns, even to the
unthankful; Sen. de benef. l. 4. c. 25.
for the Sun rises on the wicked, and the Seas stand open to Pirates. Give me
a man (says Seneca) upright, plain, mindful, Idem c. 11.
thankful, abstaining from what is another, not greedy, not tenacious of his
own, willing: when I have made choice of such, although he have received
nothing from fortune, whereby he might be enabled to requite the kindness; yet
the matter shall come to pass according to desire. If gain, or a sordid
reckoning do make me liberal: If I profit none, unless he again profit me; I
will not do a good turn to one travailing into far Countries; I will not give
to one that is like to be long absent; I will not give to one so sick, that
there is no hope of his recovery; I will not give when dying, for I should have
no time for receiving again: But that thou may know that doing good is a
thing to be desired for it self; we help Strangers lately come into our
harbor, and presently departing: an unknown shipwrackt-man, we furnish with a
Ship wherein he may be carried home; he departs, scarce knowing the Author of
his safety, and is never like more to return into our company; he assigns the
Gods as Debtors to us, and prays that they would make requital on his behalf.

The Learned Casuist; Jer. Tailor, Rule of holy lib. p. 309.
has these words, (with an eye, as may be thought, to this place of our
Savior.) Give, looking for nothing again, that is, without consideration of
future advantages; give to Children, to old men, to the unthankful and the
dying; and to those you shall never see again: for else your Alms or Courtesy
is not Charity; but Traffic and Merchandise; and be sure that you omit not to
relieve the needs of your enemy, and the injurious; for so possibly, you may
win him to your self; but do you intend the winning him to God.

Diodate interprets the place thus: In loc.
[Hoping for] Viz. with an intent to lose whatsoever ye lend, if your
neighbors want do require it, and that you cannot get it again, without
violating the Laws of Charity, and giving scandal and offense.

So the Dutch, so the English Annotators: This (say they) is to be understood
with respect to men's abilities, to give to the Poor, as also that, v. 30. So
that if our Neighbors necessities require, and we be able, we must lend
without hope of being repayed by them, etc.

I add Rivet: p. 276.
Such as draw these words to the forbidding of Usury, do not enough attend to
the scope of our Lord; for it is not immediately designed of not hoping for
use; but of not hoping for the Principal Sum, when our Neighbor comes to
borrow, and being in extreme necessity stands in need of lending too. Our Lord
therefore enjoyas, that we do not only grant to One that we know to be able and
willing to repay; but also to him whom we know not to be able, although he were
willing; or of whom we have just cause to doubt that he would not be able. Dub.
Evan. in loc.
Spanhemius gives a reason why this is expressed by lending, rather than by
giving, though the Principal be parted with: It being called Lending, with
respect to the retribution or reward that God shall make unto them thus
communicating their Goods; for we learn from Prove. 19.17. He that gives to the
Poor, lends to the Lord. What does Mr. J. say to break the force of this
interpretation?

Mr. J. It cannot be understood of giving to the poor, because that is there
spoken of distinctly from that of lending, by Christ, who would not use a
Tautology.

Reply: Giving, was commanded by our Savior, v. 30. the same is again enjoined
(though in other words) v. 35. Not so, says our Author, for this were a
Tautology: But that herein he is mistaken, you may find by looking forth to v.
38. where the same duty is pressed again: and though repeated; yet, by his
leave, it is no tautology, or vain repetition, it being common in Scripture to
hold forth the same thing in various expressions, and press the same Duty in
the same or like Notions.

If this be denied, let him answer Mr. Perkins, Christ the true gain. p. 22.
whose words are these: (On Phil. 3.7, 8.) This Paul sets down by a gradation
thus, I count them loss, I make them my losses, I count them as Dung: This
gradation is nothing else but a repetition of one and the same thing enlarged
and amplified in Speech: Now repetitions in Scripture are not idle and vain, as
they are often times in the Writings of men; but they commonly signify two
things: the necessity and the certainty of the thing repeated.

Thus he, and if this be truth, then what is contrary to it deserves another
name.

You have seen the whole that Mr. J. has said to weaken this solid
Interpretation, or strengthen his own.

2. There is a second Interpretation of this Text, the which also befriends not
his design. To open the way to this Interpretation, read, v. 34. If ye lend to
them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to
sinners to receive as much again: this is to be understood, not of receiving
back any thing by way of Usury; but of receiving the likekindness, (...),
aequalia: as suppose they lent a sum of Money to supply the occasions of a
friend, from whom another time they expect to borrow the like sum to supply
their own occasions.

This, though lawful in it self, yet Christ thinks it not enough for his
Disciples to do, all persons considered. They are not only to lend to them that
can answer this kindness, by lending to them again; but also to the Poor; yea,
to Enemies, if straightned, from whom there was little grounds to expect an
equal favor back. I say again, what the Sinners are here said to do, was
lawful, the proof whereof you shall have by and by: In the mean time consider
what Grotius writes. In loc.


If I lend to one an hundred pounds, and agree that another time he lend me the
like sum, (the which is right exchange) how can this Covenant be proved
unjust, more than if I spare my Neighbor an Ox to plow his ground, upon this
condition, that he some time after do the like for me?

I do not suppose (says our Author) that the question touching Usury, properly
belongs hither, which yet by most of the Ancients is wont to be handled on this
Text.

Zanchy puts the like interpretation upon the Text in these words: In Ephesians.
4.28.
He spoke therefore of lending to those from whom thou can not look for the
like favor or good turn, such as are the poor, and unthankful, and also
enemies; but this consequence will never hold good: Love those that love not
you; therefore do ye not love those love you: Do good and lend to those from
whom you cannot hope for the like; therefore do not lend to those from whom you
may hope for the like. -- I illustrate this by a like Text, Luke 14.12. When
thou make a Supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, etc.

The Ethiopick Version favors this, sense, thus; And if ye shall lend to those
from whom ye hope somewhat will be retributed, what is your reward. Sinners
lend to Sinners that they may requite the like to them. And now love you your
Enemies, and do them good and lend: not hoping for somewhat to be requited,
and your reward, etc.

3. There is another Interpretation taken up by some, who render the Greek word
by us translated, Hoping for again, by a far different sense, they rendering the
same, Frustrating, or, causing to despair, This sense is favored by the
Syriack, Persick and Arabic versions, and by some Divines that follow them.

Versio Syriaca. But love your Enemies, and do good to them, and lend, neither
frustrate ye the expectation of any. The Translator ( says Grotius) thought
the sense to be, Lend to all that ask, frustrating none of that hope which he
has conceived of your beneficence.

Arabica: Lend, and frustrate not the hope of any.

Persica: It behooves you that ye love your Enemies, and be bountiful to them,
and lend to them, and cause not any to despair, for great shall be your reward.
The sense whereof is ( says De Dieu commenting hereon) If any one have need of
loan, be not so rigid toward him, as to cut of all hope of a benefit to be
conferred, but rather show your selves forward in lending.

Some ( says Diodate) render it, despairing; others translate it, not any way
loosing all manner of hope, viz. of a just retribution from God, if not from
man. Thus Dr Hammond: I translate it, And nothing distrusting, In poli Synops.
or, despairing: the context favors, which runs thus, the Heathen give and
lend, knowing that they themselves may be reduced to poverty, and so they may
receive upon loan from others: but a Christian ought to perform these things
without any such design, not distrusting but expecting God the rewarder:
whereto the following words belong.

Passing by other Interpretations, you see how many the text is favorably
capable of: and those more probable (some if not all) than that Mr J. brings
from the Vulgar reading.

4. But let it be supposed, that his Interpretation be the truest, viz. Lend,
hoping for nothing again, by way of use, this may be, and yet not all taking of
gain for loan be here condemned, to this purpose I shall produce what Mayer
writes thereon. Now (says Mayer) we cannot be thus kind unless we lend our
money, or any thing else to our Neighbor freely, if we can spare it for a
time, he having need thereof: but this free lending is not without looking to
have the thing lent referred again; but although he to whom we lend be poor and
cannot, or a churl and will not, in the like requite us in our need. A man is
not hereby bound to lend freely any great sum to the rich for six or twelve
months, as the manner is most Commonly of lending or borrowing, but only for
some short time, that so his necessity may be supplied, and the lender may have
his money again in due time for his maintenance. If otherwise one man puts his
money into the hands of another for his trading and commerce from year to year,
it is not against this precept to require recompense therefore; because there
is a gain coming in hereby, with all which it is no equity that the borrower
should go away with and the lender not have a proportion according to the money
lent.

This duty then must necessarily be restrained to the persons that are fit
objects for our charitable or free lending; for all persons may be branched
into three sorts. 1. The extremely poor and necessitous. 2. Others not so poor,
but yet of mean condition, and somewhat straightened. 3. The rich or wealthier
sort. As to the first rank, Give to every man that asks of thee, Ver. 30.
Mr. J. Surely will not understand this without limitation: it must be
restrained to such as are fit objects of our Alms; otherwise there would be no
room for lending; v. 36. Lend, hoping, etc. this, let it be granted, concerns
the second sort, to whom we are to lend gratis, expecting nothing back besides
the Principal; yet this hinders not, but that from others, beyond these in
condition, we may receive somewhat back by way of reward for the Loan: for if,
Give to every one, necessarily has its restrictions; why should not, Lend,
hoping for nothing again, have its restrictions too?

Says Rivet: Of the three sorts of men which ask of us; as it is not unjust if
the first, who are poor, ask of us, without hope of restoring: so again, it
would be unjust, if they of the second sort, who may be sometime able to repay,
should ask of us without a purpose and promise of repaying; for we are not
bound to give an Alms to such, but to the former only. In like manner it
follows, that it is inconsistent with Charity, if the third sort of Petitioners
demand of us a loan altogether free, which is due only to the second sort of
poor.

If M. J. will not receive the truth from Andrew Rivet, it may be he will
receive it from the Reverend Bishop Hall, Who, pract. cas.
to the Question? Whether it be lawful for one to raise any profit by the Loan
of Money? begins his answer thus:

You may not expect a positive answer either way; many circumstances are
considerable e're any thing can be determined. 1. Who it is that borrows? a
poor Neighbor that is constrained out of need? or a Merchant that takes up
Money for a free Trade? or a rich man that lays out upon superfluous occasions?
If a poor man borrow out of necessity, you may not expect any profit for the
Loan (Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8, 9.) to the poorest of all we must give, and not lend; to
the next rank of poor, we must lend freely: but if a man will borrow that money
(which you could improve) for the enriching of himself; or out of a wanton
expense, will be laying out that which might be otherwise useful to you, for
his mere pleasure, the case is different; for God has not commanded you to
love any man, more than your self; and there can be no reason why you should
vail your own just advantage to another man's excess.

I shall adjoyn one Witness more, the Reverend Perkins. Expos. on Mat. 5.42.
-- 4thly, Some may ask (seeing Christ bids us lend looking for nothing again)
whether may a man at no time with a good Conscience receive increase for his
lending? Answer, Lending is twofold, of due, or of courtesy: Lending of due,
is the loan of the rich unto the poor, when his necessity compells him to
borrow, and for this a man cannot with good Conscience take any increase:
Lending of Courtesy is, when one rich friend lends unto another; this is not
forbidden in the Word of God, but is left to a man's own liberty and discretion;
neither has it any promise of reward: Now in this case of Courtesy, I do not
find in Scripture, that all taking of increase is simply condemned: Nay, in
some cases, both the law of Nature, and the Laws of all Countries do allow it.

I shall give in, as overmeasure, Cicero de Off. l. 2. p. 89.
what the Roman Orator says: But (says he) in that other kind of giving,
which proceeds from liberality, we ought not to be alike affected in different
Causes: There is one Consideration of him that is pressed with Calamity; and
another of him that seeks the enlargement of his Estate, being under no such
straits.

5. To advance yet one step further: the things which the sinners are here said
to do, are such as are lawful, and some, at least, commendable: only Christ's
Disciples are to transcend, and not rest contented with their having done that
which Sinners did: Christ's Disciples are to lend freely, without taking any
gain for loan, (says Mr. J. from this Text:) If so, it follows those Sinners
did lend with an expectation of gain for their loan. I pray mark it; The
Sinners were not here brought in as blameworthy in the things they are said to
do: only this was not enough; Christians must exceed in righteousness and go
beyond them, v. 32. sinners are said to love those that loved them: I trust it
was well done; but they should have loved their Enemies also, v. 33. sinners
did good unto those that did good unto them; and so far it was well done: but
they should also have done good to the ungrateful, as need required, v. 34.
sinners did lend to them of whom they hoped to receive, what? gain for their
loan, (says Mr. J.) And must this only be condemned? it is to me no doubt, but
this was lawful as well as the aforegoing; but Christians must exceed them,
lending freely to the poor, whence there was little hopes of any advantage, or
the like courtesy to be received back. Compare this Text with, Mat. 5.44, etc.
where Christians are required to do more than others: There are many things
which sinners do, which may and must be done by Saints; but only these must not
rest in so doing, they must do some singular things which others do not: And
this is intimated in that repeated Phrase, What reward have ye? Zanchy
illustrates this place by Luke 14.12, etc. When thou make a Dinner or a
Supper, call not thy friends, etc. it is lawful, no question, to invite our
Friends and Brethren and rich Neighbors to a Feast: but these, it is like, will
answer them in the same kind, with Feast for Feast; therefore there is no thank
due, but besides these, there must be a feeding of the Poor (especially Gods
Poor) that cannot recompense thee again, but God will.

I have done with his first reason: having been the larger in answering what is
produced from this Text, which being the foundation of his Definition; this
failing him, the rest of his building falls.

Mr. J. 2. Reason: Because the Usurer stands expressly condemned by Gods own
mouth.

Reply: This is easily granted with the aforesaid limitations: Who are those
Usurers, thus condemned? Such as by griping Usury oppress the Poor and
Indigent, of whom it is forbidden to take Use. I shall and do all along
vindicate only the Lender for gain, that keeps within due bounds, not
offending against Equity and Charity; leaving others to stand on their own
legs: And with this limitation, I come to try the strength of his Additional
Reasons.

Mr. J. 1. The Usurer is a Biter: for his Sin is Nesheck, biting.

Reply: What the Reverend Bishop Andrews says upon the same word, though on the
other side, may serve for an answer here: He asserts from Galen, that Etymology
is a deceitful witness. But if Mr. J. will needs place an Emphasis in the word
to make of it an argument; we will grant him, That all Usury which is biting,
is deservedly exploded; but deny, That all gain taken for loan, is such.

Mr. J. 2. The Usurer is an Exacter or Extortioner.

Reply: A man may without offense require his due, if that be meant by
exacting, and the dueness of what we are pleading; will be farther proved: But
Exaction usually signifies, a requiring somewhat with rigor and severity: And
Extortion is a wresting of another Goods without right and consent: Prove that
these are committed as often as Use is taken, or else what was intended for a
reason, proves a Calumny. He goes on saying; And taking many times excessively
more increase than he ought to take.

Reply: Such as take excessively more than they ought, we grant, deserve this
his reproof; but then it will follow, that some increase he may take.

The same word which our Translators render Increase, the Dutch Annotators
Translate Excess of Gain, Ezekiel. 18.8.

Mr. J. 3. The Usurer is an unjust person.

Reply: Where no Rule of Justice or Equity is violated, there can be no
Injustice; yea rather, he is the unjust person, that borrows Money to enrich
himself, and increase his own estate, not caring to make meet returns for the
same. De Jure, etc. p. 238.
Grotius (as before shown) quotes Andronicus Rhodius, saying, The gain which is
taken by the consent of the Contractors, is neither unjust, nor reprovable; for
the Law grants the free power thereof. And Grotius himself says, He with whom
we transact, acquires, by our private consent, not only an external, but
internal right, in our Goods.

Hereto may be safely applied, Rules of holy living p. 205.
what Dr. Jer. Tailor, writes of Civil Contracts:

This part of Justice (faith he) is such as depends upon the Laws of Man
directly, and upon the Laws of God only by consequence, and indirect reason;
and from Civil Laws, or private agreements, it is to take its estimate or
measure: As to the proof brought from Prove. 28.8. He that by Usury and unjust
gain increases his substance, etc. the word translated unjust gain, is in the
Hebrew, increase, and so acknowledged in the Margin: the which word is by the
Dutch rendered, excess of gain, elsewhere, as shown before; and so I think it is
here.

I farther add, That Moses Writings, which are the Original Law, condemn only
taking Use of the Poor; and all other passages in the Prophets or Holy Writers,
that condemn Usury, are to receive their limitation and construction from the
Law: Or else we might answer with others, that the Law was Political and
peculiar to the Jewish Nation.

Mr. J. Some make the Usurer an alienator of that which is other men's, not his.

Reply: The Borrower that is not Indigent, has no more right to the Lenders
Money, and the use thereof; than the Lender has to that increase which is by
him spoken against: This latter, has a right by gratitude, by compact or
mutual consent, as also by the Civil Laws; each of these in many cases being
enough to transferr aright: whereas he would justify this assertion from an
expression of Bishop Hall; it shall suffice to let you see how moderate the
Judgment of this Learned Man was in this Controversy; who writes thus: pract.
cas. p. 10, 11.
The Maxims of Traffic are almost Infinite, only Charity (but ever
inseparable from Justice) must make the application. -- That will tell you,
that if you can find out a way, whether by Loan or Sale, to advance your Stock,
that may be free from all Oppression and Extortion, and beneficial as well to
others, as to your self, you need not fear to walk in it with all honest
security.

Here Mr. J. heaps up several Authorities, making the Usurer as bad, or worse
than a Thief: Be it granted there be some such; but I think a man must forfeit
reason, before he can judge one that takes moderate gain this way, as bad or
worse than a Thief, and more severely to be punished: Surely our Lawmakers
have not thought so. I wish some would take notice of another sort of theft in
the borrower, mentioned by the Author Of the Whole Duty of Man, viz. The not
paying of Debts, p. 235.. 12.
whether such as we have borrowed, or such as by our own voluntary promise are
become our debts, for they are equally due to him, that can lay either of these
claims to them, and therefore the withholding of either of them is a theft, a
keeping from my neighbor that which is his.

Mr. J. The Usurer is a Covetous Person.

Reply: Whereto I answer in the words of Bishop Tailor: H. living, p. 325.
Covetousness is to be carried by the proper motives to Charity, and by the
proper rules to Justice; which being secured, the Arts of getting Money are not
easily made Criminal.

Mr. J. O what indirect courses do they greedily take?

Reply: Blame those that do so and spare not: but blame not others therefore
that use no courses, but what are warrantable.

The rest of his Additionals, as that the Usurer is a Destroyer, etc. If
intended for all persons by him counted Usurers; are no better than the
Products of a mistaken Zeal, and serve to prove the censoriousness of the
Writer.

We are now come to his Cloud of Witnesses, Fathers, Councils and Schoolmen,
which he all Summons in to give witness to the Cause he has in hand: his
Forces he Musters up for his Cause, will yet admit of a defalcation; whether we
consider persons or things testified against.

1. As to persons reproved for Usury; after he has made a great flourish with
Canons and Councils, p. 27.
he comes to confess that Clergy men are mostly concerned therein: and upon
search into the fourth Century, Magd. Cent. 41.
I meet with but one Canon amongst all, that extends the Prohibition of Usury,
See Dr. Hammond. pract. cat. p. 315. Edit. 1662
farther than to Church Men: and this one taken notice of by him: and the
Triumph that is made from the Council of Nice, consisting of 318 holy Men,
condemning the Usurer, and his Usury, etc. amounts to no more than this;
Whoever of the Clergy, for filthy lucre sake, exercises Usury, Let him be
Deposed.

And if I do say, that I suppose, that Usury was then in common practice in the
Church, by those that are commonly called the Laity, and allowed them, you
shall see that I have some reasons for my conjecture. For,

1. In the same Century, Magd. Cent. 4th. c. 1273.
Sylvester Bishop of Rome, faithfully discharging his Office, and reforming the
Clergy; It is said, Clericos usuris Civilibus vacantes, ad precationes
retraxit; he brought back the Clergy to their Ministerial work, from
Civil-usury, wherewith they were taken up: Civil is here opposed, I suppose, to
Ecclesiastic, and may therefore be translated Lay-Usury, as the common,
practice of such, but not allowed to those of the Clergy.

2. In that the Heretics, Ibid. col. 374.
called Andreans, left the Communion of the Church, because that Usurers were
suffered therein.

3. Those several Councils, that prohibited the practice of Usury to the
Clergy, do assign peculiar reasons for their so doing, which are not so
applicable to others, besides the Clergy. As

1. No man that warreth, intangleth himself with the affairs of this life. Thus
the 3d Council of Carthage, Can. 15.6. Col. 867.868.
Upon this very account, the Apostles would be excused from tending of Tables,
that they might wholly give themselves to the work of the Ministry. And upon
this account the Councils forbad the practice of other Civil Employments and
Offices to the Clergy, which in themselves were lawful; so that they might not
be Merchants, Farmers, Proctors, Guardians, etc. Yea, were prohibited all
secular cares and employments. See the aforesaid Council, with the Council of
Chalcedon, Can. 3. and Prelat. 2. Can. 14.

2. Because the Church-stock might not be disposed of for the bringing in of
any prigain: And so I find that Sophronius, Col. 505.
a Bishop was excommunicated by the Acaciani, because he had made gain of the
Church-Money, and so defrauded the same, turning it to his own proper Use. The
Custom being then, that not only the Bishops and the other Clergy were
maintained out of the common Stock of the Church they belonged to, and other
Revenues thereof; but also the Poor and Strangers: And Bernard long after, Ibid.
says to the Clergy without exception, in Epist. 2. Whatsoever thou retainest
of the Altar, beside necessary Maintenance and simple Habit, it is not thine,
it is Rapine, it is Sacrilege.

3. I read also in the same Council of Carthage forementioned, Can. 49. That
Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, or any other of the Clergy, that came poor to
their Ecclesiastical Offices, and after that therein purchased to themselves
Fields or Farms, they were to restore them to the Church, and keep nothing
proper to themselves, unless what they obtained by other Largesses, or by the
right of Inheritance.

A Canon that many, who Zealously plead against Usury from ancient Canons,
would be loath to be confined to. Thus we see men can take and leave at
pleasure.

4. And as for the other fathers that are usually brought in as witnesses
against Usury: there is reason to think, they were so bitter against Usury as
practiced in their times, which it seems was very bad, they would not have
called it Murder else, and many other such occasions laid to its charge; As
they managed it, it was a mere cheat or Cozenage: Lactantius else would not
have said, Quid faenerarius, nisi ut fallat? And Chrysostom (as before) said,
In Matt.
there was nothing more cruel, nothing more shameful than the Usury of his
time. No wonder then that he and others were so Sharp against it. In ps. 1 4.
And Basil says it was then Judged by Christians a very inhumane Act, if any
one had made gain by Lending to the poor. Leaving our thoughts free to think
that it was not so accounted, when they made advantage of lending to such as
were not poor.

5. And it is beyond doubt, P. 28.
that those expressions he quotes from Calvin and Luther, were by them intended
against the same Exorbitant Usurers; and griping oppressors; though by him
slyly brought in to bespatter all such as take any thing for loan: surely it
was no fair dealing in Mr. J. After he informed us, that whatsoever a man takes
over and above the money lent, is Usury; and that the men that did so were the
persons declaimed against by the fathers: presently to subjoyn,

Calvin tells us, that this kind of men is purposely minded to suck out the
blood of others: and So, Luther calls the Usurer, the bloud-sucker of the
people. Whereas Calvin's Judgment is well known, that he held not all taking
above the principal unlawful, as may hereafter appear. P. 48.
Neither is it much to the purpose whether Calvin himself were a lender upon
usury, seeing he has discovered his Judgment; yet I deny the Cogency of Mr.
Js Argument; that he was not, viz. because he was poor.

And then for Luther, whom Mr. J. lays claim to; we shall be the better able
to Judge of his sentiments about this controversy, after we have considered
what Rivet writes concerning him, P. 278.
as delivered by Gerard, Who says Luther was more moderate in his latter
writings in his opinion concerning usury. Some of his opinions he quotes out of
his own writings: as, 1. A certain mitigation must be made of that wonted
strictness in the forbidding of usury. 2. that to widows, Orphans and old men,
that cannot trade, it it may be granted to receive profit for money lent to
Merchants 3. Conscience may be provided for, if the Magistrate, by the advice
of Divines and Lawyers to that end assembled, do prescribe a certain middle
way in such contracts. 4. Cases of necessity from times and persons ought to be
distinguished from those that are not liable to such necessity. 5. He would not
much gainsay, if to restrain unlawful and and excesscive usuries it were
granted to a Noble man to take 4 florens; a Merchant, 8; and others, 6.

5. That such were the times now, that by paying 6 in the hundred a man might
be a good gainer. 7. That the Ministers of the Church should leave these
disputes to the Lawyers, and other good men, etc.

This is enough to let us see what was Luthers last Judgment, in the question
of Usury.

4. If we come to modern Divines, he knows all are not of his Judgment: for
besides those forementioned, the Lawfulness of a regulated Usury has been
asserted by Bucer, Martyr, Zanchy, Junius, Rivet, Windeline, Hornbeck,
Spanhemius, Diodate, Brentius, and many other Divines beyond the Seas both
Calvinists and Lutherans; Universities and learned Professors: In dec: P: 278.
some whereof are mentioned by Learned Rivet: and Windeline sticks not to say,
A Plerisque Modernis, etc. Modern Divines and Lawyers for the most part hold it
lawful, as duly stated. Several of our English Divines seem of the same
Judgment; viz. Perkins, Ames, Gataker, Mayer, Vines, Baxter, Hughes, besides
some other Divines fore-quoted, whose moderate Judgment in this controversy
there appears.

5. Of Foreign Divines, Laws and Usages, I shall also adjoyn what Learned Zanchy
writes (treating of the lawfulness of moderate Usury.) In Ephesians.
-- 7. To this Doctrine (says he) do subscribe very many men, famous both for
their Learning and Piety. 8. I have named Bucer and Calvin, Renowned Divines,
from whom P. Martyr dissents not, that I may not mention almost an infinite
number besides. 9. Hither belong the most just Laws of Pious Emperors
concerning this matter, in C. de Usuris: who also determine how much it may be
lawful to take above the Principal. 10. Add to these the use and custom taken
up in the Reformed Churches: I do not therefore in the least doubt but that
such Usury is lawful: And Carol. Molinaeus a very famous Lawyer, and a
Professor of true piety, concludes the same in his large Volume which he wrote
of usury: Thus far Zanchy. So then, it seems, regulated Usury is no such
bugbear, that any need be startled at the mention thereof; or be ashamed to
plead for it, after Men of such Worth and Eminency. I return to the Author.

M. J. And what should the Usurer do in Heaven? there are no Bills, Bonds, etc.

Reply: It Is well, I see Mr. J. is not the Key-keeper of Heavens Gate; for
then, it is like, not one of those that takes a Penny-Usury should enter: though
such as take Interest or Inter-usury, or after-usury, probably might find so
much favor at his hands, as to have admittance. Such reasonings as these,
whosoever were the Author of them, me-seems, were born before day; the which,
if admitted, would turn us all into Adamites: or rather, might have been more
agreeable to the men before Adam; the Inhabitants of Vtopia, the New Atlantis,
or Terra Incognita; for this is the ground his Argument goes on, whatsoever is
not to be found in Heaven, must find no place on Earth. He says, There are no
lenders, no borrowers in Heaven: are there buyers then? or are any builders
there? In Heaven there is no clothing used, saving those glorious Robes of
Christ's Righteousness: there is no feeding, unless on the fruits of the Tree of
Life, that grows in the midst of the Paradise of God: there is no drinking, save
of the fruit of the Heavenly Vine: there is no taking possession, unless it be
of that Inheritance incorruptible: there is no dwelling, save in that House not
made with Hands. Must we therefore disuse all these here below? Surely thus we
should do, if Mr. J's Rhetoric were found Logic.

After the making good of his own ground, Chap. 6.
he comes to supplant his Antagonists, by answering their Objections.

Obj. 1. Biting is in your Text condemned, I am no biter, and therefore I am
not concerned in this matter, etc.

Whatsoever weight there is in this Argument, I think moderate taking of Use
may be better justified by it, and on better grounds than he can condemn it
from the same term.

Mr. J. Every Usurer biteth naturally; Resp.
either actually or potentially, directly or consequentially. Take what is said
in proof hereof, and see whether he writes not as a man that understands the
Market.

Mr. J. For the borrower will take up his Interest, if by any means he can; and
for that end he will and must often sell the Commodity at a far dearer rate
than else he would, to be able to pay his Use, and live by the Overplus, etc.

Reply: In this, and what follows, are suppositions upon suppositions; whereof
if one fail, if one pin of his building slip; the whole totters. We must then
grant him, these borrowers would not sell so dear as they could, if they did
not pay Interest: we must grant him that these men can raise the price of the
Market, at pleasure, which is not so: we will easily grant him, that the rest
of the sellers will join with the borrowers, i. e. in selling as dear as they
can: we must grant him that they would not have so done, unless instigated by
those borrowers: what a deal of begging the question here is, before there can
be room for the conclusion? Let us hear his proof out by an instance taken from
the Rev. Bishop Jewel.

Mr. J. A Merchant takes up of his Neighbor an hundred pounds, and must answer
again an hundred and ten; he bestows it all in Corn, and buyeth for his
hundred pound an hundred quarters of Corn, he sends it to the Market; the
People have need of it, and buy it: If he sold it for eight groats a Bushel, he
might make up his hundred pound and be a gainer; but unless he makes up a
hundred pound, and ten pound to discharge his Usury, he must needs be a loser
and undone; but undone he will not be, he will therefore undo many others,
therefore he sells accordingly.

Reply: 1. Our Author you see, writes Stilo veteri: But what then, if the
lender agree in partnership with the borrower, and run the hazard of the
Principal, consenting to share both in his gains and losses? (which with him is
lawful yet;) would not the same inconveniences here imagined, attend this
Contract?

2. By the allowance here made, I perceive Mr. J. would oppress the seller, who
according to this account, after all his pains, time and hazards run, should
gain but six pound thirteen shillings and four pence for his hundred pound
borrowed, and laid out for one whole year.

Mr. J. Or potentially the Usurer biteth the borrower: -- I will instance in
Land: the borrower takes up 400 pound upon Interest, and buyeth Land with it
worth 20 pounds by the year: -- and he pays the Usurer 24 pounds by the year;
in which case I ask the Usurer, whether the borrower must not needs be bitten?
etc.

Reply 1. I would know, if on this score, any one should come to Mr. J. to
borrow this 400 pound, would he lend it him freely? or is any other bound to do
so? I remember Mr. Bolton says, that no man ought to borrow, but in case of
need; I doubt whether this man's need would pass with him. But in truth, if the
Purchaser borrows the whole 400 pound, few would judge him wise in meddling with
the Purchase, or him much wiser, that should entrust the money with him on his
single security.

2. Give me leave to make a supposition too, suppose then this purchaser meets
with a friend, that lends him this 400 l for 10 l P. Annum: here is usury and
yet not biting to the borrower: or, suppose there is so much Timber growing on
the land bought as that therewith he makes up the 400 l in some few years, who
is Injured then; or where is the biting?

Obj. But here (says he) the Usurer will reply; That so in other Contracts, as
buying, selling, setting, a man may be bitten, and wronged.

And I add, that Bp. Hall makes overreaching in these kinds the worst of
Usury; pract. cas. p. 11, 12.
Lamenting the Ignorance, or mistaken Zeal of those that cry down usury; but in
the mean time make no bones of actions no less biting, or oppressive: they care
not how high they sell any of their Commodities; at how unreasonable rates they
set their grounds; how they circumvent the buyer in their bargains, and think
any price Just, any gain lawful, that they can make in their markets: not
considering, there is neither less, nor less odious usury in selling and
letting, than there is in lending. It is the Extortion in both, that makes the
sin; without which the kind or terms of the transaction would not be guilty, --
In the ordinary loan-usury the borrower has yet time to boot for his money;
but here the buyer pays down an excessive Interest without any consideration,
but the sellers cruelty.

What does Mr. J. answer to the foresaid Objection? This,

Mr. J. So it may fall out, [viz. that a man may be bitten too in buying,
selling, etc.] but herein lies the difference, that these foresaid Contracts
are in themselves lawful; but usury in it self unlawful.

Reply: But the Fathers (that he pleads condemn Usury as unlawful) do some of
them also condemn Merchandising, or Trading for gains sake. Rivet in Decalog.
p. 290.
As Hom. 38. on Mat. passing under Chrysostom's name: The Lord casting out the
Buyers and Sellers of the Temple, signifies, that a Merchant can never please
God. Again, No Christian ought to be a Merchant; or if he will be, let him be
cast out of the Church. And Cassiodore On Psalm. 70. speaks the same language:
So that these Fathers, that judged one, judged both alike unlawful; and Bishop
Hall judged neither unlawful, any further than there was Oppression in them.

Mr. J. But lending must be free, Luke 6.35. It being reckoned amongst the
liberal Contracts.

Reply; If the Civilians make good that all lending must be free; then let this
Contract pass under another name, and that plea is answered; for it is not
names or words; but things, that we are inquiring to.

Though enough has been said before, to answer what is urged from Luke 6.35.
yet I shall not think it amiss to produce the sense of the Dutch Annotators on
that Scripture. And lend without hoping for at ny thing again: [or without
hoping for any thing from it] i. e. not only to them which ye hope will give it
you again; but also to them of whom ye have not this hope; like as he here
commands also, to love not only our friends, but also our enemies.

Obj. 2. The Law against Usury is political, concerning the Jews only, and not
us, and therefore we cannot be condemned by it.

Mr. J. Answer: This is a fallacy, and the contrary can be sufficiently proved.

1. The Prophets enumerate Usury among the transgressions of the Moral Law,
Ezekiel. 18.8. Jer. 15.10. and so does this Psalm. 15.

Reply 1. Jer. 15.10. makes little to his purpose, the most that can be made of
it, is what Diodate Comments thereon, thus: [ I have, etc.] i. e. I have
neither had strife nor contention with them, upon any private interests nor
pretenses; but all is by reason of my Office. In loc.
Junius to the same effect: I kept my self close to my own Calling; I have had
no other transactions with them: I warily abstained from all occasion of
strife, which might any way happen among men. Grotius understands the words of
bare lending; In Synops.
saying, Usury was forbidden among the Jews; therefore the words must be read,
Neither have I lent money to any one, nor any to me: G. Sim. Calv.
I have had to do with none upon any money-matter, whence strifes are wont to
arise, say others.

2. In reply to Psalm. 15. you may reflect upon Dixon's Comment thereon: I shall
besides produce what two learned Men say on the same Scripture. Synops.
Gev.
Sicut, etc. As the receiving of gifts is one thing in it self; and the
receiving of gifts upon an innocent man another; so is the taking above the
Principal from the Wealthy, and from the Poor.

Coc.
To take use from the Poor is hurtful and burdensome, because he receives that
he may live; but gainfnl for the Rich to pay use, for he receives that he may
gain.

3. What is asserted usually of Ezekiel, 18. viz. that it contains Morals only; if
the same be meant by way of exclusion to Judicials, may admit of a use of
addubitation: to me there seems to be Judicials expressed or referred to, v. 7.
Oppression, though a Moral evil, yet the particulars thereof might be
immediately against a Judicial Law; and in the Margin of our Bibles we are
pointed to Lev. 25.14. which concerns Judicials. Restoring the Debtor his
Pledge, respects a Law of the like nature, Exodus 22.26. And the executing of
true judgment between Man and Man, as to the Jews, was according to the
Political Laws given in special to that Nation. Again, v. 9. Statutes,
Judgments; Surely we may not hence exclude Judicials, seeing (as Mercer Notes)
the latter does properly signify such Laws, and so must signify, Lev. 25.18.
whereto this Text seems to be a Counter-part. And Grotius says the same: De
Jure, etc. p. 3.
Idem discrimen apud Hebraeos reperire est, qui cum distinct loquuntur, jus
natural vocant (...), jus Constitutum (...), quorum illud (...), hoc (...)
solent vertere Hellenistae. It is not therefore a cogent Argument, that Usury
is not forbidden by a Political Law, because the same is reproved, Ezekiel. 18.

2. In Lev. 25.35, 36, 37. Usury is there forbidden; but that is in the midst
of other Political Laws; there being none but such mentioned in that Chapter,
therefore by his own arguing, this must be so too.

3. Take a farther Instance for the weakening his Argument, Acts 15.29.
Fornication is reckoned amongst Ceremonials, and yet no Ceremonial.

4. It is worth the Inquiry, whether Usury may not be against a Judicial Law,
and yet, in them to whom it is by that Law forbidden, be Morally evil, e. g.
Theft is a Moral evil, and yet the Instances wherein it is committed may be
directly or immediately only against a positive Law of this or that Nation?
Hither belongs, what has been already quoted out of Dr. Taylor's Holy Living.
p. 205.
-- This part of Justice ( viz. Commutative,) is such as depends upon the Laws
of Men directly; and upon the Laws of God, only by consequence, and indirect
reason; and from Civil Laws, or private Agreements, it is to take its estimate
and measures. And hither belongs a Saying of Austin; In Joh. 6. Rivet p. 272.
Every one possesses what he possesses by Human Right; for by Divine Right,
The Earth is the Lords, and the Fullness thereof: God made the Rich and the Poor
of the same Clay, and the same Earth supports both Poor and Rich; yet by Human
Right, one says, this Farm is mine, this House is mine. This House then, this
Field is mine by a Humane or Political Law; and yet whosoever takes it from me,
is guilty of a Moral evil. The Law of Nature dictates this in general, that we
must give every man his own, by what Law soever, whether Divine or Human, the
thing become his own.

Atque hic obiter, etc. And here by the way, De Jure, etc. p. 26.
(says Grotius) their error is to be noted, who derive the Israelites Right to
the War, from thence alone, that God gave them the Land of Canaan. -- whereas,
what every one possesses by Human Right, is no less his, than if God had given
it; but that Right is not taken away by the Gospel.

4. I return back, whence I have digressed. The Law of Usury was Political,
says Judicious Calvin upon Ezekiel. 18. And Luther seems of the same Judgment, in
that, he advises the Ministers of the Church to leave the Disputes about Usury
to Lawyers and other good men, As we have seen before.

Mr. Hughes upon the Question; In Exodus 22.25.
Whether the Law against Usury be in force? Answ. Not in the Political
Consideration of the Jews, which was special to them; as to use it toward
Strangers, and as a Balance of Government to themselves; but as to common and
general Equity, etc.

And Rivet from Junius: p. 285.
-- Therefore if it could be proved, That the taking of all Increase was
absolutely forbidden to the Jews, even in respect of a Wealthy Brother; it
would not follow now, all yearly Increase to be altogether unlawful: for in
this Law there might be somewhat Ceremonial and Civil mixed, which should not
bind other Nations besides the Jews; for the Jews might not sell their
Possessions for ever; but the buyer only did receive the profits unto the year
of Jubilee, wherein unmovable goods ought to be restored to the right owner,
Lev. 25.10, 15. But if it had been lawful for a Jew to take use of his Brother,
that Law had been rendered useless; for one would never have bought a Possession
of another; but rather, would have received a yearly sum, without any toil,
when he should have known that the Possession was to be restored to his
Neighbor at a certain time. There is another Law of releasing Debts to a
brother every seventh year, Deuteronomy. 15.1. But if it had been lawful to exact that
increase from a brother, they would have so managed their Exactions in the six
years, that at the time appointed there should be nothing left to be released
to their Brother. These Civil reasons might be, why Vsuries were more severely
prohibited amongst the Israelites, which yet were lawful toward Strangers; even
as it was not lawful after 7 years to exact a Debt from a Brother, which yet
was lawful from a Stranger: for so it is said, Deuteronomy. 15.3.

5. This administers another proof, That this Law was Political, and Usury not
against the Law of Nature, being they might lend to a Stranger upon Usury,
though not to a Brother.

Mr J. 3. The very Law of Naure is against it.

Reply; I grant it, if meant of oppressive and biting Usury, not else. Mr. J.
here mis reports Cicero, Cicero de Off. l. 3.
as if he had said, that Usury is more against Nature than Death: whereas
Cicero speaks not there in special of Usury; but of increasing a Man's Estate by
damnifying another, which may be the fault of the borrower as well as of the
lender; Rivet p. 281.
and I find the words of Cicero made use of by the contrary minded to
streng-then their Opinion: Cicero says thus; It is against Nature to advance a
man's profit by the disprofit of another. Again, The enlargment of a man's own
estate, hurting none, is not to be despised; but wrong is always to be voided:
but to detract any thing from another; and for one man to advance his profit by
the disprofit of another man, is more against nature than Death, than Poverty,
than Grief, than any other things which can happen to the body or outward
estate: for Nature will not permit, that by the spoils of others we should
increase our Substance, Wealth, Riches: Neither is it only determined by
Nature, i. e. by the Law of Nations; but also by Popular Laws, whereby
Commonwealths in their several Cities are sustained, that it may not be lawful
for any to hurt another for his own advantage; for this the Laws respect, this
they design, that the Conjunction of Citizens be safe.

So then, the general Rules Cicero lays down, concerns both Parties; De Jure
etc. p. 215.
and Grotius citing them, adds, So great is the equity of this Saying, that
hence the Lawyers define many things without the Prescript of Laws, always
appealing to Equity it self as the most evident.

By these Rules then, which are fetched from the heart of Nature, It is unequal
and unjust for any to grow rich by money borrowed, and the lender not to have
the least advantage thereby; but that he should forgo his money to another
pleasure and advantage to his own detriment: How then the Law of Nature should
be against all gain opon loan; or how the Heathen, yea, all Nation among them,
should be so quick-sighted, as to discern, that all taking of gain for money
lent should be against the very Law of Nature, seems very strange. Let that be
weighed we receive from Grotius (who was as quick-sighted in Natures Dictates
as most others:) Per rem hactenus, Ibid. p. 601.
etc. So far they are obliged in this matter, that they may not become
wealthier by another loss, i. e. That either they perform the Contract, from
whence they are willing to receive the profit; or let them part with the
profit: -- But on the contrary, they cannot be excused as free from unjustice;
who though they dislike the Compacts, yet keep the profit which they should not
have had without these Compacts.

To one pleading for Usury, and appealing to the general practice of the World,
and the Law of Nature written in the hearts of men: Append. Of Us. p. 296.
I find Mr. Capel to answer him thus: For the general practice of the World, I
do not know, nor can he know what it is; this may serve for an answer to his
quotation out of Bishop Sands, viz. That all Nations at all times have
condemned Usury: the which assertion is easily spoken, but hard to be proved;
yea, soon disproved by the several Laws that have been made in several Ages, by
Pious Emperors, Kings, etc. for the allowance thereof, and prescribing the sum
that might be taken; as Zanchy quoted, mentions; and more may be discovered in
due place. I have read of a Law amongst the Ancient Greecians and Romans that
allowed one in the hundred, therefore called Vnciarie Usury.

But to unfold this a little: We may come to understand, whence Usury came so
generally to be forbidden among the Learned Heathen, both Greeks and Romans: If
we mark what Grotius writes, viz. That the Laws of the twelve Tables among the
Romans were borrowed from the Grecians, and these borrowed their Laws from the
Hebrews. And by the Laws of the Hebrews Usury being forbidden, it came thence
to be incorporated into the Laws of other Nations; and whatsoever Laws have
since by any Christian Princes been made against Usury, it is easy to believe
they had their arise from the same fountain.

Mr. J. 4. Usury is forbidden in the Now Testament by our Savior, Luke 6.35.
and therefore the Law against it cannot be merely Political.

Reply 1. Merely Political: None, that I know, says it is, and therefore that
term is ill foisted in: it is commonly said, that the political Laws of God
carried a general equity in them; and it is acknowledged, there is an Usury
that is against Natures Law, as we have often said. If this Law be proved to
reach the Jewish Nation, so that one Jew might not take Use of another Jew,
whatever he were, it shall suffice to say, that it was so far political.

2. Luke 6.35. has been already spoken too, and it has been proved, that all
taking of Use is here forbidden, neither expressly nor consequentially; it being
the Interest of his poor Disciples, that Our Lord is here pleading: Whole Duty
of Man. p. 367.
what is written by a Judicious Author, may serve for a farther Comment thereon.

Sometime a seasonable Loan may do as well as a gift, and that may be in the
power sometimes of those that are able to give but little: but when we thus
lend on Charity, we must lend freely without Use, and also with a purpose, that
if he should prove unable to pay, we will forgive so much of the Principal, as
his needs require, and our abilities will permit.

Mr. J. Here Usurers make two Replys. 1. That Usury is not named by Christ, --
nor any where in the New Testament. 1. Ans. True, nor is Sodomie committed with
a Beast named in the N. Testament.

Reply: The reason is not the same: this latter being a sin of rarer practice,
and carrying in it a greater abhorrency to nature, it was thought sufficient,
that in the Ancient standing Law it was severely prohibited; none of the
Prophets that came after, making any mention thereof. The very naming of some
sins (such as this) striking a horror into the hearers minds, no matter if
their names, together with their practice, were quite forgotten. The Apostle
speaking of Fornication and Uncleanness (the same very applicable here) says,
let it not be once named amongst you as becomes Saints. Ephesians. 5.2.
Should Mr. J. have mentioned that Sin he speaks of, as often as he has Usury,
I think he would have abundantly offended modest minds thereby.

Mr. J. 2. Other famous Writers shall resolve them about that place.

Reply: I have before cited others as famous of a contrary mind: And I think
very few of our late Divines interpret Luke 6.35. as condemning all Use.

Mr. J. Whereas some reply; That neither Christ, nor yet his Apostles any where
mention Usury. It is answered, That Usury in those days was suppressed by the
12 Tables, and the Emperors then Reigning, Tiberius and Claudius, and
Vespasian. -- Tiberius himself, though otherwise wicked enough, yet would
rather furnish his Banks with his own Stock to be freely lent for three years
to the Citizens, upon only the security of the sum doubled in the forfeiture,
than he would endure this griping and oppressing Transaction.

1. Reply: These proofs come far short of the Assertions: If these Emperors
made Laws against Usury; then, it is like, it was grown common, and fell under
Public Notice; and as soon as Laws are made, practices of that nature are not
quite suppressed: suppose Public Laws Enacted in our Land against Drunkenness
and Whoredom; would that save Mr. J. the labor from Preaching down those
Vices? But letting that pass; did the Roman Laws reach Judea and all the
Empire? I think not; the Romans leaving the Conquered Nations mostly to enjoy
their own Laws. De Jure, etc. p. 556.
Augustus (as Grotius has it from Philo in his Embassage to Caius) thought the
custody of the Laws proper to each Nation, belonged no less to his care, than
those of the Romans.

2. If this were granted too, that the Imperial Laws were imposed on Judea, and
Usury thereby quite Suppressed, does he not remember that Our Lord in the Gospel
designed Rules, not only for the present; but also for aftertimes of his
Church.

3. But it is a strange presumption to think, that all Usury was indeed quite
suppressed by these Laws; and he leaping from Claudius to Vespasian, gives cause
of suspicion, that the inter-mediate Emperors were not so severe against it,
considering withal, that Seneca living in that Interval, was (by his own
quotation) a notable Usurer, who was contemporary with Paul and other Apostles:
And being it was practiced by so great a Moralist as Seneca, it sets me a
wondering how they should have so great a Charity for Tiberius, (a man made up
of craft and cruelty) as to believe he should exceed the greatest Presician for
Morality in his time, (not to mention some of the ablest and purest Christians
of these latter days;) as also that the Law by him made against Usury was in
real detestation of Oppression; and not rather, a cunning insinuation to
ingratiate himself with the Multitude; and withal, a politic fetch to suppress
all the Petty Usurers, that he might have vent for his money, and monopolize
the Trade to himself; pretending free lending, but intending to make his Market
by the forseiture of the double Bonds; which whosoever should do amongst us,
would probably be a far greater gainer than any other Usurer, that keeps within
the bounds of the Law could be.

4. And upon the whole, their case seems wide from ours, Usury then, after the
Laws Enacted against it, becoming a transgression of a Civil Law, moderate
Usury with us, not so.

5. And before and after these Laws of theirs, there being no bounds sat to
the greedy Usurers desires, but what his ex libididine locupletium agitaretur
taciti Hist. l. 6. c. 16.
own will, and the borrowers necessities admitted; it is like there was
Oppression enough lurking under this name, and deserving to be suppressed;
whereas with us the Laws of the Land have measured out the bounds to the
lenders profit; Hitherto, but no further.

6. p. 42.
And I understand from him, that some of the wiser Emperors coming after, did
not absolutely forbid, but limit Usury. Alexander Severus trientariam
constituit. Antonius Pius Imperator ipse trientariam exercuit ut plurimos
invaret. These wise Emperors made it lawful to receive 4 per Centum.

Mr. J. Their second Reply is, That God permitted his People to lend upon Usury
to a stranger, and that therefore the Law against usury is Political; for if
Moral, how could they lend to a Stranger, Deuteronomy. 23.19, 20.

Mr. J. Ans. Some say one thing, some another. [But what says he?] I for my
part shall cut short what I have to say, and go to that most notable and
emphatical expression, Deuteronomy. 23.20. (...) Unto that Stranger thou may lend
upon Usury, the Canaanite, namely, whom God would have consumed and destroyed,
and ashom it was lawful to kill. So blessed Ambrose decideth this Controversy.
[A bad shift is better then none, especially if it have a venerable name to
plead for it, and Antiquity to boot: but yet, it seems this is the best he
could find: let us hear him out.] But that you may more fully see that it is
not every Stranger; but the Canaanite whom they were to put to death: I will
quote that notable place, Lev. 25.35, 36. Yea, though he be a stranger or a
sojourner ( understand, says he, become a Jew) that he may live with thee, and
then v. 36. Take no Usury of him nor Increase.

Reply 1. This Proof overthrows it self; for it by Stranger (to whom they were
forbidden to lend on Usury, as well as to a Brother) we are to understand a
Proselite, or one turned to the Jewish Religion; then it follows necessarily,
that by Stranger, to whom they were to lend upon Use, we must understand all
other Strangers, not so Proselited, of what Nation soever, and not the
Canaanite only.

2. The Text will clear it self; for there Brother is opposed to Stranger: The
Egyptian was not their Brother, therefore a Stranger, and consequently, one to
whom they might lend upon Usury; and so lending to such end is not against the
Law of Nature. The Jews might not oppress a Stranger, that is frequently
forbidden them; but yet they might lend to Strangers upon Usury, and therefore
all Usury is not Oppression, nor against the Law of Nature.

The Scripture (says Learned Ames) seems to indicate some Usury to be lawful
in it self, De Cons. l. 5. c. 44. p. 375.
seeing it was granted to the Jews to receive Usury from any Stranger that was
not poor, Deuteronomy. 23.20. for if all Usury were intrinsecally, and in its own
nature sinful; then the Jews might not have taken Use from the Gentiles without
great scandal, whereby the Gentiles would he turned away from the Jews Religion
and Law, as admitting that for lawful which was unlawful.

All Usury is not forbidden (says Hornbeck). Contra Judeos. l. 7. c. 7. p. 526.
neither is the Contract for gain upon Loan, sinful in it self, or against the
Law: otherwise, this had not been at all allowed or granted; the which God
indeed prohibited the Jews amongst themselves, not with Strangers: for what is
in it self a sin, is every where such, and can no where be counted lawful, or
be approved: no not with the Gentile. The Laws are such, for here are two to be
considered, the one which forbids Usury to the Jews, the other which grants it,
Lev. 25.35, 38. The reason is, because they were Brethren amongst themselves,
had one common father after a singular manner, and the Inheritance, and the
Goods of the land immediately delivered them by God, and after a sort common,
which were the foundation of that Political Law, as far as it concerned the
Jews, Deuteronomy. 15.3. and 23.19, 20. Thou may lend, etc. It was unlawful to take
Use of a Brother, not only for this or that thing, but for any thing
whatsoever; not so of a Gentile, -- for what favor they were bound to show to
a Brother, they did not therefore owe to the Gentiles: The reason of the
disparity is manifest. It is lawful at no time to do ill, although the same
degrees of bounty and kindness are not due to all: they were not bound to offer
the same Offices to a Gentile, which they owed to a Brother: wherefore not to
lend to a Gentile, without Usury; which degree of mutual Charity belonged only
to a Brother.

I have been the longer in this Quotation, because of the several reasons it
carries in it. I shall take the same liberty in citing Grotius, on the same
account, Comment in Luc. 6.35.
who speaks excellently to this purpose, and answers the usual cavils made
against this Reply.

I come (says he) to that Right which God granted to the Jewish Nation, Deuteronomy.
23.19. Thou shall not lend to thy Brother upon Usury, etc. here they that judge
all Usury to be against the law of Nature, understand, what is spoken of
lending upon Use to a Stranger, to be a permission of Fact, not of Right: which
neither the words admit, nor ever was so understood by that People to whom the
Law was given: I have Josephus -- and Philo for Witnesses, -- to whom all the
Rabbines consent; from whence it is sufficiently apparent, if I mistake not,
that the Law was understood of Citizens toward Citizens, which also the words
in Leviticus show: for there also usury is forbidden, this reason being added,
that thy Brother may live by thee, Lev. 25.36. wherefore when in the Psalms and
in Ezekiel. he is commended that exercises not usury, that is to be understood
according to the laws prescription. Ambrose, and some following him, by
Strangers understand those seven Nations with whom the Jews had a just War, and
he thinks it no wonder if it were lawful to take use of those whom it was
lawful to kill. But neither does this Interpretaetion agree to the words of the
law: for seeing Strangers are opposed to Brethren, i. e. Citizens, it is
certain, not these or these, but all Strangers must be understood. Add, that it
in no wise became the gravity of a Law, to grant usury toward those, whom they
were bound wholly to slay. The cause of the difference therefore was this, That
God would have the Jews to observe amongst themselves, not only those Offices
which are common amongst all men, one toward another, and which in strict
reason of right and due: but also many Offices of a nearer tie and charity: As
in the Law of Servants, Pledges, plucking the Ears of Corn, and many other may
be seen, -- But that Law of Moses, in that it respects the State of that
Nation, and was given to one Nation only, binds not others, any farther than it
contains a Natural Equity. What Christ would have us do, seeing there is no
particular Command extant of this matter, must be collected from general Rules.

Thus far Grotius. Think on it once again, how unlikely it was, that the Jews
might lend to those Nations, whom they were bound utterly to destroy: And Deuteronomy.
7. begin. they are charged to make no Covenant with them, nor show any Mercy to
them, nor enter Marriages with them: And the reason there given is, because
these Nations would entice them from the Service of God to Idolatry: which same
reason would also hinder them from lending, or having any civil Commerce with
them.

3. For a farther Confirmation of what is here said, take a parallel place,
Deuteronomy. 15.2, 3. where the like opposition is between Brother and Stranger, and
the like privilege there granted to the former in the matter of the Release,
that is elsewhere given him in the matter of Usury: All Debts were to be
released every seventh year, v. 3. Of a Stranger thou may exact it again; but
that which is thine with thy Brother, thine hand shall release: (...): The
expression is as emphatical altogether, as that which they translate, That
Stranger: And yet none, I dare say, understands Stranger in this place, barely
of the Canaanite: but as respecting all other Nations beside that they might
have any Commerce with.

Calvin upon Deuteronomy. 23. says, But in this place there is no mention made of
Hittites, -- nor of any other people of that land: but in general, of all
Nations of the World: Egypt is here comprised, and Syria, and all the Isles of
the Sea, and all those who had intercourse of Merchandise with the Jews, Vid.
Diodate in loc.

Obj. 3. Does not Christ allow of Usury, when he says, Mat. 25.27. Thou
ought therefore to have put my Money to the Exchangers: and then at my
coming I should have received mine own with usury.

Mr. J. Answ. The words are part of a Parable, and -- symbolical Scripture is
not Argumentative.

Reply 1. And yet he made it before one of his Arguments against Usury, because
the Devil was a Metaphorical Usuter.

2. Though I have not thought any Argument of cogency could be deduced from
this Text, De Consc. p. 375.
yet I shall propose to consideration what the Learned Ames writes: Hither
(says he) may be referred, that it is very probable from that Parable of the
Talents, Mat. 25.27. Not only that there was some usury of Money Changers in
common use amongst the Jews, but also that it was not disallowed of Our Lord:
because under that Similitudo he requires a spiritual Office, without the least
hint of any disallowance, the which he was wont to use in other Parables, which
illustrated duty from disallowed Customs, as Luke 16.8.

The Fourth Objection that Mr. J. answers, Chap. 7.
contains this Plea: That Usury is by God forbidden to the Poor only, and not
toward the Rich, and therefore lending to the Rich for use is lawful, As Exodus
22.25. Lev. 25.36.

Mr. J. Answ. This is a very specious Plea, I confess: but yet I hope through
mercy to overthrow it.

1. The most wise God foreseing how some would abuse such namings of the poor
people, leaves out the poor in the repetition of his Laws, i. e. in Deuteronomy.
23.19. Thou shall not lend upon Usury to thy Brother: Mark, Brother, And is not
the Rich thy Brother too?

Reply 1. I like this answer the worse, because it reflects upon the Wisdom of
God, in effect, attributing over-right to him: as if the inconveniences
happening had not been foreseen at first; the which oversights are frequent
with men, which they are wont to rectify by an after-act, revoking the former.
But far be it from us, that we should thus charge God with folly.

2. To see farther yet, that Mr. J. is out in his reckoning, and that, where
mention is made of lending in the repetition of the Law, the Poor were not left
out upon any such account, as is pretended; you shall find the Poor expressly
mentioned in the business of lending, in this Book of Deuteronomy. viz. Chap. 15.7, 8.
If there be among you a poor man of one of thy Brethren, within any of thy
Gates, -- thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor
Brother: but thou shall open thy hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him
sufficient for his need, in that which he wants.

This place joyneth Poor and Brother together. So Ezekiel. 18.17. the place so
often pointed to, and the which was written long after this foresight he
mentions; there we have these expressions: -- that have taken off his hand from
the Poor, and has not received Usury or Increase.

3. To come closer yet; Deuteronomy. 23.19. where it is pleaded, the Poor is left out,
and Brother put in its room; yet there, say I, the expressions, in effect, do
limit it to the Poor, for who are wont to borrow Victuals, and the like, save
the Poor? Hear Zanchy; Also put not out thy meat to usury; therefore he spoke
of the Poor. And Rivet: Let us consider the places: P. 284.
-- Deuteronomy. 23. where is no mention of the Poor, We mean all, and do contend,
that that third place contains the same restriction, if not in express terms;
yet both in the comparing of what goes before, and what follows after: for when
he injoyns, that none should lend to his Neighbor, either Money or Victuals
upon usury; he shows that usury to be forbidden, which should be received from
him, who had need of meat; and borrowed money, not for that end we have spoken
off, viz. for gain; but for his Maintenance, forced through necessity, as is
evinced from other places.

4. I shall add farther Testimonies: Mr. Baxter in his Directory, Part. 4. p.
125.. 18. Usury [as by him stated] is not forbidden us by the Law of Moses. 1.
Because Moses law never did forbid it: for 1. It is expressly forbidden as an
act of unmercifulness; and therefere forbidden only to the Poor and to
Brethren. 2. It is expressly allowed to be used to Strangers, Deuteronomy. 23.19, 20.
to whom nothing unjust or uncharitable might be done: only such a measure of
Charity was not required toward them, as unto Brethren. -- So that the
Prohibition of Usury is in the Law it self restrained only to their lending to
the Poor: but in the Prophets who do but reprove the sin, it is expressed
without that limitation, partly because it supposes the meaning of the Law to
be known, which the Prophets did but apply: and partly because there was little
or no lending used amongst the Jews, but to the needy, as an act of charity. 2.
And if it had been forbidden in Moses only, it would not extend to Christians
now, because the Law of Moses as such as is not in force.

5. What need of farther witness? The first Law against Usury limits it to the
poor, and there is no Law or Comment following in Scripture that extends it to
the rich, why then should we extend it to the rich? The Law says, Thou shall
not lend to thy Brother that is waxen poor by thee upon Usury: that is, (says
Mr. J. in his Comment) Thou shall not lend to the poor or rich upon Usury:
Strange Comment!

Again, In Lev. 25. The Law against Usury is not only restrained to the poor by
name, but his poverty is intimated as the reason of this free Lending: So it
runs, If thy Brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou
shall relieve him, that he may live with thee: This last reason is twice
repeated: All this intimating the persons to be such as borrow for a
Livelihood; necessity is the reason of his borrowing. Where the object and
reason of a prohibition cease, the prohibition also cease, says Rivet.
There are several Laws mentioned in this Chapter that are also limited to the
poor, see v. 25.35, 39, 47. And the same general reason annexed to them all,
viz. I am the Lord your God.

Mr. J. 2. And what were those usurers whom Nehemiah did so blame and condemn
for usury? were they not such as lent to them that had Lands, Vineyards, etc.
Neh. 5.6, 9, 11. Will you usurers call such Landed men poor?

Reply 1. Mr. J. himself called them poor borrowers; And were he in the like
case with most of them, he would count his Condition poor. Some of them so
poor, they were forced to sell their Children to keep themselves from starving,
after they had morgaged their Lands and Vineyards, etc.

2. But whether they are to be called poor or no, it seems they were for that
present very necessitous; otherwise they would not have mortgaged their
Estates, Lands, Houses, etc. To buy Corn, and for a Livelihood; nor have
suffered their Sons, and Daughters to have been brought into bondage.

3. Here I consult Rivet again. P. 279.
We grant there must be lending to a poor man place in Extremity, not only
without the hope of an early return, but also although there should be no hope
of the principal: farther, to those which otherwise do not want goods, but are
in such a condition wherein for a time they cannot enjoy their own, loan must
be granted freely, which they require to the necessary support of their life
for a time.

4. In my Animadversions on what is written by Mr. Capel on this subject, I
have given a fuller Answer to this place, viz. Neh. 5. Only this here; Let it
be considered, whether the Case mentioned were not extraordinary; as was that
of the Primitive Christians, Acts 2.
when they sold their possessions, and laid down the price at the Apostles
feet. And I think those none of the wisest Divines (whatever their Zeal may be)
that draw Ordinary Rules from Extraordinary Cases or Examples: As they that
would destroy propriety, and make all things Common, from the foresaid instance
of the primitive Christians: So they that would bring in a necessity on
Ministers ordinarily to work for a Livelihood, because the Apostle Paul under
Extraordinary Circumstances did so.

What Mr. J. says (1.) Of a sallacy of Causae non pro causa, p. 36.
avails nothing. For (upon supposition that the Law it self be not political
and proper to the Jews, but universal, and in its full force to this day) I
say, that usury in Scripture is forbidden only with respect to the poor; or,
wheresoever free lending is expressed with its object, there the poor are expressed
or implied; and the reason used for free lending reaches not others.

Mr. J. 2. Fallacy of consequence, for it does not therefore follow a man may
lend upon usury to a rich man; no more than this, that a man may rob a rich
man, because it is written, Rob not the poor, Prove. 22.22.

Reply 1. I grant his reasoning were good, if it were proved that all gain for
Loan were a moral evil, or against Natures Law, as Robbery; but that cannot be
proved.

2. In the Text mentioned, there is a particular reason added, whereon the
diswasion is grounded, or which was the temptation to the sin, viz. Because he
is poor, taking occasion from his poverty which is without power or defense,
says Diodate.

3. Learned Rivet has answered this objection, as urged by the Bishop of
Winchester: Thus. He urges, What a consequence is this? The Law forbids taking
use from a poor man, therefore it permits taking from the rich. This being
said, he knits many absurd consequences, which he pretends to be of the the
like import: As, The Law forbids to oppress Widows or Orphans, therefore it
permits, that such as have husbands and parents may be oppressed, etc. But in
such Consequences there is a dissimititude, because oppression and the like are
evil in themselves, as is clearly proved from other places, but it is not in it
self evil, to take any increase for loan, but in some cases only, into which
the rich man, while such, falls not.

Mr. J. The Stranger is Excepted, and not the Rich, Deuteronomy. 23.29.20.

Reply. Neither was it necessary; the person to whom it was unlawful thus to
lend. being sufficiently pointed out in former rehearsals of the Law. The Dutch
Annotators upon Deuteronomy. 23.20. Unto the Stranger thou shall lend upon usury, i.
e. Thou may lend upon usury; because they had dealing with the Jews, not as
the poor Israelites had by reason of poverty, but to trade and traffic with
them, and to be enriched by them.

Mr. J. A gracious promise is here made to such as shall so freely, and without
Usury lend to rich and poor.

Reply. 1. This is more than I can see from the Text (or any other) the
borrowers here being such as borrowed Victuals and Money to supply their urgent
necessity, but on the contrary there is a curse upon the head of any that is
liberal to the rich, Prove. 22.16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his
riches, and he that gives to the rich, shall surely come to want.

2. Let the Reader observe how Mr. J. makes it our duty equally to lend freely
to poor and rich. The Law saying, Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy
Brother? And is not the Rich thy Brother too? says he. In that the Law says,
Thou shall not lend upon usury, It does say, Thou shall lend; Under this
Prohibition (says Ainsworth in Deuteronomy. 23.20.) the contrary is commanded, that
we should lend unto our poor Brother freely, and not take again any thing more
than was lent. And to our rich Brother too, says Mr. J. But so far I think he
will have but few of his mind. But if we are not bound to lend to the rich, I
see not, how we can be bound to lend freely to them.

3. Of a truth there should be some difference put between rich and poor in the
business of lending: So thought the learned Dr. Hammond, Pract. Catech. p. 316.
who after he has given us (as he says) the one only ground against Usury in
the New Testament, taken from Luke 6.20. p. 313, etc.
And having declared his Judgment against taking use of the Poor, he adds; As
for the Case of the rich man's lending to the rich, there has appeared nothing
in either of these Interpretations which will oblige us to it, or (if he do)
which will prohibit the taking Interest of him. -- So do I not know any other,
so much as color of Text in the New Testament that forbids it, nor indeed
reason nor Analogy, etc.

So then Mr. I. might have taken notice of others besides Presbyterian and
Congregational men, p. 38.
that all allow of taking use of the Rich: here you have this learned Doctor
putting a difference betwixt Poor and Rich in the transaction of Lending; Rules
of holy living p. 205.
as also Doctor Tailor does in that of buying and selling: That to poor persons
the utmost measure and extent of Justice, is unmerciful; which to a rich person
is Innocent, because it is Just, and he needs not thy mercy and remission.

4. Yea, p. 56.
we learn from Mr. J. himself, That by lending to such as are rich, we do but
furnish them with Nerves and Sinews to do mischief with, to oppress others in
bargaining, etc. If we lend freely to the rich, would not the same mischiefs
follow, yea, be increased?

His Answer to the second Reply needs no farther consideration, as being
abundantly satisfied from what has been already spoken. p. 38.
Only, As to what he whispers into the Ministers Ear; I am to seek out of his
meaning, when he says, If thou art against usury indeed, as thou say thou
art, then why do thou speak against me that speak against it, when I do not
once mention lending to the rich?

Has he not once and again mentioned Lending to the rich? Vide p. 35, etc.
Does he not plead for a free Lending to such? Does he not make a Lending for
gain to such sinful?

Reply 3. We must not make more sins then God makes.

Mr. J. I confess it, but does God make Lending to the rich no sin? I pray
where is the place? show it if you can.

Reply: His Answer depends upon this Medium, whatever is not expressed in
Scripture to be lawful, is sinful: the which, how weak it is I need not stand
to show: It being, as far as I have learnt, a certain rule, that in things of
this nature, where Civil Contracts and dealings are concerned, whatsoever is no
way forbidden, is lawful. God has no where made lending to the rich for gain a
sin; Ergo, It is no sin.

Obj. 5. I show Charity to my Nelghbour, for by my loan; he preserves his
Estate, etc.

Mr. J. Answ. 1. Charity is kind, but usury is Cruel.

Reply. This is said, but not proved, as to the Usury I am pleading for. It is
evident and undeniable, being every days experience, that many men have not
only preserved, but increased their Estates by this means, and the Commonwealth
not at all bitten.

Mr. J. 2. Charity should be free in lending, Luke 6.35.

Reply. So Charity should be free in giving too; Only both must be where there
are due objects, to some we ought to give freely, to others we ought to lend
freely; but others there are to whom we owe neither, either by the Laws of God
or Man.

Give to every one that asks: Ut supra p. 314.
Though the words (says Dr. Hammond) are in an unlimited latitude, yet
ordinary prudence will interpret them so, that if a covetous rich man ask of
me, I am not bound to give to him, but only to him whose wants set him on
asking: And so consequently in like manner the prohibition or forbidding to
exact, take, or require use of him that borrows, belongs not again to the poor
or mean Creditor, when a rich man borrows of him, etc.

Obj. 6. I will never be persuaded God will damn that man who does as he would
be done to, -- Mat. 7.12. I would be willing to pay, etc.

Mr. J. Answ. 1. Nor would I be persuaded that the Usurer would be willing by
an absolute and free will to pay Interest. --

Reply. I am in this of his mind, if any would so far befriend the Borrower, as
to lend him gratis: this being of the two more eligible. Quis nisi mentis
inops, etc.

Mr. J. adds, To pay Interest; if he were in many Borrowers Case.

Reply. 1. This is not well stated: the question being, whether it be not
reasonable for some that borrow to pay interest, that can do it, and not be
prejudiced by the Contract.

2. I shall not pass farther, until I have looked a little nearer into the
Golden Rule laid down by our Savior, Of doing as we would be done unto: which
is the Rule of all Civil Trade and Commerce.

So B. Tailor thought: Rule of holy live. p. 180.
Whatsoever ye would that Men, etc. This is the measure (says he) of
Commutative Justice, or of that Justice which supposes the Exchange of things
profitable, for things profitable: that as I supply your need, you may supply
mine; as I do a benefit to you, I may receive one by ou.

3. Dr. Hammond treating (as before) of Lending to the rich for gain, Pract.
Cat. p. 316.
writes thus; I do not know any other so much as color of Text in the New
Testament which forbids it, nor indeed reason, nor Analogy, either from that
great Rule in hand, Of doing as I would be done to (for if I were a rich man, I
would, in Case of convenience or advantage, that a loan would probably bring in
me, be willing to pay use for it) Or of loving my Neighbor as my self.

3. From this very Rule Zanchy pleads the Lawfulness of taking Use or Interest.
In Ephesians. 4.28.
Add (says he) the Rule of Christ, whatsoever therefore ye would, etc. But who
is there that would not (and that from a right Judgment) be made partakers of
that gain, which is made by the Communication of thy money?

5. Such a Contract (says Rivet) has its foundation in natural equity, p. 280.
-- for natural equity requires an equality: which is not where one receives
all the profit, but the other all the disprofit. It is meet therefore in
bargaining, that the profits and disprofits be equal: that therefore things
unequal may become equal, the very Law of nature persuades that the profits be
divided, therefore a wealthy person, to whom an undue office of Lending is
performed without any necessity, ought to pay to the Lender by way of
recompense, part of the gain gotten by the money lent: and may be bound
thereunto before lending, as unto a Condition. The which is confirmed by this
Rule of natural right, As you would that men, etc. Luke 6.31. But there is none
that would not be admitted to a participation of the gain, which was procured
by the loan he made with the foresaid Circumstances: Therefore he ought to deal
so with his Creditors, and not think himself aggrieved by so doing.

Lastly, p. 9.
Hear Bishop Hall: Shortly (says he) for the guidance either of our caution or
liberty in matter of borrowing and lending, the only Cynosure, is our Charity;
for in all humane and Civil acts of Commerce, it is a sure Rule, that what
soever is not a violation of charity, cannot be unlawful; and whatsoever is not
agreeable to charity, can be no other than sinful: and as Charity must be your
rule, so your self must be the Rule of your Charity, look what you would wish
to be done to you by others, do but the same to others, you cannot be guilty of
the breach of Charity.

But the equity and reasonableness of the transaction, here pleaded for, as
grounded on this Rule, will farther appear, if it be remembered that Charity
begins at home.

1. Bishop Hall says, God has not Commanded you to love any man more than your
self; p. 2.
and there can be no reason why you shouldvail your own just advantage to
another man's Excess. -- Again; What reason can there be, that to pleasure
another man, I should hurt my self, or that I should enrich another by mine own
loss?

2. God would not have thee (says Mr. Burton, p. 4.6.
in Caveate for Sureties) to help thy Neighbor without any care to save thy
self: For although he has said, Love thy Neighbor as thy self, yet he never
said, Love thy Neighbor better than thy self; or, Love thy self less than thy
Neighbor, but love him as thy self: i. e. help him and save thy self too, or
else thou should love him, and hate thy self, which in the same words is
condemned.

3. Thus Cicero; De Off. l. 3. p. 115.
Neither are our own profits to be omitted by us, and delivered to others, when
we want them our selves: but every one must look to his own profit; which may
be obtained with another wrong: wisely speaks Chrysippus; He that runs a Race,
ought to strive and endeavor to the utmost that he may overcome: but he ought
not at all to supplant him, with whom he striveth, or thrust him by with his
hand. Thus in our life it is not unjust for any one to seek after what makes
for use, but to take from another is not lawful.

4. You may find it applied to the present Case by Grotius: Annot. in Luc. 6.35.
Nature dictates that none is bound to profit another to his own loss: but he
that parts with his money for a time to pleasure another could have laid it out
upon Fields, or Houses, and receive the fruits the mean while, the which, if
any call uncertain, yet that uncertainty, as all chance, has its value, and
may be sold.

More fully Rivet. p. 280.
Christian Charity requires that every man chiefly look to himself and his
Relations, all things considered; If any provide not for his own, etc. 1 Timothy
5.8. And Parents are bound to lay up for their Children, 2 Cor. 12.4, etc.

5. The same is applied by Dr. Hammond to selling: pract. cat. p. 301.
He that sells too low, may offend against himself and his own Family; and a
man is to love himself, and not his Neighbor only.

Obj. 5. The laws of men, and even of Christians, the Civil law, the Canon law,
the Statute law, do allow of usury, and do you think they would, if all Usurers
should be damned, as you say?

Mr. J. Answ. 1. Denying the Assertion, that they allow of it; they do but
tolerate, permit and restrain it for some Civil good, and to avoid greater
evils.

Reply 1. Greater evils? What greater than the damnation of so many souls? (for
that is the doom he has passed on all that take Use) I cannot believe it:
neither can there be any Civil good sufficient to counterballance such a
mischief, by him supposed.

2. Neither can I be persuaded, (however God might tolerate a Bill of Divorce
for the hardness of the Jews hearts) that men may take so much upon them, and
contrary to an express Prohibition of God, by Law, positively tolerate or
permit that which is in it self unlawful, against the light of Nature, and so
destructive to the Souls of men; for what would this be, but a virtual
dispensation given for the breach of the Divine Laws? And might not the Papists
plead for the like Toleration of Stews in their Dominions, even on the same
ground, of avoiding greater mischiefs.

3. But I think it not difficult to prove, that it is somewhat more than a bare
permission, or immunity from punishment that Usury lays claim to from these
Laws; I mean, an allowance, (by him denied:) for by virtue of these Laws, may
not a man recover the Use by them prescribed? In some Cases, the Law of Nature,
and the Laws of all Countries do allow it, says Mr. Perkins. It is expressly
allowed to be used to Strangers, Deuteronomy. 23. says Mr. Baxter. Hither belong
(says Zanchy) the just laws of Pious Emperors -- who also determine how much
it may be lawful to take above the Principal. And that Mr. J. is mistaken
concerning our Laws, I shall send him to the last Statute, (which is the only
Law in force in this Land:) This looking back upon the Law immediately
preceding, expresses, Its allowance of eight in the hundred. And now I am come
so far, I shall take a little more notice of the Law in force: This forbids
taking above six per Cent. by way of bargain, loan, exchange, chievesance,
shift or interest: some whereof are by Mr. J's concession in themselves lawful,
and therefore here not only permitted, but also allowed, as long as they keep
within the bounds prescribed: And all these forementioned dealings are
forbidden, not only with respect to Money, but also to Wares, Merchandise, or
other thing or things whatsoever; and with respect to the forbearing and giving
day of payment for one whole year, etc.

Mr. Bolton rejects this last too, as Usury; what are Mr. J's thoughts herein I
know not; but by that Opinion, I suppose, few of the Shopkeepers, Traders,
Merchants, etc. in the Nation will escape censure. Whatever he thinks in this
matter, I shall hereafter prove it reasonable, and the taking of Use to stand
on the same foundation of Justice and Equity with this.

4. Let it be also considered, that forasmuch as propriety (which is sounded on
the Law of Nature) receives its limitation and application from Human Laws;
whether any man has not the same right to 6 per Cent. in this land, that lends
his money, as any one one has to his Lands and Tenements, or any Goods he enjoys
by virtue of these Laws? pract. cat. p. 298.
Dr. Hammond speaking against the founding dominion in Grace; brings to
disprove it: That known Maxim, that Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, that
he came not to interpose in Secular Affairs, (such are the proprieties of men)
but disclaimed having any thing to do to be a Judge, or divider amongst men,
and himself pays Tribute, etc.

And these things we are treating of, being Civil, Political, and depending on
human Contracts, are the proper subjects wherein human Laws are concerned, for
the stating the bounds between borrower and lender in the matter of gain; as
they also do in some cases between the buyer and seller: provided still, that
these Laws do keep within the general bounds of Equity and Moderation that may
be collected from Scripture or right Reason. It appertains to these Laws to
state and appoint; as at what rate Gold and Silver shall be valued; so also
what rate Money lent shall bear.

It Is what we have learnt before from Dr. Tailor: H. living. p. 205.
That commutative Justice is such as depends upon the laws of Man directly, and
upon the laws of God only by consequence, etc. And we have Luther's Judgment
too, favoring what I aim at.

Conscience (says he) may be consulted for, If the Magistrate, with the advice
of Divines and and Lawyers, prescribe a certain middle way in these Contracts.
And Grotius. In luc. 6.35.


First, They ought to take heed, that under the covert of Usury they exact not
more than is meet, the which because it is not placed in a certain point, but
admits of a latitude according to the diversity of Countries and Nations, ought
to be defined by Civil Law.

5. I shall close this Subject with Learned Rivet: P. 281.
In these Cases, neither Christian Charity, nor Natural Equity, nor Humanity is
violated, if beside the Principal there be an addition of some increase, and so
much gain, as by Public Law is allowed and defined; and that by the same right
by which it is lawful with a safe Conscience, to buy from the same person part
of his Revenues or Estate.

Afterward: p. 282.
A wise Magistrate is not to be blamed; if to prevent strifes, he shall be
pleased to use a certain moderation, by appointing a certain sum for an yearly
Pension: And seeing the Magistrate rewards Money disbursed by Subjects with
such an yearly Pension of five or six Florens, as is done in these Provinces,
therefore the appointment thereof ought so much the more to be approved, (Not
as a toleration, or some bounds put to Usury, otherwise unlawful) for the
preventing of abuses: otherwise he ought not to administer an occasion to sin;
but because he sees it necessary for Civil Society, and not against Equity,
being he had an eye to that, and designed to stop many Controversies. Therefore
the opinion of Learned Men is not amiss, that as in Civil Commerce the
Magistrate may make use of other Constitutions, so of this also, without any
scruple of Conscience; when he knows the Magistrate to be the Minister of God,
and furnished by him with the power of making Laws, whom in this his Ordination
he knows to have respect to Natural Equity.

I come to particulars: What Mr. J. 1. says of the Civil Law, -- Whereby
ancient burdens were reduced (says he) to some Mediocrity, makes more against
him than for him, in that it acknowledges a Mediocrity may be found out in the
transaction between borrower and lender.

2. Canon Law: The Doctors of it (says he) use this Argument, That an Inferior
law cannot take off the law of the superior.

Reply: Gods Law of Usury being peculiar to that Nation, or restraining it to
the poor; there is room enough for Human Laws in this case.

Not impertinent to my purpose is what is laid down by the Rev. D. Hammond:
pract. cat. p. 313.
I must tell you, that the business of Usury is not so clearly stated in the N.
T. ( and for that among the Jews in the Old, it is both obscure, and only to a
fellow-Jew, and so belongs not unto Christians, who are not obliged by their
Judicial Laws, any further than the equity of them is imitable by us) as that I
can set strict and certain Laws to any man's actions from thence, etc.

Mr. J. 3. Statute Law, Jac. 21. Provided that no words in this Law contained,
shall be construed or expounded to allow the practice of Usury in the point of
Religion or Conscience.

Reply: Allow it then it does in civil converse. And the determination of the
Controversy, whether the Law of Old among the Jews made against Usury; be in
force, is foreign and extrinsick to a Civil Court or Judicature. If the Civil
Law forbids flesh in Lent, the use thereof at that time, in point of
Conscience, remains lawful as before.

Mr. J. Answ. 2. That these Laws are so far from allowing of Usury, that they
show themselves most bitter enemies to it.

Reply: Not all Laws surely: we have in part seen the contrary already: nor
against all Usury, but such as is vexatious and oppressive. In Ephos. 4.28.
So Learned Zanchy understood the Laws that were made against Usury; saying,
Hither belong all the Laws of Heathen and pious Emperors, whereby heed was
taken, that such like Usury should not be exercised.

Mr. J. 1. The Civil Law in old time was so strict against Usurers, that they
would not admit an Usurer to the administration of the Commonwealth.

Reply 1. I can tell him too, when they would not admit a Christian to the same
Employment.

2. Whereas he says, In old time: how old it was we may learn from Grotius: In
Luc. 6.
Leo [who lived in the ninth Cent. and began his Reign, Anno 936.] was the
first Emperor, -- who thinking all Usury forbidden Christians, established it
by a common Law, whereas before the Churches themselves were wont to take Money
[sub trientalibus Usuris] after four in the hundred.

And the Emperors which sorbad Usury, forbad Suretiship too, says the same
Author: Grotius De Jure, etc. l. 5. c. 2.. 1, 2.
which strict Laws some Emperors since have recalled; or else Zanchy was
mistaken, who says; Hither belong the Laws of Pious Emperors, -- who also have
determined, how much above the Principal it may be lawful to take.

3. Whereas the Laws Ecclesiastical and Canon, denied them the Sacraments, etc.
This also was toward the latter Ages, not in the purest Antiquity, if we credit
Grotius: Amongst the Ancient Canons (says he) I find none, which removes from
the Sacrament all those that exercise Usury promiscuously; that was done in the
latter Ages.

4. Statute Law: Though some of these condemned Usury; yet they took it from
Tradition as granted: not undertaking in point of Conscience to determine
whether lawful or not; this not belonging to their Jurisdiction. And our late
Statute of Usury, passes no such reflections thereon, as some before had done;
and the Laws in several other Countries, looking on it with a more savourable
eye, allowing the practice thereof for their Christian Subjects, under due
simits and restraints.

Mr. J. Some will reply: That the law may be understood to be so bitter against
all Oppressive Usury. But I answer, No.

Reply: It may be reasonably supposed; that it was this oppressive Usury, that
gave the occasion to those severe Laws against it: from which oppressive Usury,
they did not think themselves, it is like, secure enough, unless they condemned
all in general. Here Mr. J. grants, that all Usury is not oppressive: Let us
consider his Answer.

No, for it declares also what Usury is, namely, when a man takes any thing
over and above his loan: So Usury is committed, when a man having lent any
thing that does consist upon number weight and measure, does take any thing
over and above his loan.

Resp. A man lends his Neighbor a thousand pounds of Wool, or an hundred
Bushels of Corn, suppose for two years; here is number, weight and measure: at
the two years end may he not take somewhat over and above this loan; seeing the
other, with his leave, has the advantage of making the best profit of his
Goods all this while? Grotius states it lawful, In Luke 6.35.
saying, All acknowledge that he has more, that receives for the present time
any thing, than he that receives a long time after, for the advantage the
natural possession brings with it; which takes place no less in loan, than in a
thing hired: if we stand more upon the weight of things than the Nicity of
words; but this very thing which is placed in the delay of time, without doubt
may be valued, and therefore may be put into the bargain.

Obj. 8. Diverse Modern Divines allow of usury, if it does not exceed the sum
limited by Law, and be moderate.

Mr. J. Answ. I know some few such Divines do, etc.

Reply 1. The way to find out the truth, is not to go to the Poll: Testimonies
must be rather weighed than numbered: Errornot seldom having the major-vote. In
this our concern, I doubt not, Grotius is in the right Nothing, In Luke 6.35.
says he, is more safe, than to tie up Rules, either to the bounds of right
Reason, or of the Divine Oracles.

2. Yet, as far as I can understand, the number is not so great on his part, as
he would persuade us; but may admit of a defalcation: few coming up to the
height of his censure and strict definition, so as to make all expectation of
the least gain Usury; and all such Usury damnable.

3. Whereas he brings in one Mustering up 18. for it, but answered by Mr.
Bolton, and thereby, he says, his labor saved.

I think on the same account he might have saved his whole Treatise, at least
what concerns the objections forementioned, the work being done to his hands,
by the same Learned Author.

Mr. J. But what speak I ( says B. Jewel) of the Ancient Fathers? -- There was
never any Religion nor Sect, nor State, nor Degree, nor Profession of men, but
they have misliked it.

Reply. And that deservedly too, if this be meant of oppressive Usury:
otherwise none is bound to believe him; and it is hard to prove the truth of it.
He brings in B. Sands saying, All Nations have at all times condemned Usury;
and Mr. Bolton -- None have stood for Usury, sor the space of 1500. years after
Christ: If they meant of this Usury I am pleading for the Lawfulness of it will
appear; that they did not take right measures, nor cast their Accounts right,
if we call to mind what before we received from Grotius, viz. Ibid.
That Leo was the first Christian Emperor that made a law against all Usury;
whereas before that the Churches themselves were wont to take Usury according
to 4 per Cent.

And Mr. J. himself affirms, That it reached to learned men in the Church in
Chrysostom 's time; -- and also to many great Professors of Godliness; And I
shall add, to Martyrs and Confessors too, within this last Century: As I find
it in the History of the Bohemian Persecution, wherein the Protestant
Professors are said to suffer grievously under the Emperor, Circa An. 1620. The
words of the Historian are these:

And because they thought that many had Money at Use; that they might also
squeeze out this; they commanded that every man should bring what Bonds he had,
upon pain of loosing the whole sum, if any one did but conceal the least. In
Moravia there was a peculiar Judicature erected for this thing, which they
called Grida, at Mulas-berg, where all were bound to appear; some were restored
the whole, viz. those of less value, for an appearance of Justice, others were
suppressed for counterfeit reasons, from others a part was set apart for the
Emperor, etc.

2. Whereas Mr. Bolton says, That all Councils ( besides the Nicene) that ever
menioned it, did condemn it: I may say, neither that Council, nor any other for
the first four hundred years condemned it (one excepted) save in the Clergy.

What is urged by him out of the Rev. Bishop Hall; I shall make so bold as to
examine.

Bishop Hall: Nature teaches, that Metals are not things capable of
superfetation: that the use of the Stock once received, it is not the lenders,
but the borrowers: for the power and right of disposing the Principal, is by
Contract transferred for the time to the hands of him that receives it, etc.

Reply 1. Let it be observed how this learned Bishop, On the same question,
does as good as allow taking Use of the Rich, and is not, that I can find, of
Mr. J's mind, in making the expectation of gain, Usury: only he is against
binding by Contract to pay Use: Yet, In that the power and right of disposing
the Principal (as he says) is by Contract transferred to the borrower: I see no
reason, why by the same Contract, a right to somewhat of the gains procured by
this Money, may not be transferred to the lender.

2. I shall consider what he pleads: Nature teaches, that Metals are not
capable of superfetation.

Reply 1. If they be capable of fetation, it is enough. Of all other, this
seems to me the most barren Argument: Upon search, I find that Calvin speaking
of this Argument, that Money begets not Money, calls it a foolish, childish
reason. And Mr. Bolton himself judges it a weak argument, and prejudicial to
the cause it pleads for. But when the barenness of Metals is pleaded, I may
safely think, it is not meant of Metals in the Mine; for there they receive a
Natural Increase, at least by apposition.

If it be meant of a Civil Increase, so experience manifests, that Metals are
not fruitless, but capable of producing Increase: The World, I trust, is not
now to learn, that we ow the value of Metals, (I mean of current Coin) not to
Natures Law, but to Civil and Human Institution. In a political sense, I say,
Money is capable of Increase. Vol. 1.63.
Pious Perkins has answered this Objection: Let us hear him. Albeit (says he)
Money in it self be not fruitful, yet it is made very fruitful by the borrowers
good use; as ground which is not fruitful except it be tilled. Thus learned
Ames: De Cons. p. 374. In luc. 6.35.
Thus Grotius: Many that they may prove all gain to be unlawful from the use of
Money, -- say, Money in its own nature is barren: But in this Argument there is
an evident false reasoning; for Money is said to be barren by nature, not that
the law of nature ordains so; but because the industry of men, not Nature it
self, has given the groundwork to such fruit: As also a House is barren by
nature, yet the Rent thereof, none will say is unjustly taken by the Landlord.

Bishop Hall urges, That the use of the Stock once received, is not the
lenders, but the borrowers; for the power and right of disposing, -- is
transferred, etc.

Reply 1. But on what condition was this right transferred? or is the lender
bound to transfer this right of using and disposing his money to another, as
rich, or richer than himself? and is not this right of using, etc. valuable? If
so, (which cannot be denied) by the same Contract that the lender passes away
his right, may he not as justly, for this right transferred, have some gain
secured to himself?

2. But this and the foregoing Argument being fully answered by Rivet, I shall
transcribe what he writes.

4. Obj. Money is of its own nature barren.

Resp. Carolus Molinaeus answered, Rivet P. 287
That Money by the help of a man's labor, was a fruitful thing, as a Field,
which of its own nature brings forth no fruit without human industry.

They Reply: That will make nothing for his cause that takes any sum above the
Principal, but by this very thing his wickedness is reproved; for Money as by
human industry it is fruitful, so its fruitful to his owner alone, not to
another, not to him that by lending has deprived himself of the propriety.

What has been said, may serve for an answer to this Objection. For the
Creditor may be considered, either as before the delivery of this money,
whereof he is yet the owner; or after the voluntary delivery of the Money. In
the first State, seeing he is the owner of the thing, he may Covenant before he
deliver it. In the second, if he absolutely gives the Money without any other
Covenant, then that the like Sum may be repaid, he has parted with his right
thereto, and may not demand any thing for its use: but we speak not of what is
lawful after the Money absolutely delivered; but of the first condition,
wherein the disposing of the Money is in the hand of the Creditor, with a power
either of not delivering it without a condition, or of delivering. Neither may
it be objected, that the right of using the Money, or of any other Commodity
which may be consumed by using, cannot be distinguished from the Commodity, and
therefore nothing can justly be required for it: for that is nor absolutely
true, -- for that right is valuable, the which he that lends his Money wants.

B. H. How odious and severely interdicted usurary Contracts have been in all
times.

Reply. 1. If by Usurary Contracts he means the taking of Interest beyond
measure and common equity; let it be rendered as odious as they please.

2. If thereby be meant any thing received above the principal, we deny it
interdicted at all times; not surely in our times wherein the taking of such a
Sum is by Law allowed. And I perceive, that by Vsurary Contract, or Obligation,
is meant an illegal Contract, viz. The Covenant for taking more for Lending
than the Law allows. For I have read, Orphans Legacy. p, 206. Vide Crooks
Reports. part. 1. p. 20. and 27. De off. l. ^ p. 106.
If one be bound in an Obligation which is Usurious, the Bond is void betwixt
the parties.

3. But if true, that such moderate taking above the principal were so odious
in all times foregoing: we may find Cicero's observation verified herein.

Says he, It often comes to pass in time, that what was generally wont to be
accounted odious, may be discovered not to be so.

4. I shall anon show how these Heathens that were against all usury, were
against borrowing too; unless in case of extremity.

B. H. Wise Cato drove them out of all Sicily: and Lucullus from Asia, etc.

Reply. I know the Grandees among the Romans were went to take much upon them
in the conquered Provinces: and that many then (as well as since) forbad such
practices in others, that in themselves they frequently allowed, or other
things as bad. And of this Sage Cato (who knew, it seems, Sen. de vitabeata. c.
17.18. Idem. c. 22.
fortius loqui quam vivere.)

Seneca says, that he was wont to commend Curious and Coruncanius, and that Age,
wherein it was a fault fit to be punished by the Censor, to have a few Silver
Plates, and yet this while he possessed four Millions of Sestertia's; that is
above a Million and Quarter of pounds, according to our Count.

How he should heap up so much wealth without Usury, or Courses that were
worse, it is not easy to conceive.

I find Cicero also (though no Enemy to him) to perstringe him of over
rigidness in relation to their Allies, De off. l. 3. p. 137. Mr. Capels
Appendix. p. 290.
and in the business of the treasure and tribute. And I understand too, that
this Cato, who was so bitter against lending money for Use, could willingly
lend his own Wife to Hortensius for Use and Increase. Strange it is that he
should discern the one to be against the Light of nature, and not the other!

Mr. J. brings in Mr. Trap saying, That at Rome (this day) all Usurers are
Excommunicated Monthly.

Reply. And do not all Protestants, as well as these, stand Excommunicate at
this day, by the same Church of Rome? are Idolaters, Harlots, and Adulterers,
so often Excommunicated with them? Or, why should they, that think it not
inconsistent with their piety to tolerate Stews, etc. be so over angry with
such as receive any gain for loan? Unless the Pope have the same design in it,
that I hinted before as projected by Tiberius, in forbidding of lesser Traders
this way, that he might have the greater custom.

Mr. J. Ex Weems. -- The Primitive Church ordained that no man should eat or
drink with such Usurers, nor fetch fire from them.

Reply. Still the Question recurs what is meant by such Usurers? Such, I trust,
who made it their Trade to oppress, overreach, and cheat: And what Primitive
Church he means I know not: The Canons that were made Cent. 4th. Against Usury,
concern the Clergy only, save one that looks farther.

Mr. J. brings in Pareus affirming the Usury of Christians to be so great a
profaneness, p. 46. Worth of Souls. p. 213. marg.
that it hinders the Conversion of the Jews.

Reply 1. Oppressive Usury, as well as other sins, may have a hand in the
hindrance of that great work; (not that I think the Jews are much stumbled at
it, who are notorious for practicing thereof; and look on the Law against
Usury, as made in favor of those of their own Nation) but how this moderate
taking of gain should contribute thereto, Ut supra. p. 215.
I am still to seek: though this I perceive passes with him for profaneness
too.

2. Pareus calls the Jews, [famulos Christianorum] the Christians Servants. The
Christians, it is sike employing the Jews as their Brokers to put out their
money for them, either because they would seem shy of Usury themselves, or
because the Jews were more skilful and dextrous at the work.

3. I meet with Hornbeck reproving the Jews for the oppression and griping
Usury by them practiced against the Christians, Contra Jud. l. 7. c. 7.
under the notion of Strangers, and withal he minds Christian Magistrates of
their failure in suffering the Jews to use their Cheats and griping Exactions
amongst Christians, showing the ill consequences thereof; and amongst others
this, viz. The hinderance of their Conversion: which he says, is made a Common
observation by our Divines, viz. Luther, Fagius, Sands, Prolego. p. 28.
etc.

Mr. J. I will set down the Theses of the University of Wittenburgh, publicly
there disputed a little after Luther was risen.

Reply. This was but a little after Luther was risen: but we have seen before,
how Luther himself, when grown more Experienced, and toward his latter days,
was grown more moderate in his thoughts about this subject: And the like may
well be supposed from this same University, not only from the influence Luther
had thereon; but for that in Rivet's Catalogue of those that favor it, I find,
Solomon Gesner, Professor at Wittenberg to be one: Of the same Judgment was
Wollebius and Windeline, Christ Theol. l. 2. c. 12. Moral Philos. p. 800.
both famous Professors of Divinity, the one at Basil, the other at Anhalt; who
also asserts, that most Modern Divines, Lawyers and Moralists were of the same
Judgment: And to his University, I shall oppose another, viz. The University of
Tubing.

M. J. Univ. Wit. 1. pos. Forasmuch as all Vsurys are in themselves evil, -- It
follows that all stipulations for Usury are of no moment.

Reply: May then the borrower promising, with a safe Conscience break his
promise, and save his money? Whereas of the godly man, before his Text, it is
said, He swears [or promiseth] to his own hurt, and changes not. Whether all
Usury be in it self evil, we may consider more hereafter, when we look into Mr.
Bolton's discourse upon Usury.

Mr. J. 3. Answ. I am ashamed to see and read how our adversaries the Papists,
who scorn to appear for Usury, do cast it in our teeth, that the Calvinists,
especially, -- allow that usury, which does not exceed the Princes Tax, as they
call it, that is, the sum permitted to be taken by Law, over and above the
Principal: And will you own your selves to be such Calvinists, and such
Heretics.

Reply 1. Good words Sir; such language ill becomes you, how well soever it
might become a Papists Pen.

2. But I come to apply salve to this sore.

1. Do the Papists scorn to appear for Usury? not all surely; and the rest it
is like desire to play least in sight. p. 33. Marg.
He himself mentions several Popish Schoolmen of another Judgment; as
Abulensis, Conrade, etc.

2. Read what is written by Mr. Capel (an Anti-Usurer) of the Papists,
Oftentat. p. 269.
even of those amongst them that are most severe against Usury. Papists (says
he) teach, that in case a man be in very necessity when he takes use, and makes
profit by his Money, yet if after this, necessity cease, he is not bound to
make restitution, when he has wherewithal, and this necessity they stretch,
and will have reach to his Estate: for, say they, by the Law of Nature all
things are common, Mine and Thine came in after by law positive, etc. the
Papists then that hold Use unlawful, do not hold it unlawful for all persons to
take it.

2. And to Jews they give leave to use their griping Usuries, when they can
reprove what is moderate in Christians. I receive it from Hornbeck, Cont. Jud.
proleg. P. 28.
speaking of the oppressive Usury practiced by the Jews toward the Christians,
but condemned by Synods and Decrees of the Emperors, and commonly decryed by
our Christian Writers, as a cause of the Jews hardening and estrangement from
the Christian Faith; he adds, So that it is a wonder that there are some among
the Papists that defend these things; and that usury, which all the Canons
banne, they grant to the Jews: to wit, because the same seemed good to the Lord
Pope for gains sake. But our Divines think otherwise, and with one consent
detest these things.

3. And though the Papists generally condemn Usury; it is but the name mostly,
whiles under other names they allow the practice thereof. Public Banks having
been instituted by the Popes themselves; as Rivet informs, who showing what sad
work they made therewith, concludes thus: p. 289.
The which things I were willing to mention by the way, that one might see how
serupulous their Conscience is, who do so acutely dispute of usury, wherein
they will admit no moderation, so as that in any case, upon the account of
loan, it should be lawful to receive any thing above the Principal.

4. And the same Author brings in Scotus and Maldonate speaking as much, p. 282.
in effect, as the Calvinists do.

He brings in Scotus excepting those cases from unlawful Usury. 1. When one
takes above the Principal from Compact, in respect of a Conventional Penalty.
-- 2. Upon the account of Interest. -- 3. When both Principal and Overplus are
put to an hazard; Yea the same Author affirms, That it is lawful to take
somewhat over, because Money may be borrowed for a show, for an ornament, and
to make pretense of ability, that one may appear rich. Which last case (says
Rivet) has not so much equity, as that which covenants for an yearly Pension.

Maldonate to the forementioned cases, adds Suretiship. -- The same Author also
brings this distinction, which falls in with that we have used above. In
lending Money or any other thing, there are two Rules to be observed for the
avoiding of Usury. 1. Whether he that asks to borrow, do ask out of necessity,
or for the sake of gaining: for if he ask out of necessity, it must be
delivered without gain: If he ask to gain therewith, here Charity has no
place, but the same may be laid out as an instrument of Traffic; for which
Money thus exposed to Traffic, he that takes gain does not commit Usury. 2.
That it may be considered by what art he is wont to gain, that asks the
Money; for if he he honest, and does not ask to get unjust gain, all scruple is
taken away, etc.

What say we more than is here said?

3. The same Popish Writers, that deny all Usury as unjust, can yet palliate or
approve of some kinds of theft directly against the eighth Commandment: if we
believe the learned Spanhemius. Dub. Ev. part 3. p. 672.
As for the Opinions (says he) and Decrees of the Schoolmen, Canonists and
Casuists, we weigh them not, seeing their authority is of no force, decisions
weak, and foundation slippery, not approved by Abulensis himself, and many
other learned men. Truly it is a wonder these men should so scrupulously and
anxiosly proscribe all Usury, yea, that which is moderate, grounded on the best
right, and bounded with due cautions: and yet in the mean time do alleviate or
cherish other sins, yea many Thefts directly contrary to the eighth
Commaendment, of which sort many are to be found in Navar's Enchiridion,
Emanuel Sa's Aphorisms, and Tolet's Cases of Conscience; etc.

Mr. J. 5. Diverse Modern Divines were against the strict keeping of the
Sabbath. -- And will you profane the Sabbath? -- because such and such French
and German Divines are against the Morality of the Sabbath? --

Reply: This is not reasoning nor disproving; but a needless laying open the
shame of good men: because they were mistaken in one, must they necessarily be
mistaken in another thing? If Peter were to be reproved for symbolizing with
the Jews, must he therefore be reproved for preaching to the Gentiles? I could
name him too some that are against Usury, that are also against the Morality of
the Sabbath; will it follow, or will he grant, that because they were mistaken
in the latter, they were therefore so in the former? I think not; and yet of no
more force is his reasoning.

Mr. J. Is it not the best way, where two ways meet, the one doubtful and
dangerous, the other not, to choose the best and nearest way?

Reply 1. If Mr. J. himself had followed this Rule, he would have spared many
harsh censures, and not have so peremptorily condemned the innocent. Christian
Direct. Tom. 4. p. 129.
Mr. Baxter's Judgment in this matter is, It is a bad thing to corrupt
Religion, and fill the World with causeless scruples, by making that a sin
which is no sin. Divines that live in great Cities, and among Merchandise, are
usually fitter Judges in this case, than those that live most obscurely
(without experience) in the Country.

2. I add Pious Calvin (whom Mr. J. clears from the guilt of Usury, because he
dyed poor) If we wholly condemn Usury, Rivet. p. 277.
we put a stricter tie upon Consciences than the Lord would have.

3. Bishop Hall shall instruct him; p. 10.
Charity will tell you, that if you can find out a way, whether by loan or
sale, to advance your Stock, that may be free from Oppression and Extortion;
and beneficial as well to others, as to your self, you need not fear to walk in
it with all honest security.

4. Hear also the famous Grotius: In Luc. 6.35.
But again I see for the most part it comes to pass, that too much rigor gives
occasion to a boundless liberty: for when men perceive how that which is too
far stretched is not proved by sufficient reasons, sliding into the other
extreme, they indulge themselves without end and measure.

5. I have somewhere met with the saying of a Learned Divine, sounding, as I
remember, to this effect: That to forbid lawful delights and Recreations to
Youth, is the way to make them break over to what is unlawful: I have cause to
think, that in Civil Contracts, and mutual Commerce, the forbidding of what is
lawful, is the ready way to make men betake themselves to unlawful shifts: it is
like the too strait bracing of tender bodies to make them over-neat and fine;
which frequently proves an occasion of deformity and crookedness: for Nature,
if possible, will find a passage, and how much the more it is pent in, by so
much the more violent is the irruption, where it finds the restraint weaker
than elsewhere.

6. We need not then be to seek of reasons for the pleading for a moderate
Usury, besides the interest of the Nation, which is not a little therein
concerned; and besides the many scruples that are by his Doctrine occasioned in
tender Conscices.

Mr J. 7 Answ. Those very Divines you lean upon, will be but a broken Reed --
because they have such and so many conditions, and temper it with so many
limitations, as scarce any Usurer in the world does observe. And at last they
make it no Usury at all, such, I mean, as is commonly practiced.

Reply 1. It seems then, he is so favorable, as to allow some Usury for
lawful, though it be not that in common practice: But to me it sounds strange,
that Judicious Men, who know what they say, should plead for some Usury, and
yet make it no Usury, or at least not practicable. It is all one as if any
should undertake with great pains and study, to show others the North-west
passage to the Indies; and yet set it forth with so many, and so intricate
marks and observations, that it were next to impossible for any to observe.

2. Divines too lay down so many rules in buying and selling, and other Civil
Contracts, which, I suppose, but few do fully observe: It being not easy for
the Sons of Adam that have so much of Corruption within, to come up exactly to
the Rules of righteousness. Who in these things can say, I have made my heart
clean? so in Preaching or Praying, it is hard not to fail in one or other of
the Rules prescribed for the exact performance thereof. In all these cases,
Vide Sen. de vita beata. c. 17. p. 495. Magistr. Origin. p. 200,
we must set perfection for the mark; and he is the best man, that has the
fewest miscarriages or defects.

3. For a closer Answer, I will propose what I have read in Mr. Gee, There is
(says he) some wrong in getting, which is so deep and intrinsecal to the
substance of the Title, as that it does vitiate and destroy its being; and the
Contract, or other way of procuring the Goods by means thereof is null, as to
the producing of a property to the proeurer: and there is some injustice that
reaches not so far as to evacuate the Title. Every slip or deviation from the
path of uprightness does not make void a Bargain, or Title about which it is
used. Casuists therefore distinguish betwixt that [dolus malus] evil dealing,
which gives cause to the Contract, and that which is only incident or
Circumstantial to it; and say, the former does nullify a Contract, but not the
latter.

But what do our Divines say, that plead for Usury, and yet so temper it, as to
make it none? He brings in Zanchy for a proof; saying; Thou must be, O Lender,
of this mind, that if the Borrower have not only not made gain, but sustained
loss, thou also art to bear part of his loss. Is not this Partnership? says
Mr. J.

Reply 1. No; Zanchy meant not surely that this condition should have entered
into the Contract (which was requisite to have made it suretiship) but that the
Lender ought out of charity thus to do: for if by Contract he were to bear a
proportionable part of his losses; then by the same also, he ought to have
received a proportionable part of the others gains, be they never so great:
whereas in the case of Lending for Use it is not so; his pension being stated
within such a Sum; and let the Borrower make the best of his money: which is
sometimes double, sometime fourfold, etc. To what comes in to the Lender.

2. That this Condition mentioned is not intended as part of the Contract, but
to be left free to the Creditors charity; it farther appears, because though
the principal it self may be justly secured by Bond, yet there may be cases
wherein this may admit of an abatement, as well as the overplus: so say our
Divines. Vol. 1. p. 63.
So Mr. Perkins -- He must be so far from taking gain sometimes, that he must
not require the principal, if his debtor be by inevitable and just Casualties
brought behind, and it be also plain that he could not make, no not by great
diligence, any Commodity of the money borrowed.

3. Sen. de benef. l. 7. c. 16.
What (says Seneca) do thou judge our Ancestors to have been so imprudent,
that they thought it not to be most unjust, to make the same account of one,
who has spent his money received from a Creditor on his lust and gaming, as of
another who lost another Goods with his own, through fire, plundering, or some
sadder accident?

4. Still I say, this abatement made on the Creditors part, in Case of the
Debtors loss, is free and of his own choice, and not part of the Compact: It
may be this will be received from Bishop Hall, Practic. cases. p. 53.
though not from me. Yea, but you say the money or goods miscarried, either by
robbery, or false trust, e're you could employ them to any profit at all; this
will not excuse you; after they came into your power you are responsible for
them, what Compassion this may work in the good nature of the Owner for the
favor of an abatement, must be left to his own Breast; your tie to restitution
is not the less; for it is supposed, had they remained in the Owners hands,
they had been safe: If it were not your fault, yet it was your cross, that they
miscarried; and who should bear your Cross but your self?

Thus the Bishop looks on this abatement not as an act of strict Justice, but
of Christian Compassion.

5. I doubt not to say, there is room enough for the like Compassion between
buyer and seller, the Landlord and Tenant; when that the bargain, through
inevitable accidents, proves very sore and burdensome to the party concerned.

To break the force of a reply which pleads that the expressions of the
Fathers, and of late Writers by him quoted against Usury, p. 50.
are to be understood of griping Usury: Thereto Mr. J. answers, No such matter.

Reply. See p. 21, 22, 29, etc.
Are they then to be understood of Usury that is not griping? We must pardon
his memory; having told us before once and again, that all Usury was griping.
And therefore called Nesheck Neither can those severe reflections of the Fathers
and others, be understood better than of the worst of the kind. Neither can
those definitions given by one or two prove, that that was the Usury declaimed
against by all which they define. Let us hear the Divines of Wittenburgh
brought in by him to avouch what he says.

1. They are Usurers, whosoever take any thing for money lent; though it be but
a mite, or a Cup of cold water, upon a Convention beyond the principal. So
Aretius too.

Reply. Be it so that they are Usurers; yet possibly some such as do so may be
honest Usurers: and I think that such reasoning is the way to bring Usury into
greater credit and request than some are aware of.

It is the scruing things so high, as Grotius notes, that tempts men to run
into the other extreme.

Mr. J from a foreign Divine, says, that only Earth-use is lawful.

Reply. Cicero will teach such as receive Commodities, De Off. l. 1. p. 21.
to make returns thereof with a larger measure; and therein to imitate the
Mother-Earth, or fertile Fields, which bring forth much more than they received.

Mr. J. But some will say, that they take no Bond: but only take what comes for
them of the gain which the borrower has made: whereas some of the foresaid
Divines speak of and against Exacting, and a Convention. I Answer, though some
do, all do not.

Reply 1. It appears then, how they which condemn Usury, do not agree wherein
the essence of it does consist, or what the thing is they write against. Some
placing it in the Contract, some in the Exaction, some in the taking of gain;
and some sew others with Mr. J. place it in the Intention or Expectation.

2. I am yet to seek how the Contract can make that to be Usury, which
otherwise would not be such, the Contract or Covenant being but Circumstantial
to the question of Usury: I find others of the same mind.

Mr. Baxter, Christian Direct. part. 4. p. 128.
Note also, that in all these it appears, that the Case is but gradually
different between the taking the use, and taking the principal; for when the
reason for remitting is the same, you are as well bound to remit the principal
as the use. And yet the Compact for the principal is held lawful by all.

3. What is here said of a silent Contract, where the Borrower and Lender know
one another mind. as if they were a hatching, some secret mischief they are
ashamed of before the World; Let it suffice for answer, that honest men may
make honest Contracts at this rate, if we give credit to pious Ames saying, It
is not necessarily required, that such like Contracts be made distinctly and
expressly; but it suffices if they be made implicitly, with a sincere
intention, and according to the estimation of good men, and such as are
understanding in things of that nature.

4. Mr. J. having cited Chemnitius to prove a secret compact to be Usury;
(whose words are, If a compact or intention precede, it is surely usury) for
interpretation adds, It is so, If an expectation or hoping of more than the
principal do precede, though the lender do not exact it, but only take it, as
the very taking is used Ezekiel. 18.13.

Reply. I profess my Ignorance of his intention here. What? Means he that
taking of Use is necessary to make the Intention or Expectation Usury? but then
the intention is not Usury before the taking. Or does he think the Intention or
Expectation it self the sin of usury? (As Chemnitius here, and he too a little
before) why then to expectation does he add this requisite? If the Lender do
but take it. I leave him to be his own Interpreter.

4. Mr. J. A Compact Literal and silent. Thus the Lender takes for his
principal a Bond for security; but does not put it upon the Interest [trusting
so far, it is like, to the borrowers good nature] And so the borrower Covenants
in his heart, so much I intend to give him, as I give to another: For I know he
looked for it. -- And I must else pay so much to another. Here the Compact is
secretly made in both their hearts; and the principal secured by writing, and
so usury is completed. q. d. The Lender thinks he has reason to look for some
acknowledgment for his money lent, and the borrower proposes honestly to give
it, as not knowing how to speed better. Yet hereupon we have this Outcry made;
O sad! how will this wretched World be Cosened!

Reply 1. I would apply what Grotius says, if possible, to allay this heat.

It was not amiss said by Javolene, De Jure p. 3. c. 24. Sect. 1.
that some Contracts were made by silence, which is a thing common, both in
public, private, and mixed Contracts. The Cause is this, in that the Consent,
which way soever manifested and accepted, has a power of transferring a right:
but now there are other signs of consent besides the voice and writing.

2. Deben. l. 3. c. 10.
Seneca says; The greatest benefits have no proof: they frequently lie hid
between the Consciences of two. Would we enforce this, that none confer
benefits without a witness?

3. p. 53. Ezekiel. 18.
Whereas Mr. J. uses the Authority of Three Divines, to prove, the taking of
gifts for Loan to be usury:

I Reply. 1. I find, the taking of Increase forbidden in the Chapter mentioned,
but not the taking of gifts.

2. Whereas the taking of Gifts is in Scripture frequently reproved; as far as
I can understand, it is a taking of gifts by way of bribery, or in the sale of
Justice that is meant, they being Magistrates that are mostly rebuked for
taking such gifts: See Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19.

3. The taking of Gifts or Gratuities from the poor, or such as borrow for
extreme necessity, was then, and is now unlawful.

4. If they mean, it is Usury to take gifts of the Rich for money lent them,
this would throw down what he had before built up, who had granted Gratuities
to be lawful. And the same would make ingratitude necessary, which yet is no
small degree of inhumanity: And for this, among the Medes, Sen. de benef. l. 3.
an Action laid against an ungrateful person.

5. To make their words therefore comply with his sense he is fain to piece it
out with [understand a Gift intended or expected.] When it is plain and beyond
denial, that they mean it of a gift received: and let reason Judge, where it is
sinful to expect a Gift; is it not sinful also to receive it?

9. Obj. I am a Widow says one, I am an Orphan says another: And God knows
that such cannot employ their money as others.

Mr. J. Answ. What a mad inference is here made? If God did I intend to Exempt
the Fatherless and Widows, he would have said somewhat of them, when he named
them and usury together: Exodus 22.22, etc.

Reply 1. If we say, with some, that the Law concerning Usury was political,
and proper to that Nation, and so extensive to all therein, the objection is
answered: or, if we say, the Law was intended only for the benefit of the poor,
from whom it was, and is still, unlawful to take use: neither of these hinder
but that Widows and Orphans may now improve their stocks, left them, this way.

2. In the Case of Orphans, Mr. Baxter's Instance carries abundant reason with
it. Certain Orphans having nothing left them, but so much money as will, by the
allowed use of it, find them bread and poor clothing: the Guardian cannot lay
it out in Lands for them: and if he maintain them upon the stock, Christ.
direct. part. 4. p. 126.
it will be quickly spent, and he must answer for it: A rich man that is their
Neighbor tradeth in Iron-work (Furnances and Forges) or Lead-works, or other
such commodities; in which he constantly gets the double of the stock which
he employeth, or at least 20 l. or 40 l. in the hundred: the Guardian dare not
lend the money to any poor man, least he break, and be never able to pay it:
therefore he lends it to this rich man; and if he have it without Usury, the
poor Orphans give the rich man freely 20 l. or 40 l. by the year, supposing
their stock to be one Hundred pound, If he take use, the rich man does but give
the poor Orphans some part of his constent gain, etc.

3. It is worth the Inquiry, if the portion left Orphans were before for some
time in the hands of other men, that traded therewith, whether the Guardian
may, according to Law or Reason, take in the principal and remit the Use or
Interest due? and whether the Guardian be not responsible for so doing, when
the Orphans come to Age?

4. The Text says; Ye shall not afflict any Widow or Fatherless Child. I think
this is one way of afflicting such to tell them, that when their money has
been out in the hands of persons that have sufficiently gained thereby, and
increased their own Estates, It is damnable for them to receive one penny or
mite above the principal, by virtue of any Convention past, or upon the account
of their money thus lent.

5. I shall step aside to look into Mr. Bolton, Discourse, etc. p. 49.
whose Fifth Answer to this objection is this, Widowhood and Fatherlesness, in
respect of the former State of having Husband and Parents, are a State of
humiliation, for the outward Condition of this life: but by this unhappy trade
of Usury, they are made a State of exaltation.

Reply 1. q. d. Widows and Orphans would live too well, and yet their
livelihood too easily for some of their condition, if taking of Use be allowed
them: As if the loss of their Husbands and Parents were not affliction enough
to those in their condition, whereby they lie open to the frauds and injuries
of such as seek opportunities.

2. If this reasoning hold good in our days, it should set us a petitioning for
the Court of Wards again, that the condition of Orphans may not prove too
happy, and be a state of exaltation.

Mr. J. They should rather trust God in a lawful way. Reply. This is a taking
for granted, what is in question; This way we say still is Lawful: and see no
reason to change our thoughts by any thing that is said to the contrary. God
has, it is true, promised to take care for the Fatherless and Widows; but must
they therefore cast off all due care and diligence, and the use of all lawful
means within their power for a comfortable subsistence? Pract. Cat. p. 315.
Dr. Hammond holds taking of Use Lawful; provided it prove not oppressive to
the borrower, and be not an act of worldly-mindedness, and illiberality; but
only a way of subsisting on that small portion my Friends have left me.

Mr. J. As for them that put out their money, and say; what will become of them
in particular? I Answ. That they should rather ask, what will become of them
that have no money left? how shall they live?

Reply. Though they that have Wives, must be as they that have none, and they
that buy, as though they possessed not, and they that have money, as though
they had none: yet this is to be understood in regard of affection, and not
otherwise. For Men that have Estates and Money ought to live as becomes them
that have these: and to improve them for their own comfortable subsistence, and
the relief of their Relations: otherwise it would border upon ingratitude, and
a tempting of God, by neglecting the means he has put into their hands in the
course of his providence for their subsistence.

2. His Answers to the following replies is guilty of the common failure, viz.
petitio principii: He beats down the Widows and Orphans Improving their money
by loan, by this, that Lending for gain is not lawful: may he not as well say,
all borrowing for gain is unlawful? may another gain by my money and may not I
gain by the same? Let Grotius moderate betwixt us.

But that Law of Moses, In Luc. 6.35.
seeing it peculiarly respects the State of that people, and was given to one
Nation alone, it binds others no farther than it contains a natural equity:
What Christ would have us do; seeing there is no particular precept extant
thereof, must be drawn from general precepts: In that all excess is forbidden,
there is no doubt but an equality is required of us in all commerces.

3. p. 286.
Rivet writes: Such a Contract has its foundation in natural equity, therefore
it is not forbidden by the Law of God, for natural equity requires an equality:
which is not when one takes all the profit, and the other feels all the
disprofit, etc.

4. Cicero's saying is not beside our purpose. For it is lawful for every one
to endeavor rather the procuring to himself than to another, what belongs to
the support of life, Nature it self not gainsaying.

A Second reply: Suppose a poor Widows or Orphans money be employed any other
way, and lost: who shall stand to the loss? The Employer? or Widow, or Orphan?

Mr. J. -- Answ. 2. Let the employer employ it, and secure it in the best
manner he can: -- And if notwithstanding all care used by the employer, any
loss come, who shall bear that loss, but the Widow or Orphan?

Reply: It matters not much what he or I state, for the Law will take its own
course at last, in things of this nature; and I doubt whether it will go on his
side.

Obj. 10th. God knows that I cannot live else, -- because I know not how to
employ my money otherwise, and therefore I hope he will not damn me, though you
do in your harsh Doctrine.

Mr. J. Answ. 1. Are there no other ways in the world to live by, than Usury?

Reply: Let Mr. Baxter answer this, Christ Direct Tom. 4. p. 127.
in these words: As for them that say, it may be as well improved otherwise,
they are unexperienced men: It is a known falsehood as to the most; though some
few may meet with such opportunities: at least it is nothing to them that
cannot have other ways of improving it; who are very many.

Mr J. How do those live that have no money to lend?

Reply: You may be answered by another question: How do they live that have no
Lands, Livings, nor houses of their own? if some subsist without these, must
others that have them, neglect the due improvement of them?

Mr. J. How do they live in those Countries where Usury is not known: -- As the
Indians?

Reply 1. Those of the Western parts live poorly enough, if we credit History:
In a very late History of the Wars of New- England; p. 50.
speaking of the advantages the Indians had for the War above the English, it
is written; They know where to find us, but we know not where to find them, who
nevertheless are always at home, and have in a manner nothing but their lives
and souls (which they think not of) to lose: every Swamp is a Castle to them,
and they can live comfortably on that which would starve Englishmen.

2. Amongst them too Gold and Silver are no current Money, no wonder then that
Usury is not there exercised in the Loan thereof. Grotius De Jure. p. 42.
Justin of the Scythians: They have no desire of Gold and Silver as other
Mortals have: -- this continency in manners begets justice in them no wise
desiring what is another, for there is the desire of riches where is the use.

What he quotes out of Mr. Bolton, I shall meet with in my Examination of the
same Author.

Mr. J. From Chrysostom; Are there no other ways of living, justly to be
found? No Husbandry? Object. But that is subject to Casualties. Answ. And so is
Usury.

Reply 1. Where a man runs a hazard in lending, he may take somewhat by way of
recompense, and yet not be guilty of Usury, says Scotus. For the hazard of
losing the Principal, if any thing be required, it is not truly Usury, says
Grotius. Although it be not certain, yet when loss is probably feared, the
Creditor may lawfully Contract, before it happen, Pract. Cat. p. 301.
says Tolet.

It is among all men resolved, that every man's art and his pains, and the
charges, and the hazard he is put to, are rateable, and may be sold, says Dr.
Hammond.

2. If the seller may increase the price of his Wares upon the account of the
hazard he runs in giving time; why may not the lender receive as lawfully
somewhat by way of recompense of the hazard he runs? the former is approved of
by Jer. Tailor. Rule of holy live. p. 207.


He that sells dearer by reason he sells not for ready money, must increase his
price no higher, than to make himself recompense for the loss which according
to the rules of Trade he sustained by his forbearance, according to the common
computation, reckoning in also the hazard, which he is prudently, warily, and
charitably to estimate.

3. The same Chrysostom, that demands, whether there be no other way of living
besides Usury? is against negotiation or Merchandising too, as has been before
shown.

Obj. 11th. I lend for pity's sake, and do good with my money to many, and they
are glad and give me thanks, etc.

Mr. J. Answ. 1. Do thou do good with thy money? thou do but furnish many
men with nerves and sinews to do mischief with, to oppress others in
bargaining, etc.

Reply: If this be intended of all that lend, it is an untruth, to say no
worse: if it be meant of what may be by accident, through the borrowers sault,
would not the same inconveniences be in case the lending were free, if not more
abundant? and yet we have heard him pleading before for a free lending to the
rich. Such ill accidents may prove consequential to giving too: how many having
gotten by begging or largesses, spend it as freely in the Alehouse, in
Drunkenness or Gaming?

Mr. J. Answ. 2. Nay, many men and families are undone, or at least so
entangled, oppressed and kept down by Usury.

Reply 1. This may be true, and yet the borrowers may thank themselves for all
this; I mean, their own indiscretion, vanity or Luxury. 2. Or however, then
this we will say is the sin of Usury, and all sober men cry out against, as
well as he. 3. But have not others come to the same pass by buying and selling
and merchandising too? and yet these we hope are transactions lawful.

3. Reply: The Usurer is brought in replying, That the borrower gives thanks,
and is glad, and that he lends out of pity and piety.

Mr. J. Answ. That being forced, he borrows, and gives thanks, and is glad,
because he is necessitated to go to the Usurer for Money.

Reply 1. If this necessity be of natures making, and he borrows to keep
himself alive; here lending ought to be free, or else it will prove biting: but
if the necessity be only occasional, such as may sometimes befall men of wealth
and estates, and such as many times sends the buyer to the Market; what reason
or shadow of reason can be thought of, that any should be bound to lend to this
man freely? that he should grow the richer by my loan, and I the poorer by the
same? may not the owner of two bargains be bound to spare me one upon as good
grounds?

2. Who forced him? Nothing but his own conveniences drew him to it: If the
force were caused by the lender, it were somewhat to the purpose. Says
Grotius, De Jure. etc. p. 227,
Seneca following Nature, says; So the things that have been done through
force and necessity are made void, if this force and necessity were caused by
the Contractor: for it nothing concerns me, whether thou be forced, if thou art
not forced by me: it ought to be my fault, that it may be my punishment.

Again, It is not a using of force, to promise a thing under a certain
condition: if it be any force, it is one of thy own using toward thy self, etc.

3. To go on: May not a man gain by that money he pays a reasonable Use for?
if he may, then he owes thanks for that he has so gained by: and then
Demosthenes affirms, this ought not to be accounted Usury, viz. such as is
sinful, and affronts the Law.

Demosthenes denis (says Grotius) that he who having gotten by merchandise or
some honest Employment, De Jure 236.
and puts it out for modeate gain, partly that he may preserve his own, partly
that he may do a kindness to another, ought to be accounted in the number of
Usurers.

4. It seems Mr. J. thinks there is no thanks due to him that designs his own
gain as well as another: but the Moralist was of another, Sen. de benes. l. 6.
c 13.
and perhaps a righter, Judgment.

Again, (says Seneca) I am not so unjust, as to acknowledge nothing due to
him, who when he was presitable to me, was so too to himself: for I do not
require, that without any respect to himself, he should consult my good: yea I
desire, that the benefit given me, may more profit the giver, so that he that
gave it had respect to two when he gave, and divided it between himself and me,
although he possess the greater part thereof, if so be he received me into
partnership, if he thought on two: I am not only unjust, but unthankful also,
unless I rejoice that the same profited him which profited me. It is a sign of
the greatest malignity, not to call that a benefit, unless what brings some
inconvenience to the giver, etc.

Mr. Jel. In his Next Chapter, Chap. 8.
descends to some other objections in his way, which he calls Additional and
Secondary; the which it may suffice if I do but glance on here: because they
will receive a further consideration in the Discourse following this.

Obj. 1. Usurers plead that Countries, Commonwealths and Kingdoms cannot
subsist without some Usury, etc.

Mr. J. Answ. 1. It Is false that Kingdoms, etc. cannot subsist without Usury:
for 1. Did not Israel subsist without Usury?

Reply: It Is likely they did not: For First, It was lawful for the Israelites
to take Use of other Nations, as before shown. Secondly, There is a promise
made to Israel upon their good behavior, Deuteronomy. 15.6. For the Lord thy God
shall bless thee, -- and thou shall lend to many Nations, but thou shall not
borrow, etc. Here was a promise they should not want ability to lend, and, de
jure, they might lend to the Nations; it is likely also they, de facto, did
lend, and took use of those Nations they lended to; or else they would be on
the losing hand, should they lend freely to the Nations, and the Nations relend
to them upon Use.

Mr. J. 2. Happy was the State of Germany before it knew usurie.

Reply 1. And so it might be too before it know Printing or Guns: but was Usury
the cause of all those grievances it groaned under? Not, I dare say, this
regulated Usury here pleaded for. (as it was by many German Divines, and Luther
himself not averse to it:) this was the thing to be proved by him, or else his
arguing will be left in the lurch, as guilty of a fallacy, called Non causa pro
causa.

Bishop Hall discoursing concerning the Sale of Commodities the dearer for
giving days of payment, pract. cases p. 26.
(the which is acknowledged by him to be equivalent to Usury) Affirms it, A
practice that is now so habituated amongst all Nations into the course of
Trading, that it cannot well consist without it.

Mr. J. I confess there is a necessity of lending, but not of usurie.

Reply 1. It is enough that there is a necessity of lending, for the supporting
of societies, the other will follow, as long as it is proved, there is an
equity in taking Interest upon some lending. In Exodus 22.25.


There may be (says Mr. Hughes) such just converse and Trading about it unto
mutual good and comfort, wherein equity may be maintained, and no party
oppressed.

2. Where there is merchandising, there must be lending upon Interest, or else
trading will surely fail, or the balances will be very unequally held to the
unreasonable advantage of the borrower; and Mr Bolton saw this, when he made it
a reason of Gods permitting Israel to lend to the Nations upon Usury.

3. Whether this Usury, I plead for, be so destructive to Commonwealths, let
Holland stand for an example, where Usury is by Law allowed; if we credit the
Hollander, saying; Grotius De Jure. p. 236.
Those Human Laws whioh give leave to stipulate somewhat for the use of Money,
or any other thing; ( as long e're this was granted among the Hollanders, to
some to take 8 in the hundred, but to Merchants 12 for an yearlie use,) seeing
they consist within the recompense of that which is wanting, or may be wanting,
they are not against Natural or Divine Right.

Mr. J. 3. Answ. I grant there is a kind of necessity, which, not God has
brought upon Kingdoms, -- but men's sins --

Reply: Every necessity that is by sin brought in, is not always sinful;
Marriage is now become necessary to some, and yet that necessity is of sins
procuring. Servitude, Lordship and slaying of Beasts, are now become necessary
through sin; and so is eating Man's bread in the Sweat of his Brow, (whatsoever
buying and selling be) and yet these are not thereupon unlawful.

2. Obj. Addit: Divines themselves, which speak so much against Usury, allow of
diverse sorts of Usury; as Ship-Vsury, Recompensatory-Vsury, and Liberal-Vsury.

Mr. J. Answ. 1. I wish some had abstained from such expressions, -- there
being fitter names to be given to each. --

Reply 1. Usury (through ill usage) having gotten an ill name, thence such as
declaimed against Usury without exception, when they found it lawful in any
case specified to take gain by the means of money laid out, they would not call
that Usury, at least, they would add to it a distinguishing title; though the
common definition of Usury agree thereto; as may appear from several passages
of Demosthenes, Maldonate and others forementioned, as it also appears from
Interest or Damage-Money generally held lawful.

2. It is, I perceive, the name that many are frighted at, rather than the real
practice, or of somewhat equivalent thereunto.

Some there be that baulk Usury as unlawful, yet can take up with customs and
practices more disadvantageous to their neighbors, and so less innocent, which
calls to mind a Story I sometime met with in Heylin's Cosmography, otherwise by
him applied. A People of Africa, who having received much hurt by the Tigers,
p. 413.
made a Decree, that no man should from thenceforth call them Tigers, but give
them a more harmless, or less hated Name, and then all was well. Thus if Usury
be called by some other Name, then Mr. J. and many others can be be better
reconciled to it.

3. I like Calvin's design; Rivet. p. 278.
That laying aside names, things be weighed, whether to take any thing above
the principal, be always repugnant to the Law of God? He Answers, It is not: on
Ezekiel. 18.

Obj. 3 Addit: why may I not get by my Money, as well as others by their
Ground, Houses, etc.

Mr. J. Answ. 1. The one Usury is expressly forbidden by God, the other not.

Reply. It is not enough to his purpose, that it is expressly forbidden; he must
prove it forbidden Universally to all Nations, to all Persons: whereas the
privilege of the Jew, or of the Poor, was by these Laws peculiarly designed,
and the prohibition was not confined to money only; but extended to Victuals
and whatsoever might be lent: And as for Ground and Houses, etc. There were
other Laws that moderated dealings about them.

Mr. J. Answ. 2. Lending is a liberal Contract, whereas setting and letting are
not: but mercenary.

Reply. This, if understood Universally, is as easily denied as affirmed: and
all the reason he here gives for the affirmation, is, that by some Civilians it
is reckoned amongst the liberal contracts.

Mr. J. Answ. Ground is wont and apt to bring forth Fruit, Grass and Corn,
answerable to the Rent: but the Money Lent is spent in the use thereof.

Reply 1. The former brings not forth without labor and industry: the first
curse is still upon it; so that it brings forth Briars and Thorns of its own
accord; but not good fruit without the sweat of the brow: Yea, Genesis 3.17. etc.
and Cains Curse is sometimes superadded, so that when a man tilleth the
Ground, Genesis 4, 12.
it yields not forth her strength.

2. Whereas he says Money is spent in the using; the Apostle faith of all
Earthly things, Col. 2.22.
they perish in the using. However if Money be thus spent, the Axiom holds
true here, that the corruption of one thing, is the generation of another; so
that Fields, Houses, etc. Are the product or purchase of this Money spent: We
also learn from Solomon, Eccles. 10.19.
that Money answers all things: i. e. Money is virtually Houses, Fields, and
Tenements, and all things else saleable. For we read, Exodus 21 21.
that a Servant is styled a man's money, because he was bought for Money.

Mr. J. The gain that comes of it is not produced by the Money; but by the
pains and industry of the Borrower.

Reply 1. And is not Ship-usury so too? Rather it should have been said, by the
Money improved by the pains and industry of the Borrower, whose pains we
suppose to be contented for. He goes on, And being uncertain, should not oblige
him to pay a certain sum. -- Reply 2. As if the same might not be said of all
other incomes, as from ground rented; where the gain is uncertain, and yet the
Farmer tied up to a certain sum. 3. I propose to consideration whether it be
not as equitable to tie a man up to a certainty for a sum of money borrowed, as
for a Tenement set to farm; seeing on both hands the gains and losses are alike
uncertain? Take what is written by Grotius, and weigh whether, De Jure, etc. p.
234.
mutatis mutandis, it be not applicable to the Case in hand.

Wherefore (says he) as the Commodity perishes to the Owner; so naturally
barrenness and other hazards, that hinder the using prove a damage to the
hirer: and the setter shall not have the least right to the money promised,
because he delivered over the power of using, which at that time was worth so
much.

Mr. J. Houses lack repair still, and are very chargeable, etc.

Reply 1. What is it but Money that these Houses cost in repairing? 2. Are
Houses chargeable in building and repairing? so Money cost time, pains, trouble
and industry in getting.

Mr. J. Answ. 5. Other things also may be the worse for using, so that the
Owner thereof may take recompense.

Reply 1. Some things may not be the worse for using: a House we say is the
better for having a Tenant in it, and a Field may be better when the Farmer
leaves it, then when he came to it.

2. Though Money may not be the worse for using, yet it comes under a hazard in
Lending, which answers the other.

Mr. J. And in all such things, the use thereof, and the things may be severed.

Reply. So may money and the gain thereof: or money, and your right to use it
are two things. In Luc. 8.35.
But now gain (says Grotius) that obligation of lending, may (as all other
things) be valued by the common measure, to wit, money. I have spoken to these
things formerly, and may meet with them again,

Mr. J. Lastly, things hired, if they be consumed or lost, without the default
of him that hireth them, are lost or perish to the Owner, according to Exodus
22.15. and according to the Law of Man also. --

Reply. Upon inspection, I find we have here but a lame account of that Text of
Scripture; v. 14. (upon which the next depends) which says; If a man borrow
ought of his Neighbor, and it being hurt or dye, the Owner thereof being not
with it, he (i.e. The Borrower) shall surely make it good: but not so, if the
Owner be with it. If he can get Gold out of Stubble, let him.

Mr. J. -- And according to the Law of Man also; which says that the Commodary
is not bound to a fortuitous case or accident; unless he have bound himself so:
whereas in money lent, the borrower stands to all hazards, and the Usurer to
none.

Reply 1. Has not the borrower bound himself so too? 2. Does the lender stand
to no hazards: Whatsoever there may be, or not be by Contract; otherwise
hazards he meets with, even the same that the seller does that gives days for
payment: whereof Bishop Hall makes mention, saying: Pract. Cases. p. 27.
There are two incidents into this practice, which may render it not
unwarrantable [ viz. To take the more for a commodity on the account of payment
deferred;] The one is the hazard of the sum agreed upon: which too often comes
short in the payment. --

3. Of the Commodary Grotius gives this account, De Jure p. 232.
That the Commodary is bound to make good the thing hired if it be lost, --
unless it would have suffered the same loss if it had remained with the Owner:
for in this case nothing is lost to the Owner by means of the Hirer.

Mr. J. Obj. 4. But what need had you to trouble your self so much about Usury,
and so to appear against it, etc.

It is beyond dispute between us, whether sinful practices, and such especially
as are most in fashion, ought to be preached and printed down: as also whether
there be not too much of oppression to be found in the Land, under the covert
of Usury, as well as in buying and selling, and in the Administration of
Justice too. But whether moderate gain from Loan be such, he knows is in
dispute between Learned, pious, and good men. And I think, a man may hold
either side of the question, and his salvation be little concerned in it: only
I shall say, the practice thereof on one hand is of great consequence to the
Nation we live in, as well as to the Estates of many single persons: and the
peremptory condemnation of all that use it, is of dangerous consequence on the
other hand, upon supposals that it be false. And whereas he appears the only
Champion herein in these days; I shall not determine whether it be because he
exceeds others in Zeal, or from his unacquaintedness with the State of the
Nation, and the Interest thereof depending upon Lending: yet, to him pleading,
that it belongs to him as a watchman thus to warn; some will be ready to reply;
how has he watched, that has deferred this work these thirty years? for so
long time has past at least since his Sermons against Usury were preached,
before this Treatise of his was Printed.

Being now come to the last Chapter that contains his application, instead of
an answer whereto, I shall draw up a Scheme of his discourse by way of summary
rehearsal; wherein as in a Map may be seen the censure that is past; The
application thereof I shall leave to himself to make.

After Mr. J. has represented the Usurer as vile as he can, heaping on him all
the opprobrious terms that came in his way; and damned him ten times over to
the pit of Hell: 1. Least he should be mistaken by his Readers as intending all
this for griping Usurers, and devouring Cormorants only, and not for others
that take moderate gain, and mean no harm: he plainly says, he takes in all,
and intends this discourse of all, even of such too as take moderate use, p.
46, 50, etc. And makes them as bad as Adulterers and Thieves, yea worse, p. 23.
and 48.

2. But may not some lend for gain, that yet design good to their Neighbor?
No: The Usurer aims not at another good, but his own filthy gain, p. 41.

3. But suppose they do not bind others by Contract to pay use, but only take
it, what is to be thought of these? these also fall under the same
condemnation: For even the intention of the heart to receive more than the
principal, and the expectation of it makes a Loan of money Usury, p. 51.

4. However, may not the case be altered as to Orphans and Widows, who have
frequently no other way of improving their Money? Not so neither: Usury being
proved in it self unlawful and damnable, therefore no circumstance of persons,
nor any pretended necessity can make it lawful, p. 55.

5. Suppose then that all such Usury be a sin, may we not charitably think,
that such as have a hand in it coming to the sight thereof, may repent of this,
as we find some others do of some other sins? he leaves not room for so much
charity; For usurers seldom repent, but at last into Hell they go: p. 24.

6. May there not be hopes, that some such do it ignorantly, as Paul speaks of
himself, and as the Patriarchs lived in the sin of Polygamy, and yet repenting
thereof in the Lump, amongst their other unknown sins, found mercy? I cannot
learn he has so much kindness for them neither: his whole discourse, and
particularly his application makes directly against this; representing him as
one going against light and conviction: And in his Treatise of the Worth of
Souls, p. 215. See Capell. of tentat. part. 1. p. 232.
He thrusts in the Usurer amongst the sinners mentioned, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. That
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

7. If he then have so little Charity for the practiser of Usury, what charity
has he yet for those many learned, grave, and (to all appearance) Godly
Divines, that in the integrity of their hearts have pleaded for the Lawfulness
of moderate Usury? Surely he will honor these: If you will take his thoughts
from his words, these likewise are no better, nor worse than damned; unless
they repented of this; the which it is more than we know they did, p. 39. How
will thou answer it (says he) at that great day? when Christ shall ask thee,
how durst thou preach or say, that it is lawful to lend to the rich upon Usury,
when thou never heardest me say so? O I would not then stand before Christ in
thy Condition for ten thousand Worlds.

And here I perceive the censure I have incurred by writing against his Book:
but this is my comfort, that I have done it in the Integrity of mine heart, and
God Judges not always as Man Judges, for he Judges righteous Judgment.

He might have learned more moderation from Mr. Capel, a man alike affected
with himself in the question of Usury; but far more charitable in his censure
of persons; as may be seen in his Treatise of Tentations, Part 2. Chap. 13. p.
256. And in his Apology, p. 282.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON Mr. BOLTON'S DISCOURSE OF USURY.
HAving brought to the Test what Mr. Jel. is pleased to write on this Subject,
I think my work not fully done, until some passages relating to the same
Controversy in the Discourses of the Reverend Mr. Bolton, and Mr. Capel be
examined. Precious is the remembrance of those Men of God in his Church. It was
not a design to repeat or proclaim the mistakes or failures of the dead that
put me on this work, but a desire of Truths vindication before the Living. I
shall begin with Mr. Bolt. and because I intend to contract my Discourse, I
shall not observe any strict method, but pass some remarks on what has been
passed by, or barely glanced on by Mr. J. And to that end, I shall lay down
certain enquiries; and therein Animadvert on what Mr. B. asserts.

Is not the use of money for some time worth money? 1 Q.


This, I think, is the only objection, that Mr. B. has, which was omitted by
Mr. J. For what reason he himself knows: However I think the decision thereof
would bring no small helps toward satisfaction in this Controversy.

Mr. B. Does not deny the question, neither do I see how he could: For who is
there that does not think the Loan of 100 l. for a Year worth somewhat? And if
it be worth somewhat, it is worth money, that being the common measure whereby
the worth of any thing is valued. And if the Loan, or the use of this Loan be
worth somewhat, where is the wrong, if a man take for it what it is worth? Is
the buyer bitten, if he gives no more for a commodity than it is worth? If not,
how is the borrower bitten if he have a penniworth for his penny? All that can
be said is, this is buying, not borrowing: I reply, call it what you will as
long as we are agreed in the thing, that here is no wrong done; there is no
reason we should differ about words or Notions. Let us now weigh Mr. B's Answer.

Mr. B. So money which was ordained to be the price of all Wares, and the
measure of all Bargains, is made a Ware, contrary to the nature of it. For,
Quod est medium venditionis, non potest esse terminus.

Reply 1. That money is used as an Instrument for exchange or merchandising, is
from humane institution, and not designed thereto by nature. Time was when Gold
and Silver were forbidden in the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, Sen. de ben. l. 5.
c. 14.
and only Iron the current coin. And another while Leather having the public
stamp on it, passed there for money.

2. Money may be exchanged for Money: Grotius says, De Jure. p. 229. p. 238.
That exchange is more simple and ancient than buying: And that Tacitus of the
Germans, says, They that live more inward [viz. from the Sea] do more simply
and anciently use the Exchange of Wares. Grotius also writes of Changing Money
for Money, which (says he) the Greeks call Collybus, and the Merchants at this
day, Exchange, As also of Money brought from Illyricum to Italy as a Ware.
Again, Money is delivered, that after some time, so much and the same in kind
may be repaid in loan; which has place in those things which consist in
number, weight and measure, as well other things as Money. And how common is it
to exchange Silver for Gold, and Gold for Silver, giving somewhat above the
current price thereof? May not that which is Medium hujus venditionis, be
terminus alterius?

3. But in this case before us, the borrower pays not for the Money lent, so
much as for the Use of this Money lent, or rather for the right and power to
use that Money which before was none of his, and for the advantages attending
the same: whereof Spanhemius writes thus: Dub. Ev. part 3. p. 673.


The Overplus is required for the undue Office performed, for parting from our
own right to the Money for sometime, which was ours, and might have been kept
by us: for the liberty and opportunity we deprive our selves of, for a while,
of laying out that Money on Uses and Commodities of our own; for power granted
the Debtor of gaining, and also for the advantage or gain he has made of our
Money: But all these thing are valuable, and somewhat may be demanded for them.

Mr. B. 2. Answ. The rule holds in buying and selling, but not in acts of
Charity, therein it is no good rule. Thou bidst for the purpose thy poor
Neighbors to dinner: this is money worth, for it cost thee money, and saves
them money at home; yet thou will not set a price upon it; why? because it is a
work of Charity. Thou bidst thy rich Neighbor sometime, that which he eats
is worth money; yet thou will take none, but think it foul scorn it should be
offered: why? because it is an act of kindness, of neighborhood and friendship.

Reply 1. To the first sort of Guests, viz. Poor Neighbors, I would advise
free lending, as well as free entertainment to be used.

2. But turn the Tables: Suppose the Inviter's poor, and the Guests rich; may
not somewhat be received honestly for the entertainment made? this is commonly
done, and not reproved by any as dis-honest, that I know of; See Mr. J. Vsur.
Cast. p. 18.
but yet they will not allow the poor, with these circumstances, to take any
thing for his money lent.

3. Dinners are made at Common-Inns, and Victualing-Houses, where men pay for
them, and good reason they should.

If you say, that men are not here invited, but invite themselves: I answer, it
is enough however to show that Dinners may be allowed for without offense; and
they that lend, do not always invite Customers, but are sought unto. It were an
absurd thing for a rich man that freely invited his friends to a Feast, to make
them pay for it, (though there may be some that know how to setch out their
pennyworths again of heir Guests) where according to common Custom it is taken
for granted, that all things come freely; but not so in the business of
borrowing of money; where they themselves lay it down for granted, that the
borrower and lender know one another mind, though there be no express Compact
made for the Overplus, both Custom and common sense leading thereto.

4. When the rich invites his friends, usually there is a recompense made for
this, by the like invitation again, and it may be, he that made the first
Dinner expects it, and would take it amiss, not to be re-invited, you will not
allow the lender to hope for any thing again: Or if you will give him leave to
look for the like kindness another time, I doubt not to say, that this is
mony-worth, and so esteemed by most that know their Interest.

5. Luke 14.12, 13.
Our Savior says, When thou make a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy
friends, -- nor thy rich neighbors, etc. Mr. B. here takes it for granted,
that we may (notwithstanding this plain prohibition) invite such as these to a
dinner. He must then put a fair construction upon our Saviors words; such as
this, Invite not only the rich, or not so much the rich as the poor. Why then
should not the like candid interpretation be put upon the words of our Savior,
which are in controversy, Luke 6.35.
viz. Lend hoping for nothing again, i. e. from the poor, and such as stand in
need of your free lending.

His other reasons under the third Answer, have been elsewhere examined. As

1. Other things are fruitful in themselves, which a man may alienate for a
time, reserving the property to himself.

Reply 1. In loan there is not a full parting with the property; for if that
were true, it could not be recovered again.

2. Money in a political sense is fruitful; and Mr. B. himself rejects, as
weak, p. 53.
the usual Argument taken from the barrenness of Money.

Mr. B. 2. The Hirer restores the selfsame-thing, being for the most part
impaired.

Reply: But not always impaired: and what though the borrower restore not the
same thing that he received, seeing it is the same in kind, and no better
neither?

Mr. B. 3. The Letter to Hire, as he retains the Property, so he bears the
hazard.

Reply 1. But not all the hazards that attend the using and improvement thereof.

2. The Creditor runs hazards too, in his money lent, Mr. Jel. p. 56.
as experience, as well as Chrysostom, tells us.

3. Though the lender part with his right to that individual sum, yet not to
the like sum; else it were giving and not lending.

Mr. B. 4. The letter to hire is at cost and charge for the things he letts.

Reply: Is not the cost and charge money? and is the Creditor at no cost and
pains for procuring the money he lends.

2. Q. Whether the Law of Moses concerning Usury be Moral or Judicial?

There be Divines, that hold this Law to be Moral, and yet some Usury to be
lawful: They are of Opinion, that taking Use from the Poor is only prohibited,
who is expressed in the first writing of the Law, and to be understood in all
after repetitions of the Law, or prohibitions of Usury. And others that look on
the Law as Political, yet acknowledge a general Equity in this, as in other
Judicial Laws of God by Moses; and so far they concern Christians also. De Jure
p. 10.
From Grotius I understand, some things may be morally honest, because they may
he commendably done, and yet their opposites not morally dishonest; and for
this, he instanceth in Usury: To the understanding (says he) of the Law of
Nature, we must observe, that some things are said to belong to this Law not
properly, but by reduction, as the Schools affect to speak, the which are not
contrary to the Law of Nature, as even now, we called those things just, which
are free from injustice. Sometimes also by a Catachresis, those things are said
to belong to the Law of Nature, which Reason shows to be honest, or better than
their opposites, although not due. And the same Author; of this Law of Moses,
says, The matter of this Law, if it be not necessary, is certainly, morally
honest. This I shall say, that it is not only lawful or honest, to lend freely;
but also in it self, more commendable than its contrary, though I cannot
believe it is always so, when all things are considered. But this will not
satisfy those we contend with: I come therefore to consider what is here said
upon this question.

Mr. B. 1. Prohibition of biting Usury is moral, but that usurie which is
forbidden in the Law is biting. E. etc.

Reply: This is answered by what is said before. I shall lay down this
Syllogism in opposition to his, What is not biting is not prohibited in this
Law, by their concession; but some Usury (as has been proved) is not biting,
E. it is not prohibited by the Law. His after Discourse may be comprised in this
Syllogism: Out of uncertain profit, to covenant for certain gain is unjust and
uncharitable, and therefore forbidden in the Moral Law, but in Usury certain
profit is taken for uncertain gain, E. Apply this to the setter, and then see
whether he does not by covenant take certain gain for what is uncertain.

Mr. B. 2. The Law of free lending is moral, renewed by our Savior, Mat. 5.42.
Deuteronomy. 15.8. Luke 6.35. Therefore the Law which forbids usury is moral.

Reply 1. It is granted him, the free lending our Savior requires belongs to
the moral law, but then it must be understood with respect to the poor, the
proper objects of a free lending. And to these poor the Text by him cited does
expressly limit it, viz. Deuteronomy. 15.7, etc. Let the other Texts be interpreted by
this. Our Savior here injoyns free lending to the poorer sort; they that
extend it farther, must say, that Christ commands free lending to the rich also
and that this too belongs to the Law of Nature.

2. Dub. Ev. part. 3. p. 663.
Enough has been said to these Texts already: I shall add, however, what
Spanhemius says to all three, Luke 6.35.

1. It is inconsequent: for there is a precept what is to be done, not what
only is to be done, to Wit, we must relieve the poor, from whom nothing can be
hoped, that same thing is commended, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8, 9. But an indefinite
proposition must not be confounded with an universal; Luke has that, not this.

2. If the words of Christ should be stretched for, it would thence follow,
that the principal may not be retaken from any. --

3. So the words of Matthew speak of the thing, not of the manner thereof, we
must lend to one that asks, but they neither express the manner, nor restrain
it unless it be be in the general, that we lend observing the Laws of Piety and
Charity.

Mr. B. The Holy Prophets range it amongst the greatest abominations, etc.
Psalm. 15. Ezekiel. 18.

Reply. Read what has been before answered to these places, Psalm. 15.5. That
does not put out to Usury, viz. To his poor Brother, say Jun. and Tremelius. In
loc. p. 667.
Says Spanhem. 1. This is to be understood of the Usurer that spoyleth his
Brother by biting Usury. 2. As several expressions in this Psalm are to be
taken in a limited sense, so should this: such are, that does no evil to his
Neighbor, nor receives a reproach against his Neighbor, who swears to his
hurt and changes not. No wonder then if this also admit of a limitation, and
the same Answer will serve for other places. Thus far Spanhemius.

Mr. B. Proceeds to Answer an Exception.

Except. God permitted the letting out of Use to the Stranger, therefore the
prohibition cannot be moral: For God is not wont to permit any transgression of
the Moral Law.

Mr. B. Answ. 1: -- Permission rather proves it to be unlawful in it self: For
if it were lawful, it needed not to be permitted.

Reply 1. It is rather an exception to the Law, then a permission: and things
excepted from a prohibiting Law, may be in themselves lawful, and usually are
so antecedent to that Law.

2. I deny that permission is always of things unlawful; that expression of our
Savior relating to his Baptism, evidenceth the contrary: Mat. 3.15. Suffer it
to be so now, etc.

Mr. B. Answ. 2. The putting away of a man's innocent Wife, being a thing
simply, and in it self evil, was notwithstanding permitted to the Jews.

Reply 1. It is a mistake, that the putting away of an Innocent Wife was
permitted to the Jews. It is an Assertion against the express letter of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 4. beginning. -- Because he has found some uncleanness in her.

2. It is denied by some Learned men, that Divorce, for weighty causes supposed
in the Law, was against the Law of Nature, De Jure p. 4.
and in it self evil. Of this Judgment was Grotius, de Jure, etc. p. 21. And he
says moreover; The Law of Nature is so immutable that it cannot be changed, no
not by God himself. Of the like Judgment was Spanhemius, Dub. Evang. par. 3. p.
666.
in Answer to this exception of the Schoolmen; Excep. Usury was permitted to
the Jews toward Strangers, not as somewhat lawful, but less evil, as the Bill
of Divorce; etc. Answ. 1. That gloss of theirs is rather supposed than proved.
2. If according to the Schoolmen, all Usury were of it self, and in its kind
evil; and had an inward dishonesty contrary to the Law of nature, so it could
in no case be permitted by the Divine Law, but that the holiness both of the
Law, and Lawmakers would be violated. That of the Apostle is also known, evils
are not to be done, that good may come; and therefore things that are
absolutely such, are not to be permitted by an express sanction.

3. The instance of Divorce is inconsequent; for neither is Divorce of that
kind and order, or any such thing which has in it an intrinsecal dishonesty
contrary to the Law of nature the which is by the Schoolmen ascribed to all
Usury.

If what is here spoken be reason (as I think it is) then it evacuates the two
following reasons used by Mr. B. for this toleration of Usury, viz.

1. The hard hartedness of the Jews:

2. The injustiee of the Gentiles, with whom they did traffic, such as they
would be sure to exact Usury of the Jews.

Which Arguments seem not of force enough to bear up the weight laid thereon.

For 1. How could any man be sure that the Gentiles would practice Usury upon
the Jews, if it were (as they say) a sin against nature, and generally by the
Heathens condemned?

2. Neither is it likely that God would give a positive toleration for one sin,
to prevent another.

3. And it seems very derogatory to the Laws and Holiness of God, to give a
positive permission to such practices, as the very Heathen would cry shame
upon. (I am sure Christians are wont to look on it as no small blemish in the
Heathen Laws for things of this nature:) or that he should permit the Jews to
use injustice toward other Nations, because there was a probability they would
use the same injustice toward the Jews.

Thus you have his plea, if by Stranger be understood the Stranger at large.
But if by Stranger be meant the Canaanite, which he takes to be the right. Then
he Answers thus;

Mr. B. Permission of Usury toward the Canaanite does no more prove the Law
against Usury not to be Moral, than the allowance of manslaughter in War does
prove the Law forbidding Murder to be judicial, for although the Law condemning
Usury be never so perpetual or moral; yet notwithstanding, as other
Commandments of God, so is it to be understood with this Limitation, and
restraint, viz. Unless God otherwise appoint.

Reply 1. This limitation would seem strange, if applied to all Gods Laws: for
observe, how ill it sounds, to understand the Command thus: Thou shall not
commit Adultery, unless God otherwise appoint: Thou shall not steal, or serve
Idols, etc. Unless God otherwise appoint. I say it is a great reflection of
dishonor upon the wise God, thus to interpret his Laws.

2. The instances brought of Abraham's killing his Son, and of the Israelites
taking away the Egyptians Goods, will not prove the thing intended: For, 1.
These things were commanded, and so made lawful after this Command. 2. It had
been sin in them not to have done them; will any say so of Usury toward the
Stranger? was this Commanded? then it had been their sin, not to have done it.
But he said before, it was permitted only as the Bill of Divorce; and
permission, says he, is only of things evil, even after they are permitted.

3. In the Instances mentioned there was no dispensing with Gods Laws in a
proper sense: Murder is the taking of the life of a person without a lawful
Warrant or Authority; This Abraham wanted not; and therefore his fact, if
accomplished, had not been Murder, nor against that Law. Theft is the taking
away of another Goods without right: did the Israelites do so, when they
spoiled the Egyptians? If it be said, that the one had been Murder, and the
other Theft, unless God had given them leave for doing of what they did, and
therefore the Law was dispensed with. I reply: so, what the Executioner does in
taking away a man's life, would be murder, and what the Bailiff does in
distraining Goods, would be theft, without a Warrant from the Magistrate for so
doing; yet none will dare say, that therefore the Magistrate does or can
dispense with those Laws.

4. We have heard before from Grotius, that the Law of Nature is immutable even
to God himself: De Jure p. 10.
This is spoken, not by way of check to his power, but in that it carries an
inconsistency to his will and holy nature. I shall borrow somewhat more from
the same Author on this Subject.

The Law of Nature is the dictate of right reason, showing an Act to have
either a moral turpitude, or moral necessity from its convenience or
disconvenience, with a rational nature, and consequently such an Act to be
either forbidden or commanded by God the Author of nature. The actions
concerning which there is such a dictate extant, are lawful or unlawful in
themselves, and therefore are understood to be necessarily commanded or
forbidden by God: By which mark this Law differs not only from Man's Law, but
from the Divine voluntary, which does not command or forbid those things, which
in themselves, and of their own nature, are either lawful or unlawful, but
makes them unlawful by forbidding, lawful by commanding.

Again: Yet it sometimes comes to pass, p. 4.
that in those Acts wherein the light of Nature does determine somewhat, a
certain shadow of change deceives the Non-observant, when in truth the Law of
Nature is not changed, it being unchangeable: but the thing of which the Law of
nature does determine receives some change. e. g. If a Creditor, etc. -- So if
God command any to be slain; if what is another to be taken away; Murder or
Theft will not become Lawful, these words carrying sinfulness within them; but
it shall not be murder or theft, which is done by the Authority of the supreme
Lord of Life and Goods. Thus far Grotius. And indeed, how can this be a
dispensing with the Law of nature, the highest Law of nature it self being,
that God must be obeyed? unless we should imagine one of natures Laws to be
contrary to another.

Lastly, There is one difference more to be observed between the instances
brought, and what they suppose Usury to be, for they assert Usury to be In it
self, and by the Law of nature unlawful, such as Adultery, Mr. B. p. 47. p. 13.
p. 45.
Lying and Theft is. Again, Biting is individual and essential to the nature of
it. And from the Schoolmen; Usury is a sin not only in it self, but according
to it self; and therefore cannot be made good by any Circumstance. Will they
say the like of taking away the Goods or Life of another? Are these so sinful
in themselves, and against the Law of nature, that they can be made good by no
Circumstances? We see they were made good by the Command of God: we know they
may be made good by the Magistrates lawful Warrant. And therefore it appears
the instances will not reach the mark; unless he had instanced in Theft and
Murder, which carry a natural sinfulness in them: but neither of these could be
affirmed of Abraham's killing his Son, or of the Israelites spoiling the
Egyptians.

Concerning the latter of these; It is commonly taken for granted, that the
Israelites Fact had been sinful, secluding the special Command of God for their
so doing; and according to this supposition I have formed my Answer foregoing:
However I think I need not have granted so much, but have called in question
their supposition. I know it was the extraordinary injunction of Jehovah put
them upon the fact; but doubt whether it were for this end to legitimate that,
which had been otherwise sinful. Let us see what the Israelites did: says our
Translation, Exodus 12.35, 36.
They borrowed of the Egyptians Jewels of Silver, etc. And was not this fact of
borrowing in it self lawful? After they had thus borrowed, the Egyptians were
urgent upon them, and thrust them out of the Land in haste, Genesis 3.22.
Presently after this grant ( says Diodate) the Egyptians moved War against
the Israelites, and did unjustly assault them: so that by right their spoils
belonged to the Victors, who were assaulted, which was brought to pass by Gods
secret providence to recompense his people for the slavery they had endured in
Egypt.

The word translated, to borrow, is Shaal, which primarily signifies to ask, so
rendered by Diodate, so by Junius and Tremelius: God bad the People, ask of the
Egyptians, Instruments of Silver, and Gold and Raiment: was not the thing in it
self lawful, even antecedent to the special Command from God? if you say, they
asked with a promise of restoring; that cannot be proved, and that had been a
lie in them, and therein they had gone beyond the Command: if it be urged, the
Egyptians designed to lend only, and not to give: neither can that be proved:
They gave to them asking, [dederunt eis petentibus] say Jun. and Trem. Exodus
12.36. neither is it likely, they should deliver these Jewels, etc. with such
an intent, when the Israelites were just upon taking their farewell of them. If
it be demanded, how came it to pass that the Egyptians were so free and
liberal? The Scripture it self will remove this scruple, The Lord gave the
People favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they gave them what they
asked. The Lord inclined the hearts of the Egyptians to be thus free and
bountiful: if it be again urged, that they are said to spoil the Egyptians;
that is but spoken (...); and relates to the event, rather than to the action;
spoiling properly signifying a hostile, forcible taking away of another Goods,
which in this case, was not: but this may receive some farther light, by
comparing it with Genesis 31.9. Thus God, said Jacob, has taken away the Cattle
of your father, and given them to me. If it be again inquired, what was Gods
intent in putting the Israelites upon this demanding instruments of Silver,
etc. I answer, God had then the building of his Sanctuary in his eye, whereto
much of the things they received, proved serviceable, and was after
consecrated, for all was not cast away upon the Golden-Calf.

Having spoken of that Question that concerned the Israelites borrowing, what I
thought requisite to remove that rub out of the way, I return to attend Mr. B.

Mr. B. God appointed his People to destroy the Canaanites, and it was fittest
by little and little, -- usurie was therefore a fit Consumption so to eat them
out.

Reply 1. Believe it he that can. I can call this no other than a groundless
furmise, as having no footing on reason, or Scripture; the latter not affording
the least discovery that any of the Cursed Nations were eaten out by this means.

2. Neither will the conjecture receive any help from Reason. Suppose a Command
given to the English, to show no kindness to any of their neighbor Nations;
but to destroy them utterly, and root them out; would any think that this
Command were obeyed by lending to them upon Usury? or that this were a likely
means to effect it?

3. If you look to the end of the Command for extirpation; seems it likely,
that the Jews might lawfully exercise converse with the Cursed Nations, in
lending to them; when they were commanded not to suffer them to dwell in the
Land, Exodus 23.32, 33. Deuteronomy. 7.2.
nor make a Covenant with them, nor show mercy to them; but utterly to smite
and destroy them: and that too, for this reason principally, lest these Nations
should infect them with Idolatry, and so draw them off from the pure Worship of
God?

Q. 3. Whether it be lawful to contract for certain gain, whiles the gains of
the borrower are uncertain?

Mr. B. holds the negative, and that as universally true, or else his Argument
would not prove the thing by him designed. This string is often harped on:
particularly, p. 18. Great and certain gain accrues to the Usurer, sometime out
of little gain, sometime out of no gain; sometimes out of loss; always out of
uncertainties; always out of labor and pains, out of care and cost, out of
hazard and peril to the borrower: is this conscionable?

Reply 1. Whereas he says, Great gain, It is not so great now, as in his days.

2. Not so great, as where greater hazards are run, less gain being expected
and taken, because of the less hazard run.

3. Would it be reasonable, that the Creditor should run all hazards at this
disadvantage; so that if he gains to the utmost, he gains but 6 per Cent. but
upon the Debtors miscarriages, he may possibly lose not only 6 in the 100, but
the whole 100? And yet the lender knows to his cost, that this hazard is not
seldom run too.

4. Suppose he then covenants for uncertain gain, it may justly admit of a
doubt, whether this can be proved consistent with the Law of Moses, which yet
they plead reaches us too, as being moral and perpetual. And is not this
[lucrum ex mutuo pactum] gain covenanted for from lending? do they not also
say, we are bound to lend freely to all that we lend to, not hoping for any
thing again, and consequently, not any gain, either certain or uncertain.

5. Suppose then that men might lend for uncertain gain, i. e. trusting to the
borrower's courtesy, who frequently is to seek what his gains by the loan are;
but more frequently dissembles his gains, and magnifies his losses: the gains
on these accounts, would prove uncertain indeed; and the Principal too, if left
to the Conscience of many borrowers; the dispositions of the men of our times
being well described by the Son of Sirach, Ecccles. 29.4, 7.

6. Might not the same that is said here by him, be affirmed of other
Contractors, and particularly of him that sets out his ground to farm? does not
certain gain accrue to him, sometimes out of little gain, sometimes out of no
gain, sometimes out of loss, always out of uncertainties, always out of labor
and pain, etc. And yet this is held conscionable. De Jure. 235.
In farming (says Grotius) the use of the Money is recompensed with the fruit
of the Farm.

Lastly, The borrower says Mr. B. pays the use, always out of labor and
pains: As if no lender took labor and pains for procuring the money, before he
could lend it.

M. B. Pleads, p. 27.
He that lets any thing, bears the hazard of the thing he letts. As the
Landlord of the Ground, not only of the Title; but also of all Casualties and
Calamities any way incident, as overflowing by Sea, Invasion by enemies, etc.
in which cases he is as well to lose his Rent, as the Tenant his labor and
charges.

Reply 1. For extraordinary Cases there cannot be expected ordinary Rules: when
such happen, there should be forbearance and moderation used both by the setter
and lender. I think it is part of their Contract to secure the Tenant in the
quiet possession of what he rents, that being subject to more cavils and
molestations than the money lent is. Who sees not that in overflowings of
Water, Invasions of Enemies, money may be better secured than the quiet
possession of Fields and Tenements? but if the borrower do suffer loss by such
unexpected accidents, Charity will, that the Creditor favor him, at least, in
the Overplus, which is equivalent to the fetters losing of the Rent, and it is
well if the Principal be not hereby hazarded; whereas the Field and Land remain
after the flood is dried up, and the Enemies withdrawn.

2. But are there no hazards that the Tenant runs in what he rents? are there
no droughts and floods, no blasts and mildews, no in breakings of Cattle, that
may in part frustrate his hopes, and render his labor fruitless? here then the
Landlord takes certain gains for that which is hazardable, which we have heard
before declared unlawful in the lender.

3. I suppose a Case: A Farmer that rents a Tenement for years, having money of
his own, only it is out in other hands, and cannot get it in to supply his
present occasions: he therefore borrows of his neighbor a hundred pounds:
therewith he stocks the Tenement, and Tills the Ground, thus the money is laid
out on Cattle, Corn and Tilling: but there-after there happens a Murrain
amongst his Cattle, a Drought eats up his Corn, or the Meldew cankers it: what
reason is there the Landlord should have his full Rent, but the lender must
take his part in the loss; seeing the failure was rather on the Tenements part,
than the loan, which did the work it was designed for?

4. For a close to this Question, let it be considered, Whether in the paying
of Interest (by him held lawful) some of the objected inconveniences will not
take place: for whether the borrower gain or lose, he must (according to Mr.
B.) in reason, make up the others loss sustained: And this may amount to more
than the Use-money prescribed by Law. p. 56.
For Interest (says he) is to be rated and proportioned, not according to the
gain or benefit which the borrower has reaped by the employment of the money;
but according to the hinderance or loss which the Creditor sustaineth through
the borrowers default.

4. Q. Whether Usury be against Equity, Conscience and Reason?

So Mr. B. affirms: p. 36. p. 58, etc. Christ. Direct. Tom. c. 4.. 13. p. 125.
To whom I shall oppose Mr. Baxter, saying, That which is neither a violation
of the natural Laws of Piety, Justice or Charity, nor against the
supernatural, revealed Laws of Moses, or of Christ, is not unlawful: but there
is some Usury which is against none of all these, E. there is some Usury which
is not unlawful. They that have a mind may see him proving what he asserts in
the place quoted.

2. Spanhem. Dub. Eva. p. 669.
The 3d Reason: Not all Increase that is required above the Principal is
forbidden; seeing some is not only, not contrary to any precept or prohibition
of the Decalogue; but also, it neither prejudiceth Charity, nor Equity, nor
Honesty; but rather binds Charity, is founded in natural Equity, and does
cherish and promote good neighborhood amongst men.

3. The Equitableness hereof will appear from Gratitude on the borrowers part;
from his consent, promise, power to give, and the inequality of the contrary.

1. Some Usury, and that which I plead for, is grounded in gratitude: he that
has recived another money, and gained, and increased his Estate, or prevented
damages thereby, is by humanity bound to be thankful, and to make due returns
to the party by whom he has profited. The Heathens with one consent cried out
upon Ingratitude. Sen. That thou may know a grateful affection of mind to be
desirable for it self; De benef. l. 4. c. 18.
and Ingratitude a thing to be avoided for it self; for nothing does distract
and divide the Concord of Human Society equally to this Vice: for by what other
are we safe, save that we are helped by mutual Offices: by this one thing life
is better furnished and fortified against sudden Incursions; even by the
exchanging of benefits.

This liberal Usury may, with a good Conscience, be given and taken from an
able and willing giver, Mr. B. consenting, p. 54.
only (says he) it may not be required for loan.

Reply: Is not this Overplus paid upon the account of the loan? and may not
the Creditor receive and expect it too upon the same account? or on what other
account should he receive it? As for the Compact it has been answered already.

2. Here is also Consent on both sides, for a groundwork to the Equity of this
Contract. Theft is the Usurpation of another Goods, without the consent of the
owner, and therefore Usury cannot be Theft, as they plead: True, if there were
force used by the Creditor to bring the borrower to such a Compact, there had
been Oppression and unlawful dealing: but not so, p. 55.
where it is his own voluntary act, and there is no injury done to one willing,
according to the received Maxim, the which is by him pleaded, when it serves
his turn.

But they deny this free consent in our Case: He being constrained by thy
cruelty so to do, p. 48.
says Mr. B. being forced, he borrows, says Mr. J. p. 57.


Reply 1. Let it be still remembered, we are not speaking of such as borrow for
natural necessity, or to keep themselves from starving: but of other borrowers
that design Trade, gain, etc. how are such compelled or forced? or does the
force arise from the lender?

I consult Seneca: First of all, Contro. 3. l. 6.
it is not force, where any thing is undergone for the dispatching of a
business, but only reason: because I cannot have a house unless I buy this: no
other house is to be sold: the seller sees his time, and urges it: yet you
shall not make void this bargain; otherwise Cavillation would prove endless.
Another will say, there was a necessity laid on me: a necessity laid on thee?
how so? first thou could have been without it, and again, thy needs might
have been supplied another way, thou might have stayed till another
opportunity: could thou not have been supplied otherwise, so much the more
art thou engaged to me? but if there be force and necessity in the thing, then
are the matters transacted, by force and necessity made void, if the force and
necessity were imposed by the Covenanter. It nothing concerns me, whether thou
be forced, if thou be not forced by me: it ought to be my fault, that it should
be my punishment. Thus Seneca.

2. I shall not doubt to say, there be not a few that pay Use, that freely and
voluntarily do it; and if left to their own freedom would not do otherwise, I
mean, upon supposition of borrowing. In these there is a free consent, and in
others there is a secondary or interpretative willingness. De Jure. c. 17. 18.
Involuntary (says Crotius) taking its arise from voluntary, is in Morals
accounted for voluntary. It Is like, some would not pay Use, could they have the
money gratis: and probably, would be unwilling to part with the Principal too,
on the same terms; and he that buys, would keep his money, if he could obtain
the Commodity for naught: yet here is a sufficiency of willingness for
transferring of a right, for here is consent.

3. In the Compact for lending, there is not only a private, but a public
consent too; I mean, the National Law. Of both which Consents, De Jure. p. 541.
Grotius writes thus: For as from our private consent, there accrues, not only
an outward, but also an inward right over our Goods; so also from a certain
common consent, which, in effect, contains in it the consent of every single
person, in which sense, the Law of the Commonwealth, is called the Compact of
the Commonwealth.

4. Let us see farther, whether the borrower have not a power to pay this
Overplus, or to make over the right thereof to the lender? I speak of Civil
Power or Right. This I prove, for if he have such a power to give it freely, he
has a power to transfer it upon Compact: or let it be thought what is wanting
here to this rightful power.

Says Grotius: p. 149.
The principle, both here, and in other human acts, where-from a right does
arise, is that right, which we have interpreted a moral faculty, together with
a sufficient will. Of the consent of the will, I spoke but now. Take then what
this Learned Author adjoyns, of the definition of Propriety, which (says he)
is this, when the right of alienating is in our power; there are two things to
be noted, the one in the giver, and the other in the receiver: -- In the one
there is the same reason for alienating and promising by the Law of Nature.

Of which last, I come now to speak.

4. The Equity of this Contract of Usury, is founded in promise or fidelity:
the receiver of the money becomes debtor by promise; and it was ever the part
of an honest man to make good his promise, where it is in his power to perform
it. Says the Author last mentioned, Tully in his Offices gave so great force
to promises, p. 220.
that he calls Faithfulness the foundation of Justice. Again, All that have
come to the use of reason, are capable of a right from a promise. -- from this
fellowship of reason and speech arises that obligation from promise, whereof
we have spoken. -- a promise by it self confers a new right.

The Author Of the Whole Duty of Man, p. 237.
writes thus: As for the other sort of debts, that which is brought upon a man
by his own voluntary promise, that also cannot without great injustice be
withholden, for it is now the man's right, and then it is no matter by what means
it came to be so: therefore we see David makes it part of the description of a
just man, Psalm. 15.4. that he keeps his promises, yea, though they were made to
his own disadvantage.

I shall add Dr. Tailor: Holy live. p. 208.
Religiously keep all Promises and Covenants, though made to your disadvantage,
though afterward you perceive you might have been better; and let not any
precedent act of yours, be altered by any after-accident: let nothing make you
break your promise, unless it be unlawful or impossible, i. e. either out of
your Natural, or out of your Civil power, your self being under the power of
another, or that it be intolerably inconvenient to your self, and of no
advantage to another; or that you have leave expressed, or reasonably presumed.

5. The Equity of this Contract, appears from the inequality of the contrary.

(1.) It is unequal, that the Iender should receive less than he delivered.
(2.) It is unequal that one man should grow rich, to another damage, by whom
he is enriched.
1. It is unequal that the lender should receive back, less than the borrower
received from him: but so it is, if nothing but the Principal be restored; for
the borrower besides this, received a right and liberty, to use and make the
best advantage of what was another man's: This is more than the Creditor can be
said to receive back, having back the Principal only, he receives but what was
his own.

The Anti Usurers argue on the other hand, that Usury is unjust, because less
is given, more is received: to which Object. p. 675.
Spanhemius thus replys. 3. It is doubtful in saying, less is given, more is
received: for there is respect had either of the money delivered only, or there
is also respect had to the undue office performed by the Creditor, the parting
from his right which he had to the money, and the privation of the money thus
lent for a time: In the former respect, it is certain, that less is given, more
received; not so in the latter, seeing the Principal restored, answers to the
Principal lent; the Overplus, as a just recompense, answers to the undue
office, the parting from our right, the privation of the money, and other
things of like nature. Yea, this same Argument may be turned against them, and
said, in such a Contract the Debtor receives more than he delivers back, seeing
that he receives not only the Instrument, but also the advantage of greatly
increasing his own profits from him, to whom he pays a small Pension.

2. It is unequal, that one man should grow rich to another damage: but so it
is in many cases, where the borrower has all the gain, procured by another
money, and the Creditor that lent it has none.

Says Grotius: That one feel the loss without the profit, p. 237.
is therefore not to be admitted, because a communication of profits is so
natural to society, that it eannot stand without it.

2. Vol. 1. p. 65.
What Mr. Perkins writes will give light to this: In buying and selling, in
letting and setting, in Merchandise and other Commodities. 1. There must be
proportion and equality in all Contracts. -- 2. They must be squared according
to the Law of Nature, the sum whereof Christ expounds, Mat 7.12. 3. The bond
of Nature must be kept, whieh binds him that receives a benefit, and makes
a gainful Trade of another man's Goods, that he being once enriched, shall make
a proportionable and natural recompense, even above the Principal. 4. Men must
communicate and make use of their Goods with that Caveate which Paul gives, 2
Cor. 8.13. Not so to bestow them as that others may be eased, and they grieved:
or contrariwise.

3. The Scripture last mentioned, though spoken occasionally, with respect to
giving, yet is the foundation of all Contracts, say the Learned.

4. I add Spanhemius's Testimony: p. 675.
-- Yea Justice and Equity were taken away, e. g. If a Merchant should
increase his Estate by our money, and no part of the gain should come to us,
for our parting with our right and money, and for the advantage given to
another of increasing his Estate, without any obligation on his part.

5. Is not the reason of equity and equality overthrown, if one receive all
the profit, and the other none? when yet both conferred somewhat toward the
promoting of that profit; for one thing brings the matter or instrument, the
other industry and labor.

6. What injustice or want of equity is there, when both are gainers? it is
apparent, that sometimes it is so, which is enough to our present purpose:
neither will the instances brought to the contrary by Mr. B. overthrow the
strength of this reasoning, p. 34, 35.
viz. Instanees taken from the officious lie, stolen sheep, and buying a
presentation, where he pleads both parties are gainers.

Reply 1. But there are other parties that are apparently loosers, viz. by the
lie, the Community; by the stolen Sheep, the Owner; and by the Simony, the
Church.

2. The foundation in two of these instances, is naught and rotten, viz. Theft
and Lying, these are in their own nature sinful, and therefore not capable of
being made good by any supposed advantage: but the foundation to our Contract
of Usury, is lending, which is in it self laudable.

3. I have before proved, that the borrower has power to transfer his right,
which neither of these mentioned had.

Mr. B. Answ. 2. p. 35.
If the borrower gain by accident, in respect of the event, it is no thanks to
the Usurer.

Reply 1. It may be true, and yet the Contract be honest. In common cases, the
buyer ows little thanks to the seller, any more than the seller does to the
buyer, and the Contract held blameless.

2. All that can be said, is, that this is not an act of Charity, or that which
is commonly called beneficium; which may be true, and yet the Contract be just:
as in the case of the buyer and seller aforementioned: what is just is one
thing; and what is charitable, is another; and yet both may be good in their
kind, this is that which Seneca meant, l 2. de ben. c. 13. c. 14.
Beneficium ejus commodum spectat, cui praestatur, non nostrum, alioquin nobis
non illi damus: -- Let it be remembered, there is a Medium between a kindness
and an injury, as several kinds of Contracts are. c. 15.
Nunquid dubium est, quin contraria sit beneficio injuria? etc. Thus it is
where the Lender respects his own gain.

But 3d. Where the lender respects, and intends the borrowers gain too; the
same Author, as well as Reason, will tell us, there is thanks due, and kindness
performed. I am not (says he) so unjust, as to think Iow him nothing, who
being profitable to me, proved so also to himself: for I do not require, that
he should consult my good, without an eye to his own: yea, I rather desire,
that the benefit given me, may more advantage the giver, so be, he that gave,
had respect to both, etc.

4. To the Moralist, I shall add the Divine, p. 669.
viz. Spanhem. If Usury be against any Command of the second Table, it must be
the eighth: But it is not against the eighth: This appears, because some
Usury, is so far from intercepting or prejudicing another Goods, as that, on
the contrary, it promotes the profit, both of giver and receiver, and this by
lawful means, without wrong, fraud or extortion.

Mr. B. EXC. But if the borrower sometimes gains; yet the Commonwealth is
damnified. p. 14, 39.


Reply 1. The Commonwealth is made up of single persons, what proves
beneficial to these, does frequently (though not always) prove so to that.

2. Spanhem. Answers it thus: 676.


1. If the Commonwealth be damnified, that is by accident, through the
borrowers, rather than lenders fault: for that is often done by those that
Trade with their own money, and not another. 2. By lawful means, e. g. by a
seasonable buying of Wares in Foreign parts, or of things relating to their
livelihood, or of Farms in their own Country, the borrowers may have enough,
whence to pay moderate Pensions, such as ought only to be required, but if they
be abused to frauds and evil arts, this must be imputed to the one, and not to
the other.
Q. p. 65.67. p. 15.
5. Is it lawful for the seller to advance his price on Wares sold, upon the
account of time given for the payment?

Mr. B. Holds it not lawful: By so doing (says he) he does but sell time,
which is not his to sell, and so under the Contract of selling, he commits
Usury, -- and this is all one as if he lent so much money for such a time,
taking use for it.

Reply 1. p. 24, etc.
I find B. Hall agreeing with him in this, That there is no great difference
betwixt this Case, of selling Commodities dearer for giving days of payment,
and that of loan, save that there is money let, here Commodities money worth,
etc. but I find him more moderate than Mr. B. in stating this question.

And certainly (says he) to debar the Contract of a moderate gain for the
delay of payment upon Months prefixed, were to destroy all Trades of
Merchandise. -- a practice that is now so habituated amongst all Nations into
the course of Trade, that it cannot well consist without it.

Mr. Jel. that I remember, has not discovered his Judgment on this question,
perhaps doubting which of his leaders here to follow, seeing they herein divide.

2. I shall produce the judgment and reasons of Divines for the lawfulness
hereof.

1. Hear Blessed Calvin: On Deuteronomy. 23. p. 823.
But now some man will demand, whether all manner of profit be forbidden by
lending, and it were a thing worth discussing: for put the case that a man
deals plainly, and delivers his Ware at a price for a time: If the other
break day with him, and delay him of his money, doubtless he deserves to pay
the forfeiture or the profit which he withholdeth from him who made the loan;
and when the interest or gain thereof is set by justice; surely he need not to
make any Conscience to take it. There is a man that has taken my Commodity by
which I must live: for when I have sold to day, I must buy again to morrow; and
therefore he that hinders me, by withholding from me the gain of my Commodity,
from maintaining the Trade of my Shop, he does not better than cut my Throat.

2. Holy Live. p. 207.
Bishop Tailor. He that sells dearer by reason, he sells not for ready money,
must increase his price no higher than to make himself recompense for the loss,
which according to the rules of trade he sustained by his forbearance,
according to common computation, reckoning in also the hazard, which he is
prudently, warily, and charitably to estimate. Thus B. Tailor: and being this
differs so little from the loan of money, we may easily guess what he thought
in the question of Usury.

3. Theol. Quest.
Richard Ward, a strict Anti-usurer: yet says; All clear and orthodox Divines
agree in these things concerning Usury.

9. That with Trades men it is lawful in regard of the forbearance of their
money, i.e. They may sell dearer if they sell for a longer time, because they
lose by the forbearance of their money: and so if a man desire his money in
bargains before the day, he who pays may justly demand an abatement according
to the time, these are agreed on by all.

And yet the difference betwixt this and Usury is so small, that there is need
of a Microscope to discern it.

3. Mr. B's Reason against such selling dearer for forbearance, is Because this
is a selling of time which is none of his to sell.

Reply 1. Let Bishop Hall answer this. It is not mere time which is here set to
sale, -- but there are two incidents into this practice, which may render it
not unwarrantable. The one is the hazard of the sum agreed upon. -- The other
is the cessation of that gain which the Merchant might in the mean time have
made of the sum differed, etc.

2. Mr. Love answers the same objection. Christ. Direct. p. 81.
Then, I conceive it no breach of equity in trading, to take the more for a
Commodity, If the Man that buys it requires time for the payment of it, than if
he paid ready money, and my reason is this, because the parting with a
Commodity without money, is a damage and hinderance to the seller, and
therefore he may lawfully take more, as in Lev. 25.14, 15. says God there; If
thou buyest ought of thy Neighbor, or sellest ought to thy Neighbor, you
shall not oppress one another; but according to the multitude of years thou
shall increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of years, thou
shall diminish the price thereof. The Case is here the same, etc.

I might here examine Mr. B's concessions upon this Question: As 1. Though any
may not sell the dearer for time given, yet to bring the buyer to an equal
price, he may sell the dearer on that account as to appearance, or according to
the buyers apprehensions. 2. He grants there may be other reasons (beside
forbearance) why the seller, granting time, may sell the dearer. As 1. When he
knows that the value of the thing will be more at the day of payment, than at
the day of sale: 2. If the thing which he sells have fruitful use. -- 3. When
the price is detained beyond the time appointed. -- These Concessions may be
retorted upon himself; but, I designedly avoid prolixity.

Q. 6. Whether all Lending ought to be free, p. 41, etc.
and a work of pure Charity, etc.

This is commonly asserted by Mr. B. Lending was not (says he) Ordained to be
a Contract of negotiation; but an act of Charity and Liberality wherein the
Lender should not respect his own gain, but the borrowers good, Luke 6.35.

Reply 1. Pract. Cat. p. 219.
What we render, hoping for nothing again. Dr. Hammond renders, Distrusting
nothing: and proves his interpretation: and Asserts that the business of Usury
is not clearly stated in the New Testament: and the only place he can pitch
upon is, Luke 6.30. which yet he builds no great confidence on.

2. It is granted on all hands, there is a lending that ought to be free; which
yet is not to be taken absolutely, universally, and without limitations:
Ability is supposed in the person lending, and necessity in the person
borrowing. It is the Cause of the poor that our Savior is here pleading; to
these God and Nature require a free lending.

3. Where a man is not bound to Lend, he is not bound to lend freely; but to
such as are wealthy, and it may be richer than our selves, we are not bound to
lend therefore, not bound to Lend freely. There is a Lending of due, and a
Lending of Courtesy, says Mr. Perkins: It cannot be that Lending should be
due unto all. And it were but a jejune Interpretation of our Savior's
Injunction to understand it thus: Whenever you lend, see that your Lending be
free: But rather thus; whenever you meet with objects of pity, some of my
members that stand in need of your relief and helping hand, according to their
necessities, and your abilities, stretch forth your hand by giving or free
Lending to them; though they be unable to requite you in the like kind.

4. His Interpretation of Deuteronomy. 23.19. would make it our duty to lend to all,
and that freely: Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy Brother: say they, He is
thy Brother whether poor or rich: adjoyn hereto then Ainsworths Commentary:
Under this prohibition the contrary is Commanded, thou shall lend: what can
follow from these premises, save this Conclusion: Thou shall lend freely to
poor and rich for both is thy Brother?

5. We must not admit that which would enjoin us to show the like Charity to
rich and poor: but to require free Lending to rich and poor alike would do so.
We read, Prove. 22.16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, and
he that gives to the rich, shall surely come to poverty.

6. Our Savior injoyns a Lending to those from whom we may not expect any
thing again (according to our Antagonists sense) but if we lend to the rich,
and such as trade and get gain, we may look for something again: we may look
for the principal again, p. 31.
and for the like kindness from them another time, as Mr. B. confesses: and
therefore this cannot be the Lending, that is here meant.

7. Though Acts of Justice and Charity are not contrary; yet they are of a
distinct nature, and ought not to be confounded: for it is one thing to sell,
another thing to give or lend freely: De benef. l. 6. c. 14.
Seneca says, Some one sells me bread-corn; I cannot live unless I buy it: but
I owe not my life because I have bought: -- What I have bought I am not
beholding to any for.

If in all Cases, and to all Persons we were tied up to use acts of pure
charity, there would be no room left for Acts of Justice, such as buying and
selling; for giving and free lending would swallow up all the former Acts.

Reasons against which are these.

1. If any man were tied up to Acts of Charity, and were not free to use Acts
of Justice in Contracts, then the Fountain of his Charity would soon be drawn
dry: for then he would be still laying out, but not taking in: And no one man
is able to satisfy the Cravings and Expectations of all necessitous persons,
much less of all such as would borrow freely. Pertinent is the Discourse of
Cicero; De off. l. 1. p. 23.
But because the abilities of each one are but small, but the multitude of
those that want these things is Infinite, Common Liberality must be referred to
that end of Ennius; That nevertheless there may be light to himself; that there
may be a sufficiency, whereby we may be free to our own Relations.

2. This is the next reason: Charity injoyns us no such thing whereby we should
be cruel to our selves or Relations: though we are to be kind to others, yet
not so as to be unkind to our selves: we are to love others as our selves; not
above or better than our selves. Of Tertations, part. 3. p. 325.
Even Mr. Capell himself will join with us herein: I speak (says he) of such
as are able; for we may not stretch beyond our staple and spoil all: I must not
make my self poor, to keep another from being poor, throw my self into the same
degree of need, to help another in and against his need. The Widow who cast in
all she had, binds us not by her example, because what she did, she gave it
rather to and for the service of God, than to the Poor.

Grotius says, De Jure p. 27.
It follows; Give to him that asks of thee, and from one that would borrow of
thee turn not thou away. If you urge this in Infinitum, nothing is more harsh.
He that takes not care for his own Household is worse than an Infidel, says
Paul, 1 Timothy 5.8. Let us therefore follow the same Paul, the best Interpreter
of his Masters Law, who stirring up the Corinthians to exercise Liberality
toward those of Jerusalem: That there may not be (says he) a relaxation to
others by burdening you; but that equally your abundance, may supply their want.

To the same purpose, he quotes Seneca saying, I will give to one in want, but
so that I may not want my self: I will help one like to perish, but so that I
may not perish my self.

I add Estius. The Order of Charity requires, that first we provide for our own
necessity; after that out of things not necessary, we are to provide for the
necessities of others.

I conclude with Cicero: De off. l. 2. p. 90.
Account must be made of our own Estate, which to suffer to go backward were
indeed a flagitious thing: yet so as to keep off from a suspicion of
Covetousness.

Again, l. 1. c. 20.
Nothing is liberal which is not also just. There was another place of caution,
that our bounty should not be greater, than the ability; for that they who will
be more liberal than their Estate will allow, offend first in this, that they
are injurious to their near Relations: for what supplies it was more meet
should be afforded, and left to these, they spend upon Strangers.

All these Inconveniences and unequal dealings mentioned, would follow from
free Lending in several Cases, and expressly where the Lender is poorer than the
borrower, as it frequently falls out: And where Widows and Orphans are the
Lenders, that have nothing else to subsist on: to teach in this case, that they
may not with a good Conscience take any thing above the principal, would prove
uncharitable and oppressive: forasmuch as there is no show of reason that
others should increase their Estate by the damage of such as these.

As to Orphans the Jews, as strict as they are against Usury amongst
themselves, yet there will allow Usury to be taken for such, as Hornbeck shows
out of Maimondes. Cont. Jud. p. 531.
It was lawful to place out the Goods of Orphans, with a good and honest man,
aster this manner. Do thou traffic with these Goods; if any gain arise from
thence, thou shall render to the Orphans their part of the gain, but if loss,
take that wholly to thy self: for this is the dust of Usury; and this dust is
not prohibited unless it be by positive Law, wherein there is nothing
determined of the Goods of Orphans.

7. Lending upon Use, may be not only just, but charitable too; or, if you
will, an act of kindness. As when a man has both money by him, and an
opportunity to buy a good purchase; he Lends this money (for moderate gain) to
another to that end that he may buy this Purchase: this cannot be denied to be
an act of kindness. Seneca writes thus: If any one have profited us for his own
sake, are we any thing obliged to him, thou will say? -- It is much to the
purpose, whether any does us a good turn for his own sake, or for ours, or for
his own and ours too. Sen. de ben. l. 6. c. 12.
Again, I am not an unjust interpreter of a benefit; neither do I desire that
it may be given only to my self, but also unto thee.

8. And Lastly, whereas Mr. B. affirms, that all lending ought to be free, and
this not only by the written Law of God, but by the Light of Nature; such as
was by the Heathen themselves discerned. I Reply, They are very quick-sighted
that can read this written in Natures Law, that all loan ought to be free: or
that, if I lend to another, whose wants, all considered, are less than mine, I
must take no profit upon the account of this loan; but the borrower must go
away with all the gains. Nature truly holds her balances more equally than
this comes to.

Q. 7. Whether need be always to be suposed in the borrower to make his
borrowing lawful?

Of this mind is Mr. B. saying: He that would borrow, should have need to
borrow, for a needless desire is unlawful. Again The Holy Ghost in the borrower
presupposes need. p. 24.
I am not concerned to question the truth of this; but rather close with it so
far, p. 40.
That none have a right to our free lending, but such as borrow out of need or
necessity, or those to whom we are bound by the common bonds of humanity to
extend our Charity.

We have all this while been inquiring concerning the lenders duty: I shall now
take occasion from the question proposed, to speak somewhat to that of the
borrowers: that things may be weighed on both sides with equal balances. And
to that end shall lay down these following Proposals.

1. A threefold need may be supposed on the borrowers part; (for I believe
none borrows, but from some need, either real or conceited; either of Natures,
or their own making.) These needs I find in Seneca stated to my hands. De ben.
l. 1. c. 11.
Of those things (says he) which are necessary, some obtain the first place,
without which we cannot live: some the second place, without which we ought
not: some the third, without which we will not. Or take them thus: There is the
need of necessity, of convenience, of wantonness, and some there are that
borrow out of all these needs, taking them severally.

1. Such as borrow out of mere necessity, that they may live, and stave off
hunger and nakedness, to them lending must be free, otherwise it will be
griping. And

(1.) This need was supposed in the borrowed God pleaded for, Lev. 25.36. Deuteronomy.
15.7, 8.

(2.) The Heathen that were so strict against Usury, were of that mind, that
none ought to borrow, but out of this absolute necessity: which being true, the
expressions of these against Usury, will but little advantage the Cause of
Anti-Usurers, or befriend our common borrowers, that think wrong done them, if
the loan come not free unto them. p. 284.
Says Rivet, The Bp. of Winchester himself at length confesses, that the same
thing pleased Moses which did Plato, that none should demand water of his
neighbor, until he had dug in his own Ground, even down as far as the
Chalk.

This I find in Plutarch, Mor. Part. 2. p. 471.
both interpreted and applied to our matter in hand. Plato in his Laws (says
he) suffers not neighbors to partake of another water, till they had dug
at home in their own soil, as far as the Clay, and find it void of water. He
means that such have some part of other men's Goods, (the Law of Poverty
pleading for them) that cannot get some of their own. Is it not evident, that
Law belongs to money-matters, so that men should not borrow from others, nor go
unto others fountains, till they have ransacked their store at home, and as it
were collected by drops what may supply their use and necessity.

(3.) Is not this the need intended by the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4.28?

2. There is a need of Convenience: When men would have somewhat, that they can
live without; but yet cannot well want, without some disconvenience to their
Trade, or obstacle to their gain, or more comfortable subsistence: may men
lawfully borrow, being under this need? I suppose they may: p. 40.
And I find Mr. B. inclining this way, saying. But if thy wealthy friend have
some present, occasional need, (as the richest may have) then if thou can
spare it, lend in kindness, etc. Mr. B. then says, if we lend to such, we
ought to lend freely, even to the wealthiest and richest men, if they be under
such occasional needs: but others, upon grounds forementioned, say otherwise:
for why should one be bound to run himself into an inconvenience to free
another out of one?

3. There is a need of wantonness.

(1.) Says Plutarch: When men being set on by Luxury, Ut supra.
effeminateness and Prodigality, do not use their own, but take up great sums
upon Usury from others, being compelled by no necessity. P. 30.
Mr B. makes mention too of the cove our desire and pride of borrowers.

(2.) Is it lawful for such to borrow? not surely to seed their lusts, luxury,
pride or oppression of others; this is soon accorded so on all sides. part. 3..
7. p. 327.
Mr. Capel makes mention of all three necessities, and excludes the last from
the privilege of borrowing: answering the question, Why, and to whom must we
give? To all, but chiefly to the poor, such as are in need; and need in a case,
or in some particular point, may befall a rich man: but when men make their own
need, and through pride or folly, do occasion their own occasions and wants;
and do desire us that we should give or lend; here we are to withhold and not
feed the lusts or humors of men.

(3.) But suppose it be unknown to the lenders, that others borrow on these
unlawful designs; ought not such as these, upon discovery pay Use? or may not
the Creditor, with a good Conscience, of such, take somewhat above the
Principal? No, not according to their Principles; all gain taken on any such
score being a sin against Nature, as they say; but I am confident, in this
case, not again Justice or Charity, it being against both, that such should
have poorer Men's Estates in their hands gratis, whiles they are somenting their
own lusts.

2. There be some that hold it unlawful, not only to take, but also to pay Use,
or give a gratuity. Annot. in Ex. 22.25.
Ainsworth cites Maimonides that Learned Rabbi to this effect: only he intends
it for the Jewish Nation, whereto Rabbis generally thought the Law of Usury
peculiar.

As it is unlawful (says he) to lend; so it is unlawful to borrow upon Usury
-- It is unlawful to take use before or after: As one intending to borrow of a
man, sends him a gift, to the end, that be may lend unto him: this is Usury
before hand: Or he has borrowed of a man, and paid him again, and sends him a
gift for his Money, which he had of him for naught, this is after-Vsury, whosoever
borrows of his neighbor, and was not wont in former time to salute him first,
it is unlawful for him to salute him first: -- for it is written Usury of any
word or thing: likewise it is unlawful to the borrower to learn the lender to
read, -- all the while the money is in his hand, if he were not wont to do so
before, etc. strange it is that Eagles should thus catch Flies, and great
Rabbis learnedly discourse of trifles. If Mr. J. had hit upon these passages,
they would have befriended him in the confirmation of that conceit, that it is
not lawful to take a mite or Cup of cold water above the Principal.

Lastly, There may be, and commonly is, oppression in the borrower, as well as
the lender: This happens, when men use deceits to finger another money;
pretend ability, when there is none, promise repayment when they intend it not,
wearying out the Creditors with their denyals or delays, and many other ways
seeking his damage and trouble: these things, I am sure, ought not to be,
though the evil and wickedness thereof be but little laid to heart by many
borrowers.

I shall therefore say something for discouragement to practices of this nature.

1. Here is a plain violation of truth and faithfulness, which is the bond of
humane societies, and pillar of Justice: a good man is one that swears to his
hurt, Psalm. 15.
and changes not: how much more should he keep his word, when he promises but
to repay what he first received?

2. It is a direct and open violation of Justice, that calls upon men to give
every one his due, Romans 12.8. Ow no man any thing. the Lord requires, that men
should labor, that they may eat their own bread, and not live by the sweat of
other men's Brows, 2 These. 3.8, 12. whereas the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.28. Let
him that stole, steal no more: Estius thereon, Comments thus: To Steal is here
largely put for to deceive, or unjustly to take away, or detain that which is
another. -- He here includes restitution: for he that does not restore when he
can, perseveres in Theft, i. e. in the voluntary withholding of another Goods,
So Prove. 3.27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, etc.

3. In Deuteronomy. p. 823.
Hear Judicious Calvin pleading the cause of the Lender, thus: Behold, I
depended upon him, he promised to pay me at such a day, that time is past, and
I can get nothing from him: he cares not though I and my Family starve for
hunger, therefore in such case Justice ought to remedy a man; so then, if a man
be on this wise deceived, it is a clear case, he may take Interest gain, and
not for this be accused before either Gid or Men. We may not therefore stand on
the Term or Word.

4. This is made the Character of a wicked man, The wicked borrows, and
pays not again, Psalm. 37.21.

5. As a Comment on those forecited Scriptures, I shall recite what is written
by the Judicious Author Of the Whole Duty of Man. p. 235.
The second sort of this injustice is Theft, and of that also there are two
kinds; the one the withholding what we should pay, and the other, taking from
our neighbor what is already in his possession. Of the first sort, is the not
paying of Debts, whether such as we have borrowed, or such as by our own
voluntary promise are become our debts, for they are equally due to him that
can lay either of these claims to them; and therefore, the withholding of
either of them is a Theft, a keeping from my neighbor that which is his: yet
the former of them is rather the more injurious, for by that I take from him
that which he once actually had (be it Money, or whatsoever else) and so make
him worse than I found him. This is a very great, and a very common injustice:
Men can now adays, with as great confidence deny him that asks a Debt, as they
do him that asks an Alms: Nay, many times it is matter of quarrel, for a man to
demand his own; besides the many attendances the Creditor is put to in pursuit
of it, are yet, a further injury to him, by wasting his time, and taking him
off from other businesses, and so he is made a loser that way too: This is so
great injustice, that I see not how a man can look upon any thing he possesses,
as his own right, whilst he thus denis another his. It is the duty of every man
in Debt, rather to strip himself of all, and cast himself again naked upon Gods
Providence, than thus to feather his Nest with the spoils of his Neighbors. --
But the sure way for a man to secure himself from the guilt of this injustice,
is never to borrow more than he knows he has means to repay, unless it be of
one, who knowing his disability, is willing to run the hazard; otherwise, he
commits this sin at the very time of borrowing: for he takes that from his
neighbor, upon promise of paying, which he knows he is never likely to restore
to him, which is a flat robbery.

As for the other sort of Debts, p. 237.
that which is brought upon a man by his own voluntary promise, that also
cannot, without great injustice; be withholden: for it is now the man's right,
and then it is no matter by what means it came to be so: therefore we see David
makes it part of the description of a just man, Psalm. 15.4. that he keeps his
promises, yea, though they were made to his own disadvantage.

6. Says the Moralist, Sen. ad Marc. cons. c. 10.
It is a part of the worst Debtor, to rail on the Creditor.

Lastly, I shall close with the Son of Syrach, Eccles. 29.4, etc. Many, when a
thing was lent them, reckoned it to be found, and put them to trouble that
helped them: till he has received, he will kiss a man's hand: and for his
neighbors money, he will speak submissly; but when he should repay, he will
prolong the time, and return words of grief, and complain of the time: if he
prevail, he shall hardly receive the half, and he will count as if he had found
it: if not, he has deprived him of his money, and he has gotten him an enemy
without cause: he pays him with Cursings and Railings; and for honor, he
will pay him disgrace. Many men have therefore refused to lend for other men's
ill dealing, fearing to be defrauded.

We see, that if these last cited Authors speak true, suppose Usurers be
Thieves, (as is commonly asserted) yet there be many borrowers that may be
enrolled with them, and bear part of the denomination: though this will not
justify the faulty among either sort; but it becomes both the one and the
other, to mind honesty in their Dealings.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON Mr. CAPEL'S DISCOURSE OF USURY, In His TREATISE Of
TENTATIONS, P. 262, etc.
THE Place that is chosen by this Reverend Divine for the Foundation of his
Discourse being Nehem. 5.11. Restore to them even this day, etc. I shall not
let the same pass without some remarks thereon. I have in my Reply to Mr. Jel.
asserted the case here handled to be extraordinary. That it was such, it
appears from the present unsettled condition of this People, being but lately
returned from their 70 years Captivity; from the Heathens watching all
advantages to surprise them in their weakness, divisions, and dissettlement: V.
14.15, 18.
From the Governors forbearing to receive what belonged to him as such, and
others before him had taken; and he himself, it is like; would have taken at any
other time: as also from their yielding up their Mortgages that very day,
notwithstanding their disbursements thereon: whereas by Moses Law they were not
bound to surrender them till the Year of Jubilee, or till a Redemption was
made. And Lastly, from the frank forgiving of dues and debts: All which
evidence the Case to be more than ordinary; and therefore not so fit to make an
ordinary and constant pattern, save to a People or Persons under the like
Circumstances that these were.

Mr. C. Represents their Condition much at the same rate, when he says; Else it
could not be imagined, that in their bondage the Jews should thus have granted
one upon another: The place, the time, the scandals, besides the express Law of
God, one would have thought should have made them forbear.

Mr. C. Begins thus; The matter here is a Case of restitution of Lands and
Moneys gotten from the Poor by Usury: So our last Translation reads it, v. 7.
The Hebrew is Burden.

Reply 1. Let that be observed: the word is neither Nesheck, nor Tarbith, the
terms Scripture is wont to express Usury by, and Increase; but Massa, a Burden.
And so translated by Jun. and Trem. Onus unius cujusque Impositum alteri vos
Exigitis. I know it passes for current, that the practice here reproved by
Nehemiah was that of Usury; Though there be not one word in the Original that
expresses Usury, setting aside the general term burden. And there being other
Burdens they might have laid upon their Brethren beside Usury) unless this must
bear the burden of all Exactions and Oppressions whatsoever) and these
appearing to be some different burdens from that; it will follow that the
practices here blamed cannot be proved to have directly violated the law
against usury.

2. Let them be examined apart.

1. The first burden we meet with is, v. 2. There were that said, We, our Sons,
our Daughters are many; therefore we take up Corn that we may eat and live.

If this Corn had been taken up by them under an Engagement to restore double,
or any Increase, it had been Usury by the Law forbidden, but this no way
appears to be so: and in all likelihood was not. For they returning newly from
Captivity poor and needy, having a great charge of Children, and now working on
a public account; do desire at least their Corn be allowed them on a public
Account: See Ezr. 3.7.
and for the future not to be forced to pay, or enter promise to pay for the
Corn taken up by them for a Livelihood. Thus Diodate: Take up, i. e. whilst we
work for the public good, let our food at least be provided for, either by the
contribution of rich men, or by some public liberality. Thus Diodate: and the
motion being reasonable, makes the interpretation seem as probable.

2. The next burden is mentioned, v. 3. Some also there were that said, we have
morgaged our Lands, Vineyards, and Houses, that we might buy corn because of
the dearth. Neither can this be proved to be the sin of Usury, but some other
oppression. For the persons to whom these Estates were morgaged, either gave
for them an undervalue, or the full value; If the first be true, so that they
wrought upon the necessities of this poor people, and gave them not the full
value; this was the sin of oppression, even of oppression in buying and
selling; which is by God prohibited in this particular of morgaging or selling
Estates, Lev. 25.14, 17. But if they gave the full value for the Houses, etc.
This surely had been lawful at any other time, save such as this; and the Law
of redeeming Estates thus morgaged supposes it; Lev. 25.24, 25. And who would
sell Lands or Houses, but men necessitous? And it seems from the history of
Naboth, they might not chop and change Inheritances at pleasure.

3. The third complaint we have v. 45. They borrowed Money to pay the Kings
Tribute, and that upon their Lands: These it is like, being made over, or
morgaged by securing the money borrowed: and there was a further ground of
Complaint; that hereupon they were necessitated to sell their Sons and
Daughters for Bondslaves.

This was oppression contrary to another Law mentioned, Lev. 25.39, etc. They
shall not be sold as Bondmen, v. 42.

The Aggravation of this oppression we find, v. 8. Whereas Nehemiah with some
others had just before shown their pity and kindness to their Brethren, in
Ransoming them out of Captivity: These presently after design to make their
Market of them, by selling them again, or taking them for Bondslaves to
themselves.

4. The Complaint in v. 7. has a respect but unto the foregoing grievances; it
being their complaint taken up and managed anew by Nehemiah in his contending
with the Nobles. We read, it is true, ye exact Usury; but nearer to the Hebrew
it is, ye exact a burden every one of his Brother; or, ye Exact a debt or Loan;
so Buxtorf renders the word by Debitum, mutuum. And then it was not Money for
use that that they exacted, but the principal; whereas they should have
forgiven their Brethren that were poor, and even brought to starving: and for
the confirmation of this sense makes what we read, Neh. 10.31. Amongst other
things they there Covenant, to leave the Exaction of every Debt. And so they
were bound to do every seventh Year by God's Law, Deuteronomy. 15.1, etc. Every
Creditor that lends ought, etc. What we render ye Exact Usury, the 70. only
reads ye Exact, leaving out the substantive. (...) Pract. cat. p. 315.
And Dr. Hammond confesses, the word may signify, to Exact or require back the
loan; the which he proves by comparing it with other places.

5. All the doubt then remains of what is written, v. 11. Where they are called
on to restore the hundredth part of the money, -- that they had Exacted.

This Hundredth part of Money, Corn, Wine and Oil, thus exacted by the Nobles
and Governors, Mr. C. after others, takes for granted to be Usury that they
took, but cannot settle whether it were taken every Month, or once a Year only:
i. e. Whether it were after the rate of one, or twelve in the Hundred. But I
believe it was neither one nor other; but rather some other way of exaction
than by Usury; and my reason of this conjecture I take from what the Governor
himself says, v. 10. I likewise, and my Brethren, and my Servants, might exact
of them Money and Corn. Which way might he and his have exacted Money and Corn
of their Brethren? I dare say, he meant it not by way of Usury, which was
expressly against the Law: for this had been a frigid, Jejune reason to diswade
from Usury, to say, I and others might have done so as well as you; the thing
in question too being under Divine prohibition. Upon the whole it seems to me
not an improbable conjecture, that this hundredth part was exacted by them as
Officers and Rulers among the people, for so they were, v. 7. Chap. 11.1.

The forbearanee of Nehemiah toward the people, you may see, v. 14.15, etc.
Whereas other Governors before him, had been chargeable to the people, and had
taken Bread and Wine, and Silver of them; and their Servants bare rule over
them: In this Nehemiah was not chargeable to them; for neither he nor his
Brethren did eat the Bread of the Governor, for the space of 12. years: and it
seems he persuaded the other Rulers to have used the like forbearance toward
this people, and not have exacted at this time that part of the Corn and Wine,
etc. that belonged to them. This I take to be the Genuine sense of the place:
The sum of Nehemiahs diswasion being; I Pray let us leave off this burden, v.
10.

3. Thus I have endeavored to clear, that it was not Usury, but some other
oppressive burden they are here reproved for. But to my purpose it matters not
much, whether it were this or that: for let it be granted, that the thing
blamed was Usury, and the case was not extraordinary: yet the condemnation of
all Usury amongst Christians cannot be hence inferred. For,

1. v. 2.
These were poor, so acknowledged to be by Mr. C. himself: and the History
speaks it sufficiently (though Mr. Jel. would hence prove, it is not lawful to
take use of the rich.) Now the Law was express, they might not take use of the
poor, Exodus 22.25. Yea they were commanded to relieve him when fallen into
decay, and not to lend him their money for Usury, nor Victuals for increase,
Lev. 25.35, 36, 37.

2. They exacted usury of their Brethren, v. 7. I cannot be persuaded they
might have exacted Usury of a Stranger that was poor, and borrowed to keep
himself from starving, p. 267. Marg.
(though Mr. Capel says the Jews might have put their money to Use to a poor
Stranger, though not to a poor or rich Jew.) This was the Jews peculiar, they
might not take Use of their Brethren, those of their own Nation whatever he
were. The former being law of nature and charity, that injoyns acts of Common
humanity. This latter was a law Political, that intended acts of peculiar
kindness, Deuteronomy. 23.19, 20. They might lend upon Usury to a Stranger, but not to
a Brother: though mostly it was the poorer sort among the Jews that borrowed.
Hear Mr. C. speaking to the same effect: The Law does urge it most, p. 267.
that it be not done to the poor Jews; was it not because the Jews were then
too noble and generous to go a borrowing, except it were the poorer sort? what
should the Law then forbid that to be done by rich men, which most rich men
never did?

The usual shift here is to say, p. 266, 267
that by Stranger, is meant the Canaanite, whom they were bound to kill. What?
bound to kill him, and yet might lend him money? bound to have no society with
him, for fear of infecton, and yet might have Civil Commerce with him? A thing
incredible! this is an arguing that cuts its own Throat.

The Jews themselves, with their Learned Rabbis, always understood the Law, of
a Stranger indefinitely, In Luc. 6.35.
as Grotius asserts: And how could they understand it otherwise, when Stranger
and Brother are opposed in the Text? was the Egyptian or Assyrian their
brother? if not, then the Jews were not prohibited to lend to these upon Usury.

Mr. C. The Law I know permitted it to the Jews, p. 266.
to the Stranger; what of that? It follows the rather, that it is of it self a
sin, because permission is of sins, not of duties.

Reply 1. It is well known, there is a Medium between sins and duties; things
indifferent are neither sins nor duties, which may come under an exception or
permission in Political Laws. Some permission (says Grotius) gives a right to
do a thing, for thus he writes: We will speak something more distinctly of
things permitted, For the permission which is by Law (for that which is of the
naked fact, and signifies the removing of the impediment belongs not to this
place) is either full, which grants a full right to do a thing lawfully: or is
less than full, which only grants impunity amongst men, and a right that no man
may lawfully hinder him.

2. Is it credible, that God by a Law positively permitted sin? or tolerated
what is in itself sinful, and against the very Law of Nature; even such a sin
as the Heathens of all sorts, p. 267.
viz. Poets, Orators, Historians, Philosophers, all cried shame upon? a sin
that is in it self Thest, as bad as Adultery? would it consist with Gods
Holiness, thus to permit Adultery, Murder or Thest? for either these would be
sin after such permission or not? if they continued sin after permission
granted, would it not prove a blemish to the Holiness of Gods Law? but if these
ceased to be sin by the permission, hereby an alteration would be made in the
very Law of Nature, which will not be easily granted. Grotius says, De Jure.
p. 4.
The Law of Nature is so unalterable, that it cannot be changed by God himself.
Let them not tell us, of the spoiling the Egyptians, and killing the
Canaanites; the Israelites asking or borrowing being not in it self unlawful
(as they say Usury is, and that it cannot be made good by any circumstance)
neither killing an enemy, that deserved death by his wickedness, when
commissionated also by sufficient Authority, as they were in both these
instances.

3. But what talk they of a permission? this was more, even an allowance; for
in the Original there is no difference in the manner of expressing, as there is
in our English Bibles: which if so, why should one be barely a permission, when
the other is a Command or Prohibition?

4. It shall be granted (if that will serve their turn) that to some Strangers
they might not lend upon Usury: but these are such as are excepted by the Law
it self; and they were poor Strangers, and such as were become Brethren in the
Faith, as Mr. C. in his Appendix observes from Ainsworth. p. 291.


But that by Stranger, is meant the Cursed Nations only, Append. 290.
he would prove from hence, Because the Jews stood generally bound to show all
mercy, especially to common strangers, Heb. 13.2. The Fatherless, the Widow and
the Stranger, go hand in hand together in the Word of God; now Usury being no
act of kindness and mercy, but rather the contrary, etc.

Reply 1. The Jews were to show more kindness to those of their own Nation,
then to Strangers, as appears, beyond denial, by many other Political Laws
besides this.

2. And though free lending were an act of kindness (as the borrower sound) yet
it hence follows not, that taking moderate Use is in it self an act of
unkindness; acts of justice and equity coming between acts of Charity on the
one hand, and acts of Oppression on the other.

Mr. C. The most that can be said is, p. 265.
that the Vsury-taker pays the Use willingly; and where a man parts with his
money willingly, restitution is not of force. Judas might have retained the
money, with the good content of the Priests, who gave it willingly; yet he did
restore it, and was bound unto it.

Reply 1. These are but fair shows: the ground work here was rotten: a Pack of
Knaves bargaining for the price of innocent blood; the one side hiring the
Betrayer, the other for filthy lucre actually betraying or selling his Master:
the foundation in the other Contract is lawful, viz. the lending and borrowing
of money.

2. In the former Compact, the betraying of the Innocent had been abominable,
and would have called for Repentance, if no money had passed on that account:
they will not say so of the latter Contract.

3. Here the Chief Priests hired Judas to do mischiefs: does the Creditor by
the money he lends, or the borrower by the Use he pays, hire each other on this
design?

4. Had the money been given Judas for any kindness or good service done them,
what had been herein blameworthy? whereas the money the borrower pays, is
returned upon such account.

Mr. C. And were this good Divinity, Ibid.
then a great deal of that which comes in by briberie and dicerie may be
lawfully and comfortably kept.

Reply 1. The consequence fails, what comes in by bribery indeed ought to be
restored: There are two things that difference the case.

(1.) Whereas Bribery is a reward taken for the selling or perverting of
Justice: Let it be remembered, that those who are concerned in the
administration of Justice, have their reward or sees sixed and stated, to be
paid them either out of the Public, or by the partys concerned: now when such
take beyond and besides such allowance, this is to be paid twice for the same
office and service: but is the Creditors case the same? is he otherwise
rewarded for the kindness he shows in lending his money?

(2.) The next difference makes the weakness of the arguing yet more apparent:
for bribery is a gratuity or free gift; and yet being bestowed on such account,
is sinful both in the giver and taker: But a gratuity or free gift communicated
by the borrower, is commonly acknowledged by themselves to be lawful, and may
be both safely given, and safely taken, though the borrower therein have an eye
to the kindness done him by the loan.

[2.] As to the Argument from Dicery.

1. The groundwork is rotten, Dicery being generally held to be unlawful,
because a Lottery; and so not like to lending.

2. If Dicery were lawful, yet it were not commendable to venture at it more
than the sport or recreation is worth: No man is so Master of his money, as to
cast it away at hap-hazard; but where the gains and losses are small, and
recompensed by the sport or recreation, I see not the necessity of restitution:
Whereas, with Mr. Jel. and his Authors, the smallest gain, such as a Cup of
Cold Water or a Mite, were unlawful to be taken upon the account of money lent,
and then I think, upon the supposal of such receipts restitution must be made.

Mr. C. Then I say, Ibid.
that though it be not against the will of the borrower, that the Usurer should
keep the Use, yet it should be.

Reply 1. There are (says Grotius) two things required to the transferring of
a right, and these are will and power: here it is supposed that the borrower is
willing to pay this Use, what is then wanting? a lawful power? if so, does
either the Law of God or Man forbid it?

2. The borrower may give a gratuity; yea and ought to be thankful, and return
kindness for kindness, if able, what hinders then? may he not give it in case
the Creditor expects it? or because of the Compact past, whereby he is bound to
give it? but these bonds he freely and willingly entered into, and volenti non
fit injuria, says Mr. B. And if he may give it freely without a Compact, why
may he not give when he is under a double obligation, to wit, that of kindness
and promise? these are such niceties as will puzzle the Consciences of the
plain and honest-heartded, if not of wiser and more discerning persons, how to
put a difference between them.

Mr. C. Hortensius did borrow Cato 's Wife to breed upon; Append. p. 290.
Hortensius was willing, Cato was willing, his Wife was willing, and yet this
was sinful.

Reply: Who doubts it? 1. All that this will prove is, that there may be fin
committed in transactions passing between men, where yet all partys are
willing; but rightful power wanting to do so.

2. I hope borrowing of Money is lawful, is borrowing of Wires so?

3. The Creditor may at least lend out his Money to another, may Cato lend his
Wife so?

4. The borrower may return a gratuity, and be willing so to do, without sin;
but may Hortensius as lawfully hire another Man's Wise, and pay for the hire of
her? See the strength of such arguing!

Mr. C. Lastly, p. 266.
He seems many times to be willing, because he cannot tell how to help it; the
Traveler gives his Purse to the Thief, because he cannot do otherwise, or at
least dares not, etc.

Reply 1. That is, in other terms, the borrower cannot tell how to get Money
for to buy a bargain, stop a gap, or use Merchandising with, for nothing: if he
could, it is likely, he would never pay Use. And at the same rate, are there not
many that borrow, that would detain the Principal, if they knew how to do it,
or if left to the choice of their wills? that do as unwillingly refund the
Money lent them, as the Traveler parts with his Purse to the Thief? The Wicked
borrows, and pays not again.

2. The Traveler delivers his Purse to the Thief, and that prudently, to save
his life; but it is unlawful, say some of them, to pay Use, as well as to take
it.

3. The Traveler meets the Thief against his will the borrower out of choice,
and of his own accord applys himself to the lender, and seeks him out.

4. Is not here as great a willingness, as in other Contracts: Many would not
buy, if they could have for nothing; though I know Abraham was otherwise
minded, and David too. Many men that take pains for livelihood, would not, if
they could tell how to help it: and so, it is beyond doubt, they would not pay
Use for what they borrow, if they knew how to have their wants supplied
otherwise: But observe, there is no violence or constraint offered the man's
will or person: here is no fraud or deceit used to blind the understanding and
thereby to work the will to a compliance. If a wealthy borrower like not the
terms, though within the compass of moderation and prescription of the Law, he
may let the loan alone, there is no wrong done: Neither the Law of God or Man
lays an engagement upon another to lend to him freely. If he agrees to the
terms proposed, here is consent, and as much willingness, as uses to be in the
buyer, who not seldom is with much ado brought up to the sellers price. All the
doubt then remains, whether the Debtor have a sufficient power to transfer
his right to the Overplus he pays: and why not? seeing he may give a gratuity,
and may lend so much another time to his friend, and there is no Law forbidding
him: whereas there was the Law of Nature forbidding Cato to lend his Wife to
another, how willing soever both he and his Wife were; The more of the will in
such practices, the worse on their part; but the more of the will in the case
before us, it is not the worse, but rather the better.

Mr C. Zacheus did offer to restore what he fetched in by forged Cavillation,
Ibid.
he might like enough have kept it, etc.

Reply: What Zacheus had gotten by forged Cavillation, good reason he should
make restitution off: so should such as have over-reacht others in bargaining;
and so should they that take increase, if it were of that nature as they
represent it: and so in truth should every one that is guilty of oppression or
hard dealing, under the name of Usury. But in other things that are not clearly
stated in the word, and continue disputable between good and learned Men. I
think the Apostles practice may prove a good President; 1 Cor. 7.35.
who in another case was as heedful as well could be, that he might not cast
snares and expose those he wrote to, to needless scruples and distractions of
spirit.

Mr. C. The Heathens of all sorts have condemned this sin by the instinct and
light of Nature, p. 267.
and therefore it could not be a political Law of Moses.

Reply 1. Cato, I perceive, was one of those Heathens, that by the light of
Nature condemned all Usury; for, says Mr. Jel. after B. Hall, Cato severely
punished Usurers, and drove them out of the Commonwealth. Let it be remembered by
the way, that this Cato who was against all taking gain for the loan of Money,
was not against taking gain for the Loan of his Wife. Hortensius (says Mr.
Capel) did borrow Cato's Wife to breed upon, Append. p. 290.
and had her, and did return her to Cato rich, when he had served his turn on
her, etc. Strange it is that he who was quick sighted in Natures light, as
thereby to boggle at the loan of money upon Usury, should not by the same light
boggle at this baser Usury! only I foresee a Reply that I shall let pass
unmentioned. Mr. Bolton's Discourse p. 20.
--

2. It is apparent from their own reasonings. that the Heathen commonly
practiced Usury, or they think that they did so: for this is brought in by Mr.
B. as one reason why God permitted the Jews to exercise Usury toward the
Heathen, namely, The injustice of the Gentiles with whom they did Traffic,
such as they would be sure to exact Usury of the Jews. How could he be sure of
this, if it were a sin against Natures light? And seeing Mr. B. speaks of those
Nations they might Traffic with, how could he by Stranger understand only the
Canaanite or those accursed, Nations with whom the Jews were forbidden all
Traffic?

3. Seems it not an unlikely thing that God should by Law tolerate his own
People in such practices, which the Heathen, yea all sorts among them condemned
by the light of Nature? Dub. Evang. par. 3. p. 675.


If every Vsurary Contract (says Spanhem.) were formally and in its ownkind
sin, and a sort of Theft; then God had long ago cherished such sins, when by
his Law he permitted to exact Usury from a Stranger. What a reflection would
this have been on the Divine Law, to have granted that which Natures Law
condemns? what a stumbling block in the way of the Gentiles? would it not have
given too great occasion to their prejudices against that Religion which had
God for its Author? and do not the Christians commonly find fault with the
Heathen Lawgivers for things of this nature?

4. And it is to me as great a wonder, how the Heathen could see that to be so
horrid a sin by Natures Light; and that unanimously, all agreeing therein, when
many Holy, Learned, Judicious men, that have the Scriptures to guide them
beside and beyond the light of Nature, cannot discern this sinfulness in Usury
duly stated; but have pleaded the lawfulness thereof. Hear Mr. C. himself
saying; Append. p. 297.
And yet I hope Learned Men [much more Learned Christians] should best and
soonest find out what is written by the Law of Nature in their hearts. I cannot
be persuaded that Cato could see farther into things of this Nature, than
Calvin; or that an Aristotle, a Plutarch should be better acquainted with cases
of Conscience, than Amesius, Perkins, Baxter.

5. Understand me in the foregoing branches speaking of Usury in the same
latitude, that it is taken by those I oppose; but I have all along granted
there is an oppressive Usury which the light of Nature may be sufficient to
condemn, (as it does the like extravagances in buying and selling) and this
having been in most Ages too commonly practiced, might justly incur the
indignation of the wiser and better sort among the Heathen. Take the
testimonies of two Learned men in one, speaking to the same effect.

As for the contrary testimonies, Spanhem. Dub. Ev. part 3. p. 672.
whether of Pagans or Fathers, they are to be understood in a limited sense;
not absolutely: for some are too rigid, some speak not of all Usury, but only
of biting Usury, immoderate and exacted from the poor, or attended with the
damage of our neighbor, and of an Vsurary kind of living, which is deservedly
odious to all good men, and was long ago by Lycurgus cast out of Sparta. The
which has been well observed by the famous Hugo Grotius, l. 2. de Jure, etc.
c. 12.. 20. What is said by Cato, Cicero, Plutarch and others against Usury,
respects not so much what is intrinsecal to it, as what is wont to attend and
follow it.

6. I have made inspection into Plutarch my self, Mor. Part. 2. p. 471. De
vitando aere alieno.
and find the Usurers by him inveighed against, took Use every Month, and Use
at first lending, and Use upon Use, (which he represents by the superfaetation
of the hare) and other fraudulent dealings of theirs he there speaks of, as
naught in themselves, so against the Laws then in force.

Mr. C. We have it forbidden in the N. Testament, p. 267.
where Judicials were out of date, Lend, hoping for nothing again.

Reply 1. It is an apparent mistake, to say that Judicials were out of date in
Christ's time, they not expiring till 40 years after, when their whole polity
was destroyed by Titus: the which, for ought I can see, had for the most part
continued to this day, had not their Commonwealth been dissolved, excepting
what was typical and discriminative of them as a peculiar Church: and Mr. C.
himself, p. 271, 272.
pleads for the standing power of a Political Law of Moses, even in Christ's
time, when he justifies the Disciples plucking the Ears of Corn, Mat. 12.1. Let
Grotius decide the Controversy, saying, De Jure, etc. p. 24.
-- It can be proved by no argument, that the Law of Moses, as concerning
Judicials, ceased before the City Jerusalem was demolished; and with that both
the kind and hope of the Commonwealth fell; for neither in the Law of Moses is
any term predefined: neither Christ or his Apostles any where speak of the
cessation of that Law, save as far as it might seem to be comprehended in the
ruin of the Commonwealth, etc.

Politieals then were not out of date in Christ's time, as Mr. C. would
persuade us.

2. I am very secure (upon reasons formerly given) that our Savior here never
intended the condemnation of all Usury. And Mr. Bolt. Discourse p. 58.
himself understands it not as spoken directly against it, but only by
consequence. For thus he writes; Where Lending is commanded, without providing
for indemnity, in receiving the principal, if so their Brothers need truly
require: much more without requiring an overplus above the principal; which
Corist says in the same place, p. 8.
even sinners would do. Elsewhere, our Savior gives this testimony to the very
sinners of his time among the Jews, that they would lend one to another, that
they might receive so much as they lent, etc. Whence I gather, that in his
sense, Lend, hoping for nothing again, is not to be understood without
limitation: For 1. In many Cases it is lawful to receive the principal again.
2. Whereas Mr. B. says we are not to receive the principal again, in Case our
Brothers need truly require it, we will grant, that much less, in the like Case
may an overplus be received. 3. Our Saviors intent (according to him) being to
take men off from contenting themselves with doing what the sinners then did;
and what they did was a lending to those that would besriend them another time
with the like kindness; It necessarily follows, that this Lending, hoping, etc.
was not absolutely condemned by our Savior, but only with respect to the poor
and needy. 4. And if this be true, down falls Mr. Jel's definition grounded on
this Scripture.

Mr. C. The Usurer is bound to restore, p. 268.
because he has no true Title (Jure Divino) no not in strict Justice to what
comes in that way.

Reply. If so, I would know what is more required to make the Title good? for
though propriety have its foundation on the Divine Law, yet it is the Law of
man that actually divides betwixt mine and thine; and sets Landmarks and
boundaries to each man's propriety. Christ himself tells us, says Doctor
Hammond, Pract. Cat. p. 298.
that his Kingdom is not of this World, that he came not to interpose in
secular affairs (such are the the proprietis of men) but disclaimed, having any
thing to do to be a Judge or Divider among men.

Let us hear Grotius. De Jure p. 10.
We must also know, that the Law of Nature not only passes upon those things
that do exist without the will of man, but also upon many things which follow
the Act of man's will; Thus propriety, such as is now in use, was brought in by
man's will; but that being once brought in, the Law of nature declares it to be
wicked for me to take away what thou have such a propriety to, etc.

Now here in the Case of Usury the Law of man interposes, and the consent of
the Borrower; and somewhat valuable on the Lenders part: for I cannot be
persuaded but that the Loan of money is worth money. And Mr. B. though he
starts this Objection thinks not good to deny it, but only endeavors by
declining to avoid the force of this Arrow: And Mr. J thought it the best way
to let it alone.

Upon these considerations foresaid, what is wanting to beget a title to this
money spoken of I cannot see: The matter it self being political, is capable of
limitation by the political Laws of men, keeping within the compass of a
general equity. The question of Usury being concerning things political, as
well as that concerning thievery or murder, and propriety; I see no (...)
reason why the handling thereof should be so peculiar to Divines, as that a
Grotius or Salmasius may not concern himself in debating it, Append. p. 293. p.
269.
whatsoever Mr. C. suggests to the contrary.

I am not much concerned in the Schoolmens opinion, and what he replies upon
it: The former (as represented by him) holding, that in Cases of necessity, the
distinction of humane propriety, being grounded on men's Laws cease, and ought
to give place to the Law of Nature, which teaches self-preservation.

Although I have prepared some Animadversions on what is here by him debated,
yet I have chosen to pass them over, because somewhat foreign to the question I
am concerned to vindicate, and because I would make this Discourse no larger
than is needful: But they that have a desire to be satisfied in the question,
how far the Laws of propriety are to give place to that of self-preservation,
may find it stated by Grotius, de Jure Belli and pacis, l. 2. c. 2.. 6.

Mr. C. But when both parties gain, who is bitten? The Commonwealth say I, that
is hurtful to the Commonwealth, which is a burden to the most, Append. p. 289.
and those who have most need.

Reply 1. I doubt his proof is lame: the more of Traders, the cheaper mostly
are Commodities. If none should be Traders, but such as are monied men, then
such Traders would be fewer, and by consequence the Trade being in the
management of the hands of few, Commodities would be dearer and scarcer than
they are, both upon the account of the paucity of sellers, and their
indifferency in parting with the Commodity, unless the buyer comes up to their
demands. This is apparent if applied to foreign wares: for the bringing in
whereof, I do not know that they that have money are bound to Lend to the
Merchants freely, that they might sell the cheaper: neither can I be persuaded,
that if they borrowed freely, they would sell much the cheaper; but the gains
would remain in their own Coffers, and the poor pay as dear as before: and
would not things bear the same price, and come to the same Market, provided the
Lender entered fellowship, and bare a share both in the losses and gains?

2. All Commodities sold, are either such as are necessary, or such as are only
convenient or superfluous: the measure in the former commonly is scarcity, the
measure of worth in the latter is mostly fancy, or the will of man. So I learn
from Grotius, The most natural measure of every thing, What it is worth is
scarcity, p. 232.
As Aristotle rightly shows: but this is not the only measure; for the will of
man which is the Lord over things, desires many things more than are necessary.

Mr. C. Now Usury being no act of mercy and kindness, Append. p. 291.
but rather the contrary; it cannot but follow, that the permission to lend
upon Use to the Stranger, must not be meant of ordinary Strangers, to whom they
were to show all kindness and compassion, but the Strangers of those cursed
Nations, whom they were bound to bite and eat out.

Reply 1. This has been answered before. It is a sign men are hard put to it,
when they make use of such weak shifts and evasions; for so I must call it,
there being so little footing for it in the Scriptures (from whence alone they
can take it) And why should they distinguish where Scripture distinguishes
not, nor gives any ground toward it; but rather the contrary?

2. As to the enquiry, whether Lending upon use be a favor or no? I say that
free lending was a greater favor to the borrowers: and this was requisite for
the Jewish Commonwealth and Polity; for otherwise they would have lost the
benefit of some other political Laws; such as were the forgiving of debts every
seventh, and the releasing of Morgages every Fiftieth year. But for
Commonwealths addicted to Traffic, I doubt not to say that Lending on use is
beneficial, yea necessary: that money being hereby employed this way, that
would otherwise be diverted (and that without wrong to any man) to other uses;
or else be hoarded up. Every man's concernments leading this way, besides the
ordinary ingratitude, unfaithfulness, and undue delay on the part of most
Borrowers.

3. Neither is that true; that the Jews were to show all kindness to ordinary
Strangers: kindness indeed they were to show: this Common humanity bound them
to, if there had been no express Law of God in Scripture requiring it: And
hereupon I advance, and say, that lending upon use was consistent with Common
kindness, being they might thus lend upon use to a Stranger, to whom yet they
were enjoined to show kindness. But I am yet to seek that they were to show all
kindness to Strangers, whether you understand it of kinds or degrees; It is
apparent there were several kinds and degrees of kindness they were to show
toward their own Nation, the which they were not bound to show to others: this
is evident from several Laws given that Nation, as before hinted, and amongst
the rest this of Usury.

Whereas he says, That Usury is no act of kindness and mercy, but rather the
contrary. This needs a little examining before it have a let pass. Let it be
still remembered, there is a Medium between acts of Mercy or pure Charity and
uncharitableness, viz. Acts of Justice. Thus buying and selling, which are acts
of Justice, are not properly acts of Charity. One sells me Corn (says Seneca)
I cannot live, unless I buy it: De benef. l. 6. c. 14.
but I owe not my life, because I have bought.

Though de eventu such acts of Justice may prove charitable, and ordinarily the
buyer is advantaged thereby as well as the seller. The like I say, of lending
upon Usury: it may be an act of Justice, though not of Charity: though
intentionally it may be a charitable act, the lender designing his neighbors
advantage, besides his own: and eventually also it may prove an act of charity
or kindness, when the borrower comes off a gainer by the contract. And so it is
really a kindness, where the lender takes but 2 or 3 s, where by the Law he
might take 6 s.

5. But whatever this lending upon Use be, it is granted that lending freely is
a greater kindness to the person receiving: yet the consequence is lame, that
if lending upon Use were a favor, they should thereupon be injoined to lend
upon Use to a Jew, for that free lending of the two, was a greater favor:
giving is a greater favor than selling; what then? must all selling be
exploded to make room for giving only? this would prove as absurd in it self,
as it would be prejudicial to the interests of persons and Nations.

Mr. Ainswortb (quoted by Mr. Capel) says, That to Strangers who were brethren
in the faith, they might not lend upon Usury. Is this not rather against, than
for him? would it not follow hence, that to Strangers which were not of the
Faith they might lend upon Usury? and again it would admit of an inquiry,
whether they might take Use of the Canaanite, or any of those accursed Nations
when they were Proselited, and become brethren in the Faith? If not, (as I
think they dare not say it) upon the whole we shall find the case of all
Strangers to be alike in this question of Usury.

Mr. C. Starts an Objection, p. 294.
Is it not fit I should have rent for my Money, as well as for my Land. The sum
of his answer is: When Money is lent to a poor man for bread, here it is
acknowledged to be unlawful to take gain; but not so take Money for a piece of
Arable Land, which this poor man rents at an indifferent rate, to provide bread
for him and his; or to pay Money for an house he dwells in.

Reply 1. If I am bound to help my poor neighbor; is it not all one, whether I
give him twenty shillings out of my Purse, or abate him so much in the Rent of
House or Field he hires of me?

2. Suppose to a poor man one neighbor lends twenty shillings; and a richer
than he letts his House to the same person: the former being bound to lend his
Money freely to this poor man, may the other take his full Rent of him? I
think, both the one, and the other, In case of extremity, are bound to show
charity to this poor man; as the one lending freely, so the other abating in
his Rent; or else the burden would lie unequally on these two Men's Shoulders.

3. Let what follows serve for an answer to this and the like Objections: that
such arguings are usually guilty of a confusion of Charity and Justice; They
consider what Charity requires on the Lenders part, and they observe and set
against it what is just on the Setters part. It is just on the Setters part,
say they, to require the Rent for the House; It is just also, say I, on the
lenders part, to take Use for his Money: but yet in this case before us,
wherein the poor man's condition is considered, Justice must give place to
Charity on both hands; the one for Charities sake must lend his Money freely;
the other for Charities sake must deal favorably with him, setting his House
at a cheaper rate: and in some Cases, the one must be content to forgo his
Rent, and the other to lose his Principal.

Caterum sciendum est latius patere Charitatis quam Juris Regulas. Grot. De
Jure, etc. p. 542.

For a Close to my Discourse, I shall lay down a disswasive from
uncharitableness in censuring Men for Dealings in Civil Contracts, farther than
they have just ground for so doing. This disswasive I shall strengthen with a
double ground.

1. Because there is a certain Latitude in these Civil Contracts wherein
Justice walks: the highest or lowest degree of which latitude it were hard for
any to charge with injustice. This is observed from Grotius out of Aristotle.

It is most true (says Grotius) what Aristotle has written, De Jure. l. 2. c.
8.. 1.
that a certitude cannot be found in Morals, equally as in Mathematical
Sciences: which therefore happens, because Mathematical Sciences separate forms
from all matter; and because the forms themselves for the most are such, that
they have no Medium; as there is not between right and crooked: But in Morals,
the least circumstances change the matter and the forms whereby it is acted,
have somewhat placed between them in that latitude, that approach is made
sometime nearer to one, sometime to another extreme: for so between what ought
to be done, and what ought not to be done; the middle is that which is lawful
to be done; but nearer sometime to one, sometime to another extreme: whence an
ambiguity happens, as in the dawning of the day, or in cold water waxing hot.

Thus then, what is right or lawful, in things of this nature, consists not in
an indivisible point, so as that all that go near this side, or that do not run
themselves aground on injustice, so long as they keep within the general bounds
that Nature, Scripture, Reason and approved Customs have prescribed to things
of that nature.

2. As long as Interest is allowed by them as lawful, it is not easy to condemn
another of what they call Usury; especially when it enters not the bond, and
the increase taken be moderate: for who can judge of another Man's concerns, so
as peremptorily to say, he has suffered no prejudice by the loan, or that he
might not have in the mean time improved the same money to his own advantage?
Yea, and some Anti-Usurers will allow of a Contract also for this increase,
supposing the Principal be not sufficiently secured, or any damage be probably
foreseen: in such cases, they say, it is not Usury, but an honest recompense
for the hazard that is run, or the damage probably foreseen, or foregoing the
opportunity of improving his Estate.

Therefore I say, on these accounts, if there were no other, there should be a
forbearance of rash censuring: it becomes every man to look to his Conscience,
in such and the like Dealings and Contracts: that nothing be done to the
prejudice of Christian Charity, Moderation, Equity and Prudence; but in all
things to be careful to do to others, as in the like circumstances they judge
it reasonable others should do to them.

FINIS.
The Contents.
A ADventuring Page 10 Abraham Offering Isaac p. 179

B Borrowers reproved p. 218 Borrowing p. 178, 227. Bribery p. 236.

C Canaanite p. 178, 231. Case in Nehemiah extraordinary p. 224. Certain gain
Contracted for p. 186. Charity consistent with Justice p. 45. Charity begins at
home p. 209. Clergy p. 54. Commonwealth, whether bitten p. 151, 153, 201, 244.
Compact p. 11, 133. Compact silent p. 137. Consent of partys p. 192, 234.
Councels p. 54, 55, 114.

E Equity p. 196. Exaction p. 50. Expectation of gain p. 12, 136. Extortion p.
50, 65.

F Fathers against Usury p. 17, 56, 66, 113. Force p. 149.

G Gratitude p. 191.
H Hazards p. 146, 258. Heathen p. 18, 119. Hirer p. 158, 171

I Interest p. 6, 23. Inter-Vsury p. 22, 23. Injustice p. 51. Israelites
borrowing p. 179, 227.

J Jews Conversion hindered p. 121. Judas his restitution. p. 235. Judicials p.
242.

L Law of Moses Judicial p. 67, 172, 230. Law of Nature p. 70. Laws of Men p.
74. 103. Lending to the Rich p. 87, 147. Letting and setting p. 16, 157, 29,
30, 64. Liberal increase p. 25, 138. Light of Nature p. 212. Loan of Money
worth Money p. 166. Loan, whether it must be always free? p. 13, 66, 94, 156,
206.

M Money how consumed in Using p. 14, 156. Money not barren p. 117, 171.

N Necessity in the borrower p. 213. Nesheck p. 49, 62.

O Orphans and Widows p. 139, 211.
P Permission p. 175, 232, 233. Power to transfer a right p. 194, 238. Promise
p. 195. Property not altered in Loan p. 171. Propriety p. 195. Popish Writers
p. 124.

S Scheme of Mr. Jel. Censure p. 161. Shiploan p. 24. Stipulation p. 31.
Stranger p. 83, 232.

T Time given for Payment p. 202. Trading p. 152.

U Usury its Definitions p. 9. Usury its Descriptions p. 16. Usury not expressed
in N. Testament p. 75. Usury not against Equity, Conscience, etc. p. 190.

Z Zacheus's Restitution p. 243.
Scriptures debated, or referred to.
GEnesis 3.17, etc. p. 156. GEnesis v. 22 p. 183. GEnesis 4.12. p. 156. GEnesis
3.9. p. 184. Ezodus 12.35, 36. p. 184. Ezodus 21.21. p. 180. Ezodus 22.14, 15.
p. 158. Ezodus v. 22, etc. p. 139. Ezodus v. 25. p. 35. 87. 230. Ezodus v. 26.
p. 68. Ezodus 23.32, 33. p. 185. Ezodus v. 8. p. 139. Leviticus 25.10, 15. p.
71. Leviticus v. 14. p. 68. Leviticus v. 14, 15. p. 205, 226. Leviticus v. 18.
p. 68. Leviticus v. 24, 25. p. 227. Leviticus v. 35.36. p. 69. 81. 82. 214.
230. Leviticus v. 37. p. 34. 35. 64. 87. Leviticus v. 39, etc. p. 227.
Deuteronomy 4. begin. p. 160. Deuteronomy 7. begin. p. 94. 175. Deuteronomy
15.1. p. 67. 228. Deuteronomy v. 2, 3. p. 83. 85. 72. Deuteronomy v. 6. p. 151.
Deuteronomy v. 7, 8. p. 43. 88. 174. 214. 23. 19. 20. Deuteronomy 23.19, 20. p.
14. 21. 34. 80. 82. 83. 87. Deuteronomy v. 10. p. 35. Nehemiah 5. p. 20. 91.
223. Nehemiah 10.31. p. 228. Psalms 15.4. p. 175. 221. 223. Psalms v. 5. p. 4.
67. Psalms 37.21. p. 36. 220. Psalms v. 20. p. 36. Proverbs 3.27. p. 219.
Proverbs 19.17. p. 39. Proverbs 22.16. p. 95. 207. Proverbs v. 22. p. 257.
Proverbs 28.8. p. 51. 96. Jeremiah 15.10. p. 67. Ezekiel 18.8. p. 50. 67.
Ezekiel v. 13. p. 52. Matthew 3.15. p. 176. Matthew 5.2. p. 174. Matthew 12.1.
p. 245. Matthew 7.12. p. 98. 86. 198. Matthew 25.27. p. 32. 86. Luke 6.31. p.
166. Luke v. 32. p. 25. Luke v. 34. p. 40. Luke v. 35. p. 11. 13. 36. 66. 76.
171. 173. 174. 214. 247. Luke 14.12, 13. p. 41. Luke 16.8. p. 41. 91. Acts
15.29. p. 69. Romans 12.8. p. 219. 1 Corinthians 6.9, 10. p. 163. 1 Corinthians
7.35. p. 241. 2 Corinthians 8.13. p. 198. 2 Corinthians 12.4. p. 102. Ephesians
4.28. p. 83. 215. 219. Ephesians 5.2. p. 77. Colossions 2.22. p. 156. 2
Thessalonians 3.8, 12. p. 219. 1 Timothy 5.8. p. 102. 210.
FINIS.

