AN ACCOUNT OF W. Penn' s TRAVAILS IN HOLLAND and GERMANY. Anno MDCLXXVII. For
the Service of the Gospel of Christ, by way of Journal. Containing also Diverse
Letters and Epistles writ to several Great and Eminent Persons whilst there.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street, and at the Croked-Billet in
Holy-well-lane near Shoreditch, 1694.

THE Preface to the Reader.
THis Ensuing Journal of my Travils in Holland and Germany, in the Service of
the Gospel of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, was written for my own and some
Relations, and particular Friends Satisfaction, as the long time it has lain
silent does show: But a Copy that was found amongst the late Countess of
Connaway's Papers, falling into the Hands of a Person that much frequented that
Family, he was earnest with me, both by himself and others, to have leave to
Publish it for a Common Good: Which upon, perusal, I have found a willingness
to comply with, hoping that the Lord will make the Reading of it Effectual to
some into whose Hands it may Fall; as well those who have received a
Dispensation of the same Ministry, for Their Encouragement in their Public
Service for God, as those who are under the same Ministry, unto Zeal and
Faithfulness. For it is the Glorious Gospel-Day in which God is Exalting his
Dear Son, as Prophet, Priest, and King, in the Hearts of his People. Oh, that
the Nations would hear him, their only Saving Health, and Isreal's great
Shepherd! who takes care of his Sheep, that hear his Voice, and gives unto them
that follow him, in the daily Cross, unto Regeneration, Eternal Life: And who
has sent, and is sending forth his Servants to gather home the Sheep that are
gone astray in all Nations, that so there may be but One Shepherd and One
Sheepfold, according to the Glorious Promise made to these latter Times; In
which he would be the Teacher of his People himself: For he is Teaching
thousands, by the Light, Spirit and Grace of his Son Christ, in whom he is well
pleased. To this, God has sent forth his Servants in this Day, to turn all
People, as God's Call and Visitation to the Nations: And blessed are all those
that Hearken to this Testimony, both Mediately and Immediately. For God is
awakening Men to the Knowledge of his Glory in the Face or Appearance of
Christ, by his Spirit in their Hearts and Consciences, which reveal to Men the
Father; yea, the deep things of God.

Oh, that they would Hear, and Fear, and Learn the things that make for their
Eternal Peace! For if the Righteous scarcely are saved, where, O where, shall
they appear that neglect so great Salvation! A Salvation that comes so near
them, as to knock at the door of their Hearts; that teaches them and trys their
Reins, and tells unto them their most inward Thoughts; and brings a Time of
Judgment over all their Words and Works. This is Christ Jesus the Light of the
World, that was given of God for Salvation to the ends of the Earth. He has
Enlightened all, and Shines to all, and Calls all, that they should see their
Sins and be sorry for them, and forsake them, and take up his daily Cross and
follow him whom God has given for an Example as well as a Propitiation for our
Sins. And none can know him to be their Propitiation that rejest him as their
Example and Leader in their Lives and Conversations. Wherefore, Reader, be
Serious, Inward and Inquisitive for thy Souls Sake. What Faith have thou? One
that over-comes the World, or one that the Spirit of the World over-comes,
which is not the Faith of God's Elect, without which we cannot please God. For
that Faith works by love. Such a love to God as will not affend him, but seeks
his Glory through a most willing Obedience to his Holy Will. Blessed are the
Souls in which this love dwells. For such have none in Heaven but God, nor in
the Earth in comparison of him: As they receive all good from him, so they
resign all up to him; and though it be through many Tribulations that they must
attain the rest of God, yet as nothing can separate them from his love, so
neither can anything deprive them of their Reward in the End.

Wherefore, Reader, be thou persuaded to take thy Lot among that blessed
Number, if thou art not yet one of them. Thou see the way to that Divine
Privilege; walk in it; for the End Crowns all: If one of that number, that
have chosen God for their Portion, be Diligent, Zealous, and fervent in the
Work and Service of God. Redeem thy Time and Run thy Race, with care and
constancy; looking to Jesus the Author, that he may be the Finisher of thy
Faith. Remember who said, there are many Mansions prepared for the Faithful. Do
we believe and look for another World? Let us not then live in this as if there
were no other. Let our Eyes be upon our better World, and live here as
Strangers that are but on our way to our Eternal Home; that so we may Answer
the End of God's Love by working out the Salvation of our own Souls (by his
Power) with fear and Trembling; knowing God will Judge all, by Christ Jesus,
according to the Deeds done in the Body.

Reader, this Journal is of a Religious Voyage, and has some passages in it
that may Engage thy Soul to Seriousness, and let the sea how Good* God is to
those that go of his Holy Errands. May thou be heartily affected with this
Testimony of his Love and Presence with his People; and feel good desires
raised in thee to serve the Lord also, according to his blessed will in thy
day, that Peace thou may know to thy Soul when time here shall be no more. I
am

Thy assured Friend in the best Things, W. Penn.

AN ACCOUNT OF MY JOURNEY INTO Holland and Germany.
BEING the First Day of the Week, 22d. 5. Month. London.
I left my Dear* Wife and Family at Worminghurst in Sussex, in the Fear and
Love of God, and came well to London that Night.

The next day I Employed my self on Friends behalf that were in Sufferings,
2^d. Essex.
till the Evening, and then went to my own Mothers in Essex.

The next Morning I took my Journey to Colchester, 24th. Colchester.
and met George Wats of London upon the Way, who returned with me, and came
well to that Town that Evening. We lodged at John Furly's the Elder, but had a
Blessed Meeting at Jonathan Furly's House that Night.

25th. Harwich.
The next Morning early I left Colchester, and came to Harwich about Nine,
accompanied with George Wats and John Furly the Elder, William Tallcoat, and J.
Whiterly of Colchester, where we found dear G. F. at J. Vanderwall's House,
with many more Friends.

After Dinner we went all to the Meeting, where the Lord gave us a Blessed
Earnest of his Love' and Presence that should be with us in this Voyage; for
his overcoming refreshing Power did open all our Hearts, and many of our Mouths
in Ministry, Prayer and Praises, to the Magnifying of his own Name, and Truth
in that Place. The Meeting done, we returned to John Vanderwall's House, where
we took our leave of Friends, that is to say, of the Friends of that place,
with others that came with us, or met us there; and so we went on Board of the
Pacquet-boat, where (by the special Favor of the Master of the Pacquets to me,
having formerly served under my Father) we had the best Accommodation given to
us: Many of the Friends accompanied us to the Ship, not leaving us till all was
fixed, and then we parted in the Fellowship of Jesus. Those that came over were
G. Fox, G. Keith, R. Barclay, G. Wats, J. Furly, W. Tallcoat, E. Keith, My
self, with two of our Servants. We set Sail about Three in the Morning, 26th. ^
Month.
being the fifth day of the Week, and got the Sixth day at Night within half a
League of the Briel; 27th.
we had good Service those two days in the Ship with several Passengers French
and Dutch, and though they seemed at first to be Shy of us, and to Slight us,
yet at last their Hearts were much Opened in kindness toward us, and the
universal Principle had place.

2^th. Briel.
The next Morning Friends were fetched on Shore by a Boat of Rotterdam, with some
Friends of that City that came to the Briel to meet us; the Friends that came
were A. Sonneman, B. Furly and J. Johnson, Yetterkeuken, with three Young Men
that live at B. Furly's House.

After we had Eaten, we took Boat immediately for Rotterdam, Rotterdam.
where we arrived about Noon, and where many Friends came to see us, among whom
we were comforted.

2^th.
The next day being the First day of the Week, we had two Meetings at B. Furly's
House, whither resorted a great Company of People, some of them being of the
considerablest Note of that City. And Oh, blessed be the true Word of Life that
never failed them that rest upon it, and abide in it! The Gospel was Preached,
the Dead was Raised, and the Living Comforted, and God even our God bore
Heavenly Record to his only begotten Son in us; and Truth is honorable in the
Eyes of several of that place.

The next day being the Second day of the Week, 30th. 5 Month.
we spent in visiting Friends from House to House, not in one Company, being
lodged in several quarters of the City. All our Visits were Precious Meetings,
for indeed for that end God brought us into this Land. Several of us Dined and
Supped that day at two great Men's Houses, where we had blessed Opportunities
to make known unto them what was the Hope of our Glory, that Mystery, which to
the Gentiles is now revealing, even Christ Jesus the Light of the World
manifested in us.

The next day being the Third day of the Week, 31st.
G.F. J.F. W.T. and my self, after having broken our Fast at A. Sonneman's,
took Boat for Leyden, Leyden.
where we came that Night in Order to be at Haerlem next day at a Meeting
appointed by G.F. and my self from Rotterdam, being accompanied by J. Bocliffs,
J. Arents and J. Claus that came from Amsterdam on purpose to conduct us
thither.

1st 6 Month. Haerlem.
At Haerlem we arrived about the 11 th. Hour, and went to the House of a good
Old Man, that had long waited for, and is now come to behold the Consolation
and Salvation of Israel. After we had a little refresht our selves, we went to
the Meeting, where the Lord gave us a blessed Opportunity, not only with
respect to Friends, but many sober Baptists and Professors that came in, and
abode in the Meeting, to the End; Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

The Meeting done, Amsterdam.
we went to Amsterdam in Company with several Friends of that City, and of
Alchmaer and Embden, who met us at the Meeting at Haerlem, and we were lodged
at Getrueydt Dirck's House. G. K. and his Wife, and R. B. stayed over the
Fourth day's Meeting at Rotterdam, and so came not till the next day, which was
the day of the general Meeting of Friends in this Country.

The Fifth day of the Week at G. D's House the general Meeting was held both of
Men and Women. 12th. 6 Month.
And the Lord who is setting up his own Kingdom by his own Power, owned us with
his own blessed Presence, and opened us in that Wisdom and Love, that all
things Ended with Peace, great Concord and Comfort, many things being Spoken,
especially by our Dear Friend G. F. that were of good Service; and I hope will
dwell with them for ever. These several things being agreed upon, being of good
Savor and Report, I think fit here to insert them. At the General Meeting of
Friends at Amsterdam, the 12th. of the 6th. Month, 1677.
1. BE it known to all Men that the power of God, the Gospel, is the Authority
of all our Men's and Women's Meetings, and every Heir of that Power is an Heir of
that Authority, and so becomes a living Member of right of either of those
Meetings, and of the Heavenly Fellowship and Order in which they stand, which
is not of Man, nor by Man.

2. That each Monthly Meeting have a Collection apart; and also that there be
another Collection quarterly at Amsterdam from each Meeting for general
Services, and that it be disposed of but by the consent of the said Quarterly
Meeting.

3. It is Agreed upon, that henceforth a Yearly Meeting be held here at
Amsterdam, unto which Friends in the Palatinate, Hambrough, Lubeck and
Frederickstadt, etc. be invited, of which Meeting there shall be given Notice
to the Friends of the Yearly Meeting at London, to be kept always on the first
day of that Week, which is fully the third Week following after the Yearly
Meeting at London.

4. It is also Agreed upon, that henceforth this General Meeting is to be
changed into a Quarterly Meeting, and that the first Quarterly Meeting
hereafter shall be held on the second first day of the ninth Month following,
and so forth every Quarter on the second first day of the Month; this second of
the nine Month is to be this first Quarterly Meeting.

5. It is also Agreed, that henceforth a Monthly Meeting in Vriesland should be
Established, as also at Rotterdam, and that on the second second day of each
Month, and at Harlingen upon the third third day of the Month.

6. Further, that in the interim, the Friends of Alchmaer and Haerlem and
Waterland, are to have their Monthly Meeting with Friends at Amsterdam, and to
begin the said Meeting the sixth, seventh Month, and so forth always upon the
first second day of the first week of the Month at the Eighth Hour.

7. And further concerning Gospel*order, though the Doctrine of Christ Jesus
requires his People to admonish a Brother or Sister twice, before they tell
the Church, yet that limiteth none, so as that they shall use no longer
forbearance before they tell the Church, but that they shall not less than
twice admonish their Brother or Sister before they tell the Church; and it is
desired of all, that before they publicly complain, they so wait in the Power
of God to feel if there is no more required of them to their Brother or Sister,
before they expose him or her to the Church. Let this be weightily considered.

8. And farther, when the Church is told, and the party admonisht by the Church
again and again, and he or she remain still unsensible or unreconciled, let not
final Judgment go forth against him or her, till every one of the Meeting has
cleared his or her Conscience, that if any thing be insisted upon any farther
to visit such a Transgressour, they may clear themselves, if possibly the party
may he reached and saved, and after all clear of the Blood of such an one. Let
the Judgments of Friends in the Power of God go forth against him or her, as
moved for the Lord's Honor and Glory's Sake, that no reproach may come or rest
upon God's Holy Name, Truth and People.

9. As much as possible can be, let all Difference be ended by some honest
Friends, and trouble not the Monthly or Quarterly Meetings with them; and if
that will not do, proceed to your particular Monthly Meetings; but if they be
not there ended neither, then take aside six honest Friends out of the
Quarterly Meeting, and let them hear and determine the matter; and in case any
Person or Persons be so obstinate as that they refuse the Sense and Love of
Friends, and will not comply with them, then to proceed toward them according
to the way of Truth in such Cases.

10. That all such as behold their Brother or Sister in a Transgression, go not
in a Rough, Light, or upbraiding Spirit to reprove or admonish him or her, but
in the Power of the Lord and Spirit of the Lamb; in the Wisdom and Love of the
Truth which suffers thereby to admonish such an Offender, so may the Soul of
such a Brother or Sister be seasonably and effectually reached unto, and
overcome, and have cause to bless the Name of the Lord on their behalf, and so
a blessing may be rewarded into the Bosom of the Faithful and tender Brother or
Sister that so admonishes.

11. And be it known unto all, we cast out none from among us; for if they go
from the Light, and Spirit, and Power, in which our Unity is, they cast out
themselves; and it has been our way to admonish them, that they may come to the
Spirit and Light of God which they are gone from, and so come into the Unity
again. For our Fellowship stands in the Light, that the World hates, and in
the Spirit, that the World grieveth, vexes and quenches; and if they will not
hear our Admonitions, the Light condemns them, and then goes our Testimony
out against them.

12. That no Condemnation is to go farther than the Transgression is known, and
if he or she return and give forth a Condemnation against him or her self,
(which is more desirable than that we should do it) this is a Testimony of his
or her Repentance and Resurrection before God, his People and the whole World.
As David when Nathan came to admonish him, Psalm 51.

13. That no Testimony by way of Condemnation be given forth against any Man or
Woman (whatever crime they commit) before Admonition, and till such time as
they have had Gospel Order according to Christ's Doctrine.

14. And if any Brother or Sister hear any Report of any Brother or Sister, let
him or her go to the Party, and know the Truth of the Report; and if true, let
the thing be judged; if false, go thou to the Reporter, and let him or her be
judged, and if any should report it at a second or third hand, without going to
the party of whom the Report goes, let such be brought to Judgment, for thou
shall neither raise nor suffer a false Report to lie upon my People, says the
Lord, for they are to be Holy as he is Holy, and Just as he is Just.

15. And if any Controversy, or Weakness should appear in either Men's or
Women's Meeting, let it not be told out of your Meetings, because such Speeches
tend to the defaming of such Persons and Meetings, and to the Hurt of the
common Unity, and Breach of the Heavenly Society and Previlege.



This is an account of what passed in that Meeting. Next day (notice being
already given) we had a large public Meeting, 13th. 6 Month.
in which the sound of the everlasting, Gospel, Testament and Covenant went
forth, and the Meeting ended with a sweet and weighty Sense; that Evening we
had a more select meeting of Friends than the day before, in which the Nature
of Marriage, and the practice of Friends relating to it, and other things were
very weightily and closely discoursed; the Resolutions were these following.

1. A Scruple concerning the Law of the Magistrate about Marriage, being
proposed and discoursed of in the fear of God among Friends in a Select
Meeting, it was the universal and unanimous sense of Friends, that joining in
Marriage is the work of the Lord only, and not of Priest or Magistrate; For
it is God's Ordinance and not Man's, and therefore Friends cannot consent that
they should join them together; for we Marry none; it is the Lord's Work and we
are but Witnesses.

2. But yet if a Friend through tenderness have a desire that the Magistrate
should know it before the Marriage be concluded, they may publish the same,
after the thing has by Friends been found clear, and after the Marriage is
performed in a public Meeting of Friends and others, according to the Holy
Order and Practice of Friends in Truth throughout the World, (the manner of the
holy Men and Women of old) to go and carry a Copy of the Certificate to the
Magistrate, they are left to their freedom herein, that if they please they may
Register it. But for Priests or Magistrates to marry, or join any in that
Relation, it is not according to Scripture; and our Testimony and Practice have
been always against it. It was God's work before the Fall, and it is God's work
only in the Restoration.

3. If any Friend have it upon him to reprint any Book already Printed and
approved either in England or here, they may do it upon their own Charges.

4. It is also agreed that the care of reading and approving Books be laid upon
some of every Meeting, to the end no Book may be Published but in the Unity, yet
any other faithful Friends not so Nominated, are not thereby excluded, though
in all these cases it is desired, that all would avoid unnecessary Disputes
about words, which profit not, but keep in the love that Edifieth.

5. It is farther concluded that the general Stock of the Quarterly Meeting be
not disposed of, but by the consent of the Quarterly Meeting; but if betwixt
times there should be a pressing necessity concerning the Public, let that
monthly Meeting, where it shall fall out, lay down the Money, and give in an
Account at the next Quarterly Meeting in Order to their Relief, if it appear
that they are thereby overcharged; and let all things be done without Favor,
Affection, Relation, or any respect to Persons, even for the Lord's Sake and
his blessed Everlasting Truth, that God may bless and prosper his People. And
let all things be written down, both as to your monthly and quarterly meeting
Collections, what you Receive, what you Disburse, that all may be fair and
clear to the satisfaction of all that desire to see and Examine the Books. And
the Lord's Fear and Life and Power was over all, in which the Lord God preserve
his for ever.



14th. 6 Month.
The next day (being the Seventh day of the Week) was employed in visiting of
Friends, and preparing our selves for a further Journey, that is to say, G. K.
R. B. B. F. and My self. Finding Letters here from the Friends of Dantzick,
complaining of their heavy Sufferings they underwent, informing us also that
the King of Poland was there, asking advice about an Address to Him, it fell
upon me to write the following Letter in the Name of the Friends of Dantzick.
TO THE KING OF POLAND.
Great Prince,
ACtions of Justice, Mercy and Truth are worthy of all Men, but in a most
excellent manner of the serious consideration of Kings and Princes. We certain
Inhabitants of the City of Dantzick have been long great Sufferers, not for any
Wickedness committed against the Royal Law of God, or any Breach of those Civil
Laws of this City that relate to the well Government of it in all Natural and
Civil things; but purely and only for the cause of our Tender Consciences
toward God. This severity being by us represented to the Magistrates of this
City, we could not as yet receive from them any Relief, some expressing; as if
easing the Burden of our Oppressions should give thee, O King, an occasion of
Dissatisfaction against them, who art our acknowleged Protector. Being thus
necessitated, and in a manner driven to make this address unto Thee, take it
not amiss, that we with that Humility and Patience, that becomes the Servants
and followers of Jesus, and with all manner of Christian respect and sincerity
of Mind, briefly relate to Thee, the most Fundamental Principles most surely
believed by us, which we hope Thou will believe deserve not those Punishments,
that are inflicted upon us as evil doers.

1. We do reverently believe that there is one God and Father, one Lord Jesus
Christ, and one Holy Spirit, and these three are one, Ephesians. 4.6.

2. We believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to have been given
forth by Divine Inspiration, and that they are profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, able to make the Man
of God wise unto Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15,
16.

3. That these Holy Scriptures are not to be understood, but by the
Discoveries, Teachings and Operations of that Eternal Spirit from whence they
came.

4. We believe that all Mankind through Disobedience to the Spirit of God are
fallen short of the Glory of God, and in that State are under Condemnation; but
that God out of his infinite Goodness and Kindness, has sent his Son a Light
into the World, that whosoever believes and obeys this Light should not
abide in Darkness, but have the Light of Eternal Life.

5. We believe this Gift of Light and Grace through Jesus Christ to be
Universal, and that there is not a Man or Woman upon Earth, that has not a
sufficient measure of this Light, and to whom this Grace has not appeared to
reprove their ungodly Works of Darkness, and to lead them that obey it to
Eternal Salvation. And this is the great Condemnation of the World at this Day,
under all their great professions of God, Christ, Spirit and Scriptures; that
though Christ has enlightened them, yet they will not bring their Deeds to the
Light, but hate the Light, and love their dark Customs and Practices rather
than the Light, because their Deeds are Evil.

6. We do believe in the Birth, Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Resurrection
and Ascension of Jesus Christ our Lord, and that he laid down his Life for the
Ungodly, not to continue so, but that they should deny their Wickedness and
Ungodliness, and live Soberly, Righteously and Godlikely in this present evil
World, as the Saints of old did, that were redeemed from the Earth, and sat in
Heavenly places.

7. We do believe, that as the Devil through Man's Disobedience brought sin
into Man's Heart, so Christ Jesus, through Man's Belief in, and Obedience to
his Holy Spirit, Light and Grace, cleanses the Heart of Sin, destroys the
Works of the Devil, finisheth Transgression and brings in everlasting
Righteousness; that as the Devil has had his Kingdom of Darkness in Man, so
Christ may have his Kingdom of Light, Life, Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the
Holy Ghost in the Heart of Man, and not that Christ Jesus saves Men from Wrath
and not from-Sin; for the Wages of Sin is Death in whose heart soever it
lives, but the Gift of God is Eternal Life to all that believe and obey
through Jesus Christ.

8. We do believe that all true Ministry and Worship only stand in the
experimental Sense, Operations and Leadings of this Holy Light, Spirit, or
Grace, that is shed abroad in the Hearts of Men and Women, to conduct them in
the Holy way of Regeneration unto Life Eternal; this was the Ancient
Apostolical Doctrine, they spoke what they had seen, Tasted and Handled of the
Word of God. And this is our Faith, Doctrine and Practice in this day. And be
not displeased with us, O King, we entreat thee, if we give this for the reason
of our absenting our selves from the public and common Ministry or Worship,
Namely, that we have no Taste or Relish, no Sense or Evidence that their
Ministry and Worship are Authorized and performed by the Apostolical Power and
Spirit of Jesus, but rather that they are the Inventions, Studies and Powers of
Man's Nature, all which are but strange Fire, and therefore cannot kindle a
true and acceptable Sacrifice to God, for it is not Man's Spirit and degenerate
Nature, Speaking and Professing the Words of God's Spirit that gives
acceptance with the Lord, or adminstreth Heavenly Edification to Men, nor can
we believe, that where Envy, Passion, Wrath, Malice, Persecution, Envy and
Strife, Lusts, Vanity, Wantonness and Worldly Mindedness have such Sway and
Power, that the true Christian Spirit, Life and Doctrine can be heartily
received and followed.

And as this is the Reason in the sight and presence of that God that made
Heaven and Earth, and will Judge the Quick and Dead, wherefore we cannot join
in the common and public Worship of these parts, so does the same Light and
Spirit of God lay an Holy necessity upon us with a Meek and Quiet Spirit to
come together after the manner of the Ancient Christians, that were the true
Followers of Jesus; and with Godly fear and a retired Mind to wait upon God,
and Meditate in his Holy Law of Life, that he has writ in our Hearts according
to his New Covenant-Promise that he may Feed us, Teach us, Strengthen us, and
Comfort us in our inward Man; and as by this Holy Spirit according to the
Practice of the Churches of Old, any are inclined or moved to Reprove, Exhort,
Admonish, Praise, or Pray, we are found exercised in these Holy Practices.

Now, O Prince, give us poor Christians leave to Expostulate with Thee. Did
Christ Jesus or his Holy Followers endeavor by Precept or Example to set up
their Religion with a Carnal Sword? Called he any Troops of Men or Angels to
defend him? Did he encourage Peter to dispute his escape with the Sword? But
did he not say put it up? Or did he countenance his over zealous Disciples,
when they would have had Fire from Heaven to destroy those that were not of
their Mind? No, but did not Christ rebuke them, saying, ye know not what Spirit
ye are of? And if it was neither Christ's Spirit, nor their own Spirit that
would have Fire from Heaven? Oh! what is that Spirit that would kindl^ ^ire on
Earth, to destroy such as peaceably dissent upon the account of Conscience; if
we may not wish that God would smite Men of other judgments, because they
differ from us, (in which there is no use of Carnal Weapons) can we so far
deceive our selves, as to esteem our selves Christians and Followers of Christ,
whilst we encourage Men with Worldly Weapons to persecute such as dissent from
us? O King! When did the true Religion Persecute? When did the true Church
offer Violence for Religion? Were not her Weapons, Prayers, Tears, and
Patience? Did not Jesus conquer by those Weapons, and vanquish Cruelty by
Suffering? Can Clubs, and Staves, and Swords, and Prisons, and Banishments
reach the Soul, convert the Heart, or convince the understanding of Man? When
did violence ever make a true Convert? Or bodily punishments a sincere
Christian? This makes void the end of Christ's coming, which is to save Men's
lives and not to ^estroy them, to persuade them and no^ ^o force them; yea it
robs God's Spirit of its Office, which is to convince the World, that is,
the Sword by which the Ancient Christians overcame: It was the Apostle's
Testimony, that their Weapons were not Carnal but Spiritual, but the Practice
of their pretended Successors proves, that there Weapons are not Spiritual,
but Carnal: Suppose we are Tares, as the true Wheat has always been called,
yet pluck us not up for Christ's Sake, who says, Let the Tares and the Wheat
grow together until the Harvest, that is, till the End of the World; let God
have his due as well as Caesar; the judgment of Conscience belongs to him;
and mistakes about Religion are best known to him. And here give us leave to
mind thee of a noble Saying of one of thy Ancestors, Stephen King of Poland, I
am King of Men, not of Consciences; King of Bodies, not of Souls; and there
have been found and still are among the Emperors, Kings, Princes and States of
the World, some that have had that noble Spirit of indulging their
Conscientious dissenting Subjects, and not only with Gamaliel and Gallio not to
persecute, but also eminently to protect and defend them from the Hatred and
Violence of their Enemies. Be not then less Noble than they, consider how
Quietly and Comfortably our Friends live under other Governments. And indeed we
conceive it to be the Prudence of the Kings and States of the World; for if the
wise Man say true, The Glory of a Prince is in the Multitude of his People; but
this Practice says, No, the Glory of a Prince is in the Conformity of the
People to the Canons of the Clergy; which seems to strike at all Civil
Society, which consists in Men of Virtue, Parts, Arts and Industry. But let
Men have never such excellent Abilities, be never so Honest, Peaceable and
Industrious, all which render them good and profitable Subjects to the Prince,
yet they must not live within their Native Country, unless they will sacrifice
the Peace of their Consciences by an Hypocritical Submission to the Canons and
Fashions of the Church: Is not this, O Prince, to set the Church above the
State? The Bishop above the King? to waste and give away the Strength and Glory
of a Kingdom.

O that thou may be wise even in thy Generation, and use the Power that God
has given thee, for God and Truth and Righteousness, that therein thou may
be like unto God, who Peter tells us, Accepts of all that fear him and work
Righteousness throughout the World, whose Sun shines upon all, whose Rain
comes upon all.

And least any should be so injurious to us, as to render us Enemies to Civil
Government; Be it known unto thee, O King, that we Honor all Men in the Lord,
not with the vain invented Honors of this World, but with the true and solid
Honor that comes from above; but much more Kings, and those whom God has
^laced in Authority over us; for we be^ieve Magistracy to be both Lawful and
^sefull for the Terrifying of all Evil Do^rs, and the Praise and Encouragement
^f those that do well.

The Premises duly Considered, we ^ntreat thee, O Prince, to take our
suffering Case into thy serious Regard, and b^ that Power and Influence thou
had with the Magistrates of this City to recommend our suffering Condition to
their serious Consideration, that we may no longer lie under these not only
Unchristian, but Unnatural Severities, but receive that speedy and effectual
Relief which becomes Christian Magistrates to give to their own sober and
Christian People.



15th. 6. Month.
The first day of the Week being come, the Meeting began about the Eleventh
Hour, and held till about the Fourth Hour in the Afternoon. There was a mighty
Concourse of People from several places of this Country, and that of several
Persuasions, Baptists, Presbyterians, Socinians, Seekers, etc. and God was with
his People, and his Word of Life and Power, of Wisdom and Strength covered
them; yea the hidden things both of Esau and Jacob, the mystery both of
Iniquity and Godliness were opened and declared in the Demonstration of the
Eternal Spirit that day; and, O Blessed and Magnified be the Name of the Lord
that has not only not left himself, but also his Servants not without a
Witness! Oh, he is worthy to be Loved and Feared, and Obeyed, and Reverenced
for ever!

The next day G.K. R.B. B.F. and my self, 16th.
having taken our leave of dear G.F. and Friends, took Boat for Naerden,
Naerden.
where we Arrived about the Second Hour in the Afternoon, and after having
Eaten, 18th.
we took our leave of those Friends that had Accompanied us hither, and begun
our Journey in the common Post-waggon to Osnaburg, Osnabrug.
where we came the Fourth day following in the Evening.

We past through a very dark Country to that place, yet I felt not so great a
weight and suffering in my Spirit as six Years ago, when I went through the
same places.

At Osnabrug we had a little time with the Man of the Inn, where we lay, and
left him several good Books of Friends in the Low and High Dutch Tongues to
Read and to dispose of.

19th. 6 Month. Herwerden.
The next morning (being the fifth day of the Week) we set forward to Herwerden,
and came thither at Night. This is the City where the Princess Elizabeth
Palatine has her Court, whom and the Countess in Company with her, it was
especially upon us to Visit, and that upon several Accounts.

1. In that they are Persons seeking after the best things.

2. That they are actually Lovers and Favorers of those that separate
themselves from the World for the sake of Righteousness.

For the Princess is not only a private supporter of such, but gave protection
to De Labadie himself and his Company, yea when they went under the
reproachful Name of Quakers about seven Years since.

This Man was a Frenchman, that dissatisfied with the looseness and deadness of
the French Protestants, even at Geneva it self, left them and came for Holland,
and so vehemently declaimed against the Apostasy of the Priests and People
there, that the Clergy were enraged and stirred up the Magistrates against him;
and the rather because many followed him, and several Women of great Quality:
Upon this the Princess gives them an invitation, and they came and were
protected by her, but since some miscarriages falling out in that place, she
thereupon in good measure withdrew her Favor from them, and they removed into
another place.

I was moved to Visit this Man and his Company six years ago, and did see him
and his two great Disciples, but they would not suffer me to see the People
which I labored for; I in that day saw the airiness and unstableness of the
Man's Spirit, and that a Sect-master was his Name, and it was upon me both by
Word of Mouth and Writing to let them know, that the Enemy would prevail
against them to draw them into inconvenient things, if they came not to be
stayed in the Light of Jesus Christ, and to know the Holy Silence, and that at
last they would come to fall out one with another and moulder away; which is in
some measure come to pass as I feared; for I clearly perceived, that though
they had received some Divine Touches, a danger there was they would run out
with them, and spend them like Prodigals, not knowing then where to stay their
Minds for daily Bread; yea though they were something Angelical and like to the
Celestial Bodies, yet if they kept not their Station, they would prove fallen
Stars; they moved not in the motion of him that had visited them, but were
filled with gross Mixtures, and thereby brought forth mixed Births: That is to
say, things not Natural but Monstrous. In fine they were Shy of us, they knew
us not; yet I believed well of some of the People, for a good thing was
stirring in them, and in this Case was the Countess commendable, in that she
left all to have joined with a People, that had a pretense at least to more
Spirituality and Self-denial than was found in the National Religion she was
bred up in; for God had reached her as she told me about Nine Years ago, and
that by an extraordinary way. Now it seemed great pity to us, that Persons of
their Quality in the World, should so willingly expose themselves for the false
Quaker, the reprobate Silver, the Mixtures, and that they should not be
acquainted with the Life and Testimony of the true Quakers.

Now about a Year* since, R.B. and B.F. took that City in the way from
Frederickstadt to Amsterdam, and gave them a Visit, in which they informed them
somewhat of Friends Principles, and recommended the Testimony of Truth to them,
as both a nearer and more certain thing than the utmost of De Labadie's
Doctrine. They left tender and loving.

Soon after this Getrueydt Dircks and Elizabeth Hendricks from Amsterdam
visited them, and obtained a Meeting with them, improving that little, way God
by his Providence had made more closely to press the Testimony, and though
they, especially the Countess, made some Objections, in relation to the
Ordinances and certain Practices of Friends, yet she seemed to receive at that
time satisfaction from them. These Visits have occasioned a Correspondence by
way of Letter betwixt them and several of us, wherein the Mystery of Truth has
been more clearly opened to their Understandings, and they have been brought
nearer into a waiting Frame by those Heavenly Directions they have frequently
received by way of Epistles from several of us.

This Digression from the present History, I thought not altogether unnessary
or unpleasing.

But to Return, being arrived at that City, part of which is under her
Government, we gave her to understand it, desiring to know what time next day
would be most proper for us to Visit her. She sent us word, she was glad that
we were come, and should be ready to receive us the next Morning about the
Seventh Hour. 10th./20th. 6 Month.


The next morning being come (which was the sixth day of the week) we went
about the time she had appointed us, and found both her and the Countess ready
to receive us, which they did with a more than ordinary Expression of Kindness.
I can truly say it, and that in God's fear, I was very deeply and reverently
affected with the Sense that was upon my Spirit, of the great and notable day
of the Lord, and the breakings in of his Eternal Power upon all Nations, and of
the raising of the slain Witness to judge the World, who is the Treasure of
Life and Peace, of Wisdom and Glory to all that receive him in the Hour of his
Judgments and abide with him. The Sense of this deep and sure Foundation which
God is laying, as the Hope of Eternal Life and Glory for all to Build upon,
filled my Soul with an Holy Testimony to them, which in a living Sense was
followed by my Brethren, and so the Meeting ended about the Eleventh Hour.

The Princess entreated us to stay and Dine with her, but with due regard both
to our Testimony and to her at that time we refused it; desiring if she pleased
another opportunity that day, which she with all cheerfulness yielded to; She
her self appointing the Second Hour. So we went to our Quarters, and some time
after we had Dined we returned. The Meeting soon began, there were several
present besides the Princess and Countess; it was at this Meeting that the Lord
in a more eminent manner began to appear, the Eternal Word showed it self a
Hammer at this day, yea sharper than a two edged Sword dividing asunder between
the Soul and the Spirit, the Joints and the Marrow; yea this day was all Flesh
Humbled before the Lord; it amazed one, struck another, broke another, yea, the
noble Arm of the Lord was truly awakened, and the weight and work thereof bowed
and tendered us also after an unusual and extraordinary manner, that the Lord
might work an Heavenly Sign before them and among them, that the Majesty of him
that is risen among the poor Quakers might in some measure be known unto them,
what God it is we serve, and what Power it is we wait for and bow before, yea
they had a Sense and Discovery that day what would become of the Glory of all
Flesh, when God shall enter into Judgment. Well, let my right hand forget its
Cunning, and my Tongue cleave to the roof of my Mouth, when I shall forget the
loving kindness of the Lord, and the sure Mercies of our God to us his
Traveling Servants that day. O Lord, send forth thy Light and thy Truth, that
all Nations may behold thy Glory. Thus continued the Meeting till about the
Seventh Hour, which done, with Hearts and Souls filled with Holy Thanksgivings
to the Lord for his abundant Mercy and Goodness to us, we departed to our
Lodging; desiring to know whether our coming the next day might not be uneasy
or unseasonable to her with respect to the Affairs of her Government, it being
the last day of the Week, when we were informed she was most frequently
attended with Addresses from her People; but with a loving and ready Mind she
replied, That she should be glad to see us the next Morning, and at any time
when we would. 11th./12th. ^ Month.


The next Morning (being the Seventh day) we were there betwixt Eight and Nine,
where R.B. falling into some discourse with the Princess, the Countess took
hold of the Opportunity, and Whispered me to withdraw to get a Meeting for the
more inferior Servants of the House, who would have been Bashful to have
presented themselves before the Princess; and blessed be the Lord, he was not
wanting to us, but the same blessed Power that had appeared to Visit them of
High, appeared also to Visit them of Low Degree, and we were all sweetly
tendered and broken together, for Virtue went forth of Jesus that Day, and the
Life of our God was shed abroad amongst us as a sweet savor, for which their
Souls bowed before the Lord, and confessed to our Testimony, which did not a
little please that Noble Young Woman, to find her own report of us, and her
great care of them so effectually answered. Oh, what shall we say, is there any
God like our God? Who is glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, working
Wonders! To his Eternal Name, Power and Arm be the Glory for Ever.

The Meeting done, the Princess came to us expressing much Satisfaction, that
we had that good opportunity with her Servants, telling us she much desired
they should have a true and right Character of us, and that therefore she chose
to withdraw, that they might have freer access, and that it might look like
their own Act, on Words to that Purpose. The Twelfth Hour being come we
returned to our Inn, letting them understand, we purposed (the Lord willing) to
Visit them some time that Afternoon.

I must not here forget, that we found at our Inn the first Night at Supper, a
Young Merchant of a sweet and ingenious Temper, belonging to the City of
Bremen, who took occasion from that Night's Discourse, the sixth day at Dinner
and Supper, and the Seventh day also, to seek all opportunities of conference
with us, and (as we have reason to be believe) he stayed Twenty Four Hours in
that City on our Account. We opened to him the Testimony of Truth; I know not
that in any one thing he contradicted us. At last he plainly discovered himself
unto us to be a Follower of a certain Minister in Bremen, that is even by his
Fellow-ministers and Protestants reproached with the Name of Quaker, because of
his singular sharpness against the formal lifeless Ministers and Christians in
the World. We laid fast hold upon this, and asked him, in case any of us should
Visit that City, if he would give us the opportunity of a Meeting at his House?
which he readily granted us: So we gave him some Books, recommending him to the
true and blessed Testimony of Christ Jesus the Light and Judge of the World,
and Life of them that receive him and believe in him, and so we parted.

It being now about Three in the Afternoon we went to the Princess's, where
being come, after some little time, the Princess and Countess put me in
Remembrance of a Promise I made them in one of my Letters out of England,
namely, that I would give them an account (at some convenient time) of my first
Convincement, and of those Tribulations and Consolations which I had met withal
in this way of the Kingdom, which God has brought me to. After some pause I
found my self very free and prepared in the Lord's love and fear to comply with
their request, and so after some Silence, began: But before I had half done, it
was Supper time, and the Princess would by no means let us go, we must Sup with
her, which importunity not being well able to avoid, we yielded to, and sat
down and her to Supper; among the rest, present at these Opportunities, it must
not be forgotten, that there was a Countess, Sister to the Countess, then come
in to Visit her, and a French Woman of Quality, the first behaving her self
very decently, and the last often deeply broken, and from a light and slighting
Carriage toward the very Name of a Quaker, she became very intimately and
affectionately kind and respectful to us. Supper being ended, we all returned
to the Princess's Chamber, where making us all to sit down with her, she with
both the Countesses and the French Woman pressed from me the Continuance of my
Relation, but none more than the Countess' s Sister, which (though late) I was
not unwilling to oblige them with, because I knew not when the Lord would give
me such an opportunity, and I found them affected. It continued till about Ten
at Night, yet many particulars omitted, partly through forgetfulness, and
partly for want of time; howbeit, I must needs say, they heard me with an
Earnest and Tender Attention, and I hope and believe the Lord has made it
profitable unto them.

This done, some discourse they had upon it, and afterward we spoke about a
Meeting for the next day, being the first day of the Week, and that we might
have not only as many of her own Family, but as many of her Town as would
willingly be there, she yielded to it, and appointed the Meeting to begin at
the Second Hour, so we parted being near the Eleventh Hour at Night.
12th./22th. 6 Month.


The next Morning we had a Meeting among our selves in our Chamber, wherein the
Lord refresht us, and there was a great Travail upon our Spirits, that the Lord
would stand by us that day and magnify the Testimony of his own Truth by us,
that he might have a Seed and People in that place to lift up a Standard for
his Name.

At Dinner there were several Strangers that came by the Post-Waggon that day,
among whom there was a Young Man of Bremen, being a Student of Duysburgh, who
informed us of a sober and seeking Man of great Note in that City of Duysburgh;
to him we gave some Books. There was one more who was tender and inquiring, to
whom also we gave some Books.

The Second Hour being at Hand we went to the Meeting, where were several as
well of the Town as of the Family; the Meeting began with a weighty Exercise
and Travel in Prayer, that the Lord would glorify his own Name that day, and
by his own power he made way to their Consciences, and sounded his wakening
Trumpet in their Ears, that they might know that he was God, and that there is
none like unto him. Oh, the day of the Lord livingly dawned upon us, and the
searching Life of Jesus was in the midst of us! Oh! the word that never fails
them that wait for it, and abide in it, opened the way and unsealed the Book of
Life, yea the quickening Power and Life of Jesus wrought and reached to them, and
virtue from him in whom dwells the Godhead bodily, went forth, and blessedly
distilled upon us his own Heavenly Life, sweeter than the Spices with pure
Frankincense, yea than the sweet smelling Myrrh that comes from a far Country,
and as it began, so it was carried on, and so it ended; Blessed be the Name of
the Lord, and confided in be our God for ever. As Soon as the Meeting was done,
the Princess came to me and took me by the hand (which she usually did to us
all coming and going) and went to speak to me of the Sense she had of that
Power and Presence of God, that was amongst us, but was stopped, and turning her
self to the Window brake forth in an extraordinary Passion, crying out, I
cannot Speak to you, my Heart is full, claping her Hands upon her Breast; it
melted me into a deep and calm tenderness, in which I was moved to Minister a
few words softly to her, and after some time of Silence, she recovered her
self, and as I was taking my leave of her, she interrupted me thus, Will ye not
come hither again? Pray call here as ye return out of Germany: I told her we
were in the Hand of the Lord, and being his, could not dispose of our selves;
but the Lord had taken care, that we should not forget her and those with her,
for he had raised and begotten an Heavenly Concernment in our Souls for her and
them, and that we loved them all with that love wherewith God had loved u^,
with much more to that purpose. She then turned to the rest of the Friends, and
would have had us all gone down to Supper with her, but we chose rather to be
excused; we should Eat a bit of her Bread and Drink a glass of her Wine if she
pleased in the Chamber where we were. At last we prevailed with her to leave
us. The Countess, the French Woman, and the Countess's waiting Woman stayed
with us, and we had a very retired and seasonable Opportunity with them. After
the Princess had Supt, we went all down and took our Solemn leave of her, the
Countess, her Sister, the French Woman, with the rest of the Family, whose
hearts were reached and opened by our Testimonies; recommending unto them Holy
Silence from all Will Worship, and the Workings, Strivings and Images of their
own Mind and Spirit, that Jesus might be felt of them in their Hearts, his holy
Teachings witnessed, and followed in the way of his Blessed Cross that would
crucify them unto the World, and the World unto them; that their Faith, Hope
and Joy might stand in Christ's in them the Heavenly Prophet, Shepherd and
Bishop, whose voice all that are truly Sheep will hear and follow, and not the
voice of any stranger whatever. So we left them in the Love and Peace of God,
praying that they might be kept from the Evil of this World. So we returned to
our Lodging, having our Hearts filled with a weighty Sense of the Lord's
appearance with us in that place, and being late (toward the Ninth Hour) we
prepared to go to Rest. 13th./23th. 6 Month.


The next Morning (being the Second day of the Week) G.K. B.F. and my self got
ready to begin our Journey toward Franckfort, wc^ by the way of Cassel is
about 200 English Miles. R. B. prepared himself to return by the way we^came
directly back to Amsterdam. But before we parted, we had a little time together
in the Morning in our Chamber, whither came one of the Princess's Family, and
one of the Town. The Lord moved me to call upon his great Name, that he would
be with them that stayed, and with them that returned also, and with us that
went forward in wild and untrodden places, and his blessed Love and Life
over-shadowed us, yea he filled our Cup together, and made us drink into one
Spirit, even the Cup of Blessings in the Fellowship of the everlasting Seed, in
which we took leave of one another, and after having Eaten, it being about the
Seventh Hour, we departed the City.

We came to Paderborn that Night, six German Miles, Paderborne.
which are about thirty six English, it is a dark Popish Town, and under the
Government of a Bishop of that Religion; howbeit, the Woman where we lodged was
an Ancient, Grave and Serious Person, to whom we declared the Testimony of the
Light, showing her the difference betwixt an outside and an inside Religion,
which she received with much kindness. We left some Books with her, which she
took readily.

There was also with us at Supper a Lutheran that was a Lawyer, with whom I had
very good Service in opening to him the great loss of the power of Godliness,
as well among them who separated from Rome, as in the Roman Church: which he
confessed: I directed him to the Principle of Light in his Conscience, that let
him see the lifeless State of the false Christians; and if he turned his mind
to that Principle and waited there for Power, he would receive Power to Rule
and Govern himself according to true Godliness, and that it was the loss of
Christendom that they went from this Principle, in which the Power stands,
that conformeth the Soul into the Image and Likeness of the dear Son of God,
and thither they must come again, if ever they will have the true knowledge of
God, and enjoy Life and Salvation; with much more to that purpose, all which he
received lovingly.

14th./24th. 6 Month.
The next Morning we set forwards toward Cassel, but through great foulness of
Weather, having only naked Carts to Ride in, the Waters being also High with
the Rains: We got not to Cassel till the next day, 15th./25th. Cassel.
which was the Fourth day of the Week. It being late we made little inquiry
that Night, being also wearied with the foulness of the Ways and Weather.
16th./26th.


But the next day we made our usual Inquiry, viz. who was worthy in the City,
and found some that tenderly and lovingly received us, to whom we declared the
Visitation of the Light and Love of God. Among the rest was Dureus our
Countryman, a Man of Seventy Seven Years of Age, who had learned in good
Measure to forget his Learning, School Divinity, and Priest's Craft, and for
his approaches toward an inward Principle is reproachfully saluted by some
with the honest Title of Quaker; it is much better than Papist, Lutheran or
Calvinist, who are not only ignorant of, but Enemies to Quaking and Trembling
at the Word of the Lord, as Moses and others did.

Upon the Sixth day of the same week about Noon, 17th./27th. 6 Month.
we set out toward Franckfort, having left several Books behind us, which has
been our Practice in our Journey.

At Franckfort we Arrived the Second day about Noon, Frankfort.
being just a Week from Herwerden, and having from thence and Cassel made known
our intentions of coming to that City, two considerable Persons came and met us
about half a German Mile from the City, informing us of several well affected
in that Town; upon which we told them the end of our coming, and desired to
have a Meeting with them in the Afternoon, which we easily obtained at the
House of a Merchant, one of the two that met us. The persons that resorted
thither were generally People of considerable Note, both of Calvinists and
Lutherans, and we can say, they received us with gladness of Heart, and
embraced our Testimony with a broken and reverent Spirit, thanking God for our
coming amongst them, and praying that he would prosper this work in our Hands;
this engaged our hearts to make some longer stay in this City.

21st./31st. 6 Month.
We therefore desired another Meeting the next day, which they cheerfully
assented to, where several came that were not with us the day before, and the
Lord that sent us into the Land was with us, and by his Power reached to them,
insomuch that they confessed to the Truth of our Testimony. Of these Persons
there were two Women, one a Virgin, the other a Widow, both Noble of Birth, who
had a deep Sense of that power and presence of God that accompanied our
Testimony, and their hearts yearned strongly toward us; 22/1 6 Mon.
the Virgin giving us a particular invitation to her House the next Morning,
where we had the most blessed Opportunity of the three, for the Lord's power so
eminently appeared, that not only those that had been with us before were most
effectually reached, but a certain Student residing in the House of a Lutheran
Minister (sent for by that Young Woman) was broken to pieces, and magnified
that blessed power which appeared. Also there accidentally came in a Doctor of
Physic, who unexpectedly was affected, and confessed to the Truth, praying God
to prosper us. This was the blessed Issue of our Visit to Franckfort.

But there is one thing more not unfit to be mentioned. Among some of those
that have Inclinations after God, a fearful Spirit together with the shame of
the Cross has entered, against which our Testimony in part striking, we took
Notice it was as Life to these noble Women, for that was it as they told us,
which had long oppressed them, and obstructed the work of the Lord amongst them.
Therefore said the Young Virginour, Quarters are free for you, let all come
that will come, and lift up your Voices without fear, for (said she) it will
never be well with us till Persecution come, and some of us be lodged in the
Stadthouse, that is the Prison. We left the Peace of Jesus with them, and the
same Afternoon we departed out of that City, being the fourth day of the week.

Here I writ an Epistle to the Churches of Jesus.

TO THE CHURCHES OF JESUS Throughout the WORLD, Gathered and settled in his
Eternal Light, Power and Spirit, to be one Holy Flock, Family, and Household to
the Lord, who has Redeemed them from among all the Kindreds of the Earth.

Godly Zeal, Wisdom, Power, Perseverance and Victory, with all Heavenly
Blessings, be multiplied among you in the Name of the Lord.

William Penn.

Printed in the Year. 1677.

TO THE CHURCHES OF JESUS Throughout the WORLD, Gathered and settled in his
Eternal Light, Power and Spirit, to be One Holy Flock, Family, and Household to
the Lord, etc.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
WHO have been visited with the Fatherly Visitation from on High, and have
received God's Eternal Word and Testament in your Hearts, by which you have
been gathered home to Christ Jesus, the true Shepherd, from all the
Idol-Shepherds, and their barren Mountains, and unprofitable Hills, where you
have been scattered in the Dark and Gloomy Day of Apostasy, and by hi^ Light,
Spirit and Power have been convinced of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment, and
can say, The Prince of thi^ World is judged by his Holy, Righteous and powerful
Appearance in you, unt^ whom all Judgment in Heaven and Earth is committed; who
is the blessed Lam^ of God, the Light and Savior of the World; who is King of
Salem, and Prince of Peace: My Soul loves you with everlasting Love, even with
the Love with which my God and your God, my Father and your Father has loved
me, and visited my Soul and your Souls; in this do I dearly salute and embrace
you all, in this the day of the fullfilling of his glorious Promises to his
Church in the Wilderness, and Witnesses in Sackcloth. And, O magmagnified be
his Name, and everlastingly praised and renowned be his holy Power and Arm, by
which he has reached unto us, and brought Salvation near us! For he has found
us out, and has heard our Solitary Cries, the deep and mournful Supplications
of our bowed Spirits, when we were as the ^ittle silly Dove without its Mate,
and ^he lonely Pelican in the Wilderness; when we were ready to cry out, Is
^here none to save, is there none to help! O when shall the Time and Times and
half a Time be finished! when shall the One Thousand, Two Hundred and Sixty Days
be accomplished! and when shall the Abomination, that stands in the Holy Place,
^^e cast out! when shall the Captivity of the People be turned back! O when
shall Babylon come into Remembrance before God; the Dragon, Beast, and False
Prophet be cast into the Lake! And when shall the Law go forth out of Sion, and
the Word of the Lord out of Jerusalem! When shall Sion become the Joy, and
Jerusalem the Praise of the whole Earth! And when shall the Earth be covered
with the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Wa^ers cover the Sea!

Friends, The Lord of Heaven and Earth has heard our Cries, and the full time
is come, yea, the appointed time is come, and the Voice of the E^ernal Spirit
in our Hearts has been (...)

And, Friends, let it never pass out of our remembrance, what our God has done
for us, since he has made us a People: Has any Weapon formed against us,
prospered? has he called us, and not protected us? has he given Power to
conceive, and not to bring forth? has he not sheltered us in many a Storm? did
he ever leave us under the Reproaches and Contradictions of Men? nay, has he
not spoken Peace to us? were we ever cast out by Men, and he forsook us? No,
the Lord has taken us up: Were we ever in Prison, and he visited us not?
hungry, and he fed us not? naked, and he clothed us not? or have we been sick,
and he came not to see us? When were the Jails so close, that he could not come
in? and the Dungeons so dark, that he caused not his Light to shine upon us? O
nay; he has never left us, nor forsaken us; yea, he has provided richly for
us; he has brought us into the Wilderness, not to starve us, but to try us;
yet not above our measure: For he fed us with Manna from on high, with pure
Honey and Water out of the Rock, and gave his good Spirit to sustain us: By
Night he was a Pillar of Fire to us, to comfort us; and by Day a Pillar of
Cloud, to hide and shelter us. He was a Shadow of a mighty Rock, that followed
us; and we never wanted a Brook by the way to refresh us. Was God good to
Israel outward? Much more has he abounded to his spiritual Israel, the proper
Seed and Offspring of himself. O the noble Deeds and valiant Acts that he has
wrought in our Day for our Deliverance! He has caused One to chase Ten, and
Ten an Hundred, and an Hundred a Thousand many a Time. None has been able to
snatch us out of his Hands, who abode in his Truth. For though the Winds have
blown, and the Sea has raged, yet has he rebuked the Winds and the Sea for
his Seed's sake: He has said to the Winds, Be still; and to the Sea, Thus far
shall thou come, and no further. He has cast up a high Way for his Ransomed to
walk in, so plain, that though a Fool he shall not err therein. This is the
Light, in which all Nations of them that are saved must walk for ever.

And therefore, Friends, let us stay our Minds in the Light of the Lord for
ever; and let the Awe, Fear and Dread of the Almighty dwell in us; and let his
Holy Spirit be known to be a Covering to us, that from the Spirit of this World
we may be chastely kept and preserved unto God, in the holy Light and
Self-denying Life of Jesus, who has offered up himself once for all, leaving
us an Example that we should also follow his Steps; that as he our dear Lord
and Master, so we his Servants, and Friends, and Children, might by the eternal
Spirit offer up our selves to God in Body, in Soul and in Spirit, which are
his; that we may be his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works,
to the Praise of him that has called us; which Calling is an high and an holy
Calling, by the eternal Light and Spirit in our Consciences. O that it might
for ever remain in high Estimation with us; and that it may be the daily Watch
and Travel of us all, in the Presence of the Holy and Living God, that has
called us, to make our great Call and Election sure, which many have neglected
to do, (who have been convinced by the blessed Light and Truth of Christ Jesus
revealed in their Hearts, and who for a time have walked among us) have been
overcome by the Spirit of this World, and turned their Hands from the Plough,
and deserted the Camp of the Lord, and gone back into Egypt again, whereby the
Heathens have blasphemed, and the Way and People of the Lord greatly have
suffered.

Therefore, O my dear Friends and Brethren, in the Sense of that Life and
Power, that God from Heaven so gloriously has dispensed among us, and by which
he has given us multiplied Assurances of his Loving Kindness unto us, and
crowned us together with heavenly Dominion, and in which my Spirit is at this
time broken before the Lord, do I most earnestly entreat you to watch
continually, lest any of you, that have tasted of the good Word of God, and the
Powers of the World to come, fall by Temptation; and by Carelessness and Neglect
tempt the living God to withdraw his fatherly Visitation from any of you; and
finally to desert such: for the Lord our God is a jealous God, and he will not
give his Glory unto another. He has given to Man all but Man himself, and him
he has reserved for his own peculiar Service, to build him up a glorious
Temple to himself; so that we are bought with a Price, and we are not our own.

Therefore let us continually watch, and stand in awe, that we grieve not his
Holy Spirit, nor turn his Grace into Wantonness: But all of us let us wait, and
that in a holy travail of Spirit, to know our selves sealed by the Spirit of
Adoption, unto the Day of our complete Redemption; when not only all our Sins,
but all Sorrows, Sighings and Tears shall be wiped away from our Eyes; and
everlasting Songs of Joy and Thanksgivings shall melodiously fill our Hearts to
God, that sits upon the Throne, and to his blessed immaculate Lamb, who by his
most precious Blood shall have completely redeemed us from the Earth, and
written our Names in the Book of Life.

Friends, The Spirit of the Lord has often brought you into my Remembrance,
since I have been in this desolate Land, and with Joy unutterable have I had
sweet and precious Fellowship with you in the Faith of Jesus, that overcomes
the World: For, though absent in Body, yet present in him that is Omnipresent.
And I can truly say, you are very near and very dear unto me; and the Love that
God has raised in my Heart unto you, surpasses the Love of Women. And our
Testimony, I am well satisfied, is sealed up together. And I am well assured,
that all that love the Light shall endure to the End throughout all
Tribulations, and in the End obtain Eternal Salvation.

And now, Friends, as I have been traveling in this dark and solitary Land,
the great Work of the Lord in the Earth has been often presented unto my view,
and the Day of the Lord has been deeply upon me, and my Soul and Spirit has
frequently been possessed with an holy and weighty Concern for the Glory of the
Name of the Lord, and the spreading of his everlasting Truth, and the
Prosperity of it through all Nations, that the very Ends of the Earth may look
to him, and may know Christ the Light to be given to them for their Salvation:
And when the Sense of these things has been deeply upon me, an holy and strong
Cry God has raised in my Soul to him, That we, who have known this fatherly
Visitation from on High, and who have beheld the Day of the Lord, the Rising of
the Sun of Righteousness, who is full of Grace and full of Truth, and have
beheld his Glory, and confessed it to be the Glory of the only begotten Son of
God* and who by Obedience to his appearance are become the Children of Light,
and of the Day, and as the First Fruits to God after this long Night of
Apostasy, might for ever walk and dwell in his holy Covenant, Christ Jesus, the
Light of the World; because in him we have always Peace, but out of him comes
all the Trouble.

And whilst this heavenly Sense rested with me, the Lord God, that made me, and
called me by his Grace unto Salvation, laid it upon me, to visit you in an holy
Exhortation. And it is the Exhortation of my Life at this time, in the earnest
and fervent Motion of the Power and Spirit of Jesus, to beseech you all, who
are turned to the Light of Christ, that shines in your Hearts, and believe in
it, That you carefully and faithfully walk in it, in the same Dread, Awe and
Fear, in which you began; that that holy Poverty of Spirit, that is precious in
the Eyes of the Lord, and was in the Days of your first Love, may dwell and
rest with you; that you may daily feel the same heavenly Hunger and Thirst, the
same Lowliness and Humility of Mind, the same Zeal and Tenderness, and the same
Sincerity and Love unfeigned; that God may fill you out of his heavenly
Treasure with the Riches of Life, and crown you with holy Victory and Dominion
over the God and Spirit of this World: That your Alpha may be your Omega, and
your Author your Finisher, and your first Love your last Love; that so none may
make Shipwreck of Faith, and of a good Conscience, nor faint by the Way. And as
in this State we are kept in holy Watchfulness to God, as in the beginning, the
Table which our heavenly Father spreads, and the Blessings with which he
compasses us about, shall not become a Snare unto us, nor shall we turn the
Grace and Mercies of the Lord into Wantonness; but we shall eat and drink in an
holy Fear, apparel our selves in Fear, buy and sell in Fear, visit one another
in Fear; keep Meetings, and there wait upon the Lord in Fear: yea, whatsoever
we take in hand to do, it shall be in the holy Fear of God, and with an holy
Tenderness of his Glory, and Regard to the Prosperity of his Truth: yea, we
shall deny our selves not only in the unlawful things, but in the things that
are even lawful to us, for the Sake of the many Millions that are unconverted
to God.

For my Friends and Brethren, God has laid upon us (whom he has honored with
the beginning of his great Work in the World) the Care both of this Age, and of
the Ages to come; that they may walk, as they have us for Examples: yea, the
Lord God has chosen you to place his Name in you; the Lord has entrusted you
with his Glory, that you might hold it forth to all Nations; and that the
Generations unborn may call you Blessed.

Therefore, let none be Treacherous to the Lord, nor reward him Evil for Good;
nor betray his Cause directly by wilful Wickedness, nor indirectly by
Negligence and Unfaithfulness: But be zealous and valiant for Truth on Earth;
let none be slothful or careless: O remember the slothful Servant's State. And
let the loving kindness of the Lord overcome every Soul to Faithfulness; For
with him are Riches and Honor, and every good thing: And whither should any
go? he has the words of Eternal Life. O, let none loose their Testimony, but
hold it up for God; let thy Gift be never so small, thy Testimony never so
little. Through thy whole Conversation bear it for God; and be true to what
thou art convinced of: And wait all upon the Lord, that you may grow in your
heavenly Testimony; that Life may fill your Hearts, your Houses, and your
Meetings; that you may daily wait to know, and to receive Power to do the Will
of God on Earth, as it is in Heaven.

And O! that the Cross of Jesus, may be in high and honorable Esteem with
every one; that the Liberty of all may stand in the Cross, which alone
preserves: for it is the Power of God, that crucifieth us to the World, and
the World to us. And through Death, way is made unto Life and Immortality;
which by this blessed Cross, the Gospel, the Power is brought to Light: So
shall the Seed of Life that God has sown in our Hearts, grow; and in that Seed
shall we all come to be Blessed, unto whom God has appointed the Dominion over
us: and it is good for all to live under the Holy Government of it; for the
Ways of it are the Ways of Pleasantness, and all its Paths are Peace; and all
that are born of it, can say, Thy Scepter is a Scepter of Righteousness. And O!
That all Friends every where, may continually bow unto his righteous Scepter,
and keep to his holy Law, which is written in their Hearts; that it may be a
Light to their Feet, and a Lanthorn to their Paths. So shall they come to
witness that holy Promise made good unto them, Isa. 59.21.
That the Spirit, which I have given unto him, the Seed; and the Words* which I
have put into his Mouth, shall not depart from him, nor from his Seed, nor from
his Seed's Seed unto all Generations.

Wherefore, Friends, redeem the Time, because the Days are Evil; God has given
you to see they are so: and be ye separated more and more, yea, perfectly
disentangled from the Cares of this World. And be ye not cumbred with the many
things; but stand loose from the things that are seen, which are Temporal.

And you that are Poor murmur not; but be Patient, and trust in the Lord, and
submit to his Providence, and he will provide for you, that which is convenient
for you, the Days of your appointed Time. And you that are Rich, keep in the
Moderation, and strive not to multiply earthly Treasure, nor to heap up
uncertain Riches to your selves; but what God has given you more than what is
convenient for your own Use, wait for his Wisdom, to employ it for his Glory;
that you may be faithful Stewards of this World's Mammon; and the Lord God
shall reward you into your Bosoms, of the Riches of that Kingdom that shall
never have an End.

O my Friends and Brethren, whether Rich or Poor, in Bonds or at Liberty, in
whatsoever State you are, the Salutation of the universal Life of Jesus is to
you. And the Exhortation is, to bow to what is made known unto you; and in the
Light, by which ye have received in measure the Knowledge of God, watch and wait
diligently to the farther Revelation of the Mind and Will of God unto you, that
ye may be endued from on High with Power and Might in your inward Man, to
answer the call and requirings of the Lord; that ye may be enabled to make
known to the Nations, what is the Riches of the Glory of this blessed Mystery
in the Gentiles; which is Christ Jesus the Light of the World, in you the Hope
of Glory. For this I have to tell you in the Vision of the Almighty, that the
Day of the breaking up of the Nations about you, and of the sounding of the
Gospel-Trumpet unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, is just at the Door: And they
that are worthy, who have kept their Habitation from the beginning, and have
dwelt in the Unity of the Faith that overcomes the World, and have kept the
Bond of Peace: The Lord God will empower and spirit you to go forth with his
Everlasting Word and Testament to awaken, and gather Kindreds, Languages, and
People to the Glory of the rising of the Gentiles Light; who is God's Salvation
unto the Ends of the Earth.

And I must tell you, that there is a Breathing, Hungering, Seeking People,
solitarily scattered up and down this great Land of Germany where the Lord has
sent me; and ^ believe it is the like in other Nations* And as the Lord has
laid it upon me, with my Companions, to see^ some of them out, so have we foun^
several in diverse Places. And w^ have had many blessed Opportunities amongst
them, wherein our Hearts have greatly rejoiced; having been made deeply
sensible of the Love of God toward them, and of the great openness and
tenderness of Spirit in them to receive the Testimony of Light and Life through
us. And we have a steadfast belief, that the Lord will carry on his Work in this
Land effectually; and that he will raise up those, that shall be as Ministers
of his eternal Testament amongst them. And O! our desire is, that God would put
it into the Hearts of many of his faithful Witnesses, to visit the Inhabitants
of this Country, where God has a great Seed of People to be gathered; that his
Work may go on in the Earth, till the whole Earth be filled with his Glory.

And it is under the deep and weighty Sense of this approaching Work, that the
Lord God has laid it upon me, to write to you to wait for the farther pourings
out of the Power and Spirit of the Lord; that nothing that is Careless, Sleepy,
Earthly, or Exalted, may get up, whereby to displease the Lord, and cause him
to withdraw his sweet and preserving Presence from any that know him. But let
all keep the King of Righteousness his Peace, and walk in the Steps of the
Flocks of the Companions: For Withering and Destruction shall come upon all
such as desert the Camp of the Lord, or with their murmuring Spirit disquiet
the Heritage of God; for they are greater Enemies to Sion's Glory, and
Jerusalem's Peace, than the open Armies of the Aliens.

And it is a Warning to all, that make mention of the Name of the Lord in this
Dispensation he has brought us to, That they have a care how they let out
their Minds in any wise to please the Lusts of the Eye, the Lusts of the Flesh,
and the Pride of Life; which are not of the Father, but of this World, lest any
be exalted in a Liberty, that makes the Cross of Jesus of none effect, and the
Offense thereof to cease: for such will become as Salt that has lost its
Savor, and at last will be trod under the Feet of God and Men. For the Lord
will withdraw his daily Presence, and the Fountain will come to be sealed up,
and the Well of Salvation be stopped again.

Therefore, as all would rejoice in the Joy of God's Salvation, let them wait
for the saving Power, and dwell in it; that, knowing the Mystery of the Work of
Regeneration, Christ formed in them the Hope of their Glory, they may be able
in the motion of him, that has begotten them through Death to Life, to go
forth and declare the Way of Life and Salvation.

And all you, that are young, convinced of the Eternal Truth, come into it, and
then you will feel the Virtue of it: And so, you will be Witnesses, otherwise
Vain Talkers, Wells without Water, Clouds without Rain; for which State is
reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

Wherefore gird up the Loins of your Minds, and be sober, and tempt not God;
but receive the Day of your Visitation, and walk worthy of so great Love, and
delight to retain God in your Knowledge; and grieve not his Holy Spirit, but
join to it, and be led by it, that it may be an Earnest to you of an Eternal
Inheritance.

And take up your daily Cross and follow Christ, and not the Spirit of this
World. He was meek and lowly, he was humble and plain; he was few in Words, but
mighty in Deeds: He loved not his Life unto Death, even the reproachful Death
of the Cross; but laid down his Life, and became of no Reputation, and that for
the Rebellious. O the Height, and the Depth, the Length, and the Breadth; yea,
the Vnsearchableness of the Love of God in Christ Jesus.

Wherefore, while it is to Day, hearken to his Voice, and harden not your
Hearts; and make no Bargains for your Self, neither consult with Flesh and
Blood: But let the Lord be your Light, and your Salvation; let him be the
Strength of your Life, and the Length of your Days. And this know assuredly,
that none ever trusted to the Lord, and were confounded.

Wherefore hold up your Testimony for God; as ye would enjoy the Increasings of
his Life and Love: And let your Light shine, and confess him before the whole
World. Smother not his Appearance, neither hide thy Candle, God has lighted in
thee, under a Bushel; for Christ walks among his Candlesticks of pure and
tried Gold: Wherefore set thy Light upon a Candlestick, and show forth thy good
Conversation in Meekness and godly Fear, that thou may become a good
Example; and others beholding thy good Works, may glorify God. But for the
Rebellious, the Fearful, and the Unbelieving, the Day hastens upon such, that
the things that belong to their Eternal Peace, shall be hid from their Eyes for
ever.

And all you my dear Friends and Brethren, who are in Sufferings for the
Testimony of Jesus, and a good Conscience; look up to Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of your Faith; who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, and despised the Shame; and is sat down at the Right Hand of the Father
in the heavenly Place: into which, if you faint not, you shall all be received,
after the Days of your Pilgrimage shall be at an End; with a Well done, good
and faithful Servant.

And though these Afflictions seem not joyous, but grievous for the present;
yet a far more exceeding weight of Glory stands at the Door.

Wherefore count it all Joy, you fall into these Trials, and persevere to the
End; knowing that he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, and that
his Reward is with him. Remember the Martyrs of Jesus; that loved not their
Lives to the Death for his Name's-sake, that had called them. And Jesus
himself, that made a good Confession before Pontius Pilate; who has
consecrated through his Blood a new and living Way for all, that come unto God
by him, who is made a high Priest, higher than the Heavens, one that can be
touched and moved; and is daily touched and moved with our Weakness and
Infirmity; that through him we may be made strong in the Lord, and more than
Conquerors through him that has loved us.

Wherefore let it not seem, as if some strange thing had happened to you, for
all these things are for the Trial of your Faith; which is more precious than
the Gold that perishes. It Is the old Quarrel, Children of this World, against
the Children of the Lord; those that are born after the Flesh, warring against
those that are born after the Spirit: Cain against Abel, the Old World against
Noah, Sodomites against Lot, Hagar against Sarah, Ishmael against Isaac, Esau
against Jacob, Egyptians against Israelites, the false Prophets against the
true Prophets, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc. the Jews under the Profession of the
Letter of the Law against Christ, that came to fulfill the Law, and all his
spiritual Followers and Disciples: And all the false Apostate Christians
against the true and Spiriritual Christians and Martyrs of Jesus.

So, your Conflict is for the Spiritual Appearance of Christ Jesus against
those that profess him in Words, but in Works and Conversations every day deny
him; doing Despite to the Spirit of Grace in themselves, and those that are
led by it. But though Gog and Magog shall gather themselves together to lay
waste the City of God; yet the Lord has determined their Destruction, and he
will bring it to pass.

Wherefore rejoice, O thou little Hill of God, and clap thy Hands for Joy; for
he that is Faithful and True, Just and Righteous, and able to deliver thee,
dwells in the midst of thee: Who will cause thee to grow and increase, till
thou becomest a great Mountain, till thou becomest the Praise of the whole
Earth, and the whole Earth be filled with thy Glory.

And to you all, who are the followers of the Lamb of God, who was dead, but is
alive, and lives for evermore; who is risen in your Hearts, as a bright shining
Light, and is leading you out of the Nature and Spirit of this World, in the
Path of Regeneration. I have this to say by way of holy Encouragement unto you
all; the Lord God Eternal that was, and is, and is to come, has reserved for
you the Glories of the last Days: and if so be, that the Followers and Martyrs
of Jesus in Ages past, when the Church was going into the Wilderness, and his
Witnesses into Sackcloth, were notwithstanding so Noble and Valiant for the
Truth on Earth, that they loved not their Lives unto the Death, and suffered
joyfully the Spoiling of their Goods for the Testimony of Jesus, how much more
ought you all to be encouraged unto Faithfulness, who are come to the
Resurrection of the Day, which shall never more be eclipsed; in which the
Bridegroom is to come, to fetch you his Spouse out of the WILDERNESS, to give
you Beauty for Ashes, and the Garment of Praise for the SPIRIT of HEAVINESS;
who will cover you with his Spirit, and adorn you with his fine Linen, the
Righteousness of the Saints. Lean upon his Breast for ever; and know your
joining in an Everlasting Covenant with him, that he may lift up the Light of
his Countenance upon you, and delight to do you Good; that in blessing he may
bless you, increase you and multiply you in all spiritual Blessings now and for
ever; that to God through him you may live all the Days of your appointed Time:
to whom be Glory and Honor, Praises and Thanksgivings in the Church throughout
all Ages, and for ever.

I am, In the Faith, Patience, Tribulation and Hope of the Kingdom of Jesus,
your Friend and Brother, William Penn.
My Companions in the Labor and Travel of the Testimony of Jesus, G. Keith and
B. Furley, salute you all in the Love of our God. We have passed through
several Cities of Germany, and are now at Franckfort, where the Lord has given
us Three blessed Opportunities with a serious and seeking People; whereof, as
in other places of this Country, many of them are Persons of great Worldly
Quality. Blessed be the Name of the Lord, to whom be Glory be for ever.

W.P.
Franckfort, the 22d of the 6th Month, 1677.


The fifth Day we arrived by the way of Worms at Crisheim in the Paltzgrave's
Country, 5.23. 6 Month. Crisheim.
where we found, to our great Joy, a Meeting of tender and faithful People: But
it seems the Inspector of the Calvinists has injoined the Vooght, or chief
Officer, not to suffer any preaching to be among our Friends; who (poor Man)
fearing the Indignation of the Clergy, came next Day to desire Friends not to
suffer any preaching to be amongst them, lest he should be turned out of his
Place. To whom we desired Friends to say, that if he pleased he might apprehend
us, and carry us to the Prince, before whom we should give an Account of our
Testimony. But, blessed be the Lord, we enjoyed our Meeting quietly and
comfortably; of which a Coachful from Worms made a part, amongst whom was a
Governor of the Country, and one of the chief Lutheran Priests.

It came upon me in this Place to salute the Princess and Countess with this
following Epistle. A Salutation to Elizabeth Princess Palatine, and Anna Maria
d^ Horns Countess of Horns, at Herwerden in Germany.
My worthy Friends,
SUCH as I have, such I give unto you, the dear and tender Salutation of Light,
Life, Peace and Salvation, by Jesus Christ the blessed Lamb of God, with the
unspeakable Joy of which he has replenished my Soul at this time, that my Cup
overfloweth; which is the Reward of them that cheerfully drink his Cup of
Tribulations, that love the Cross, and triumph in all the Shame, Reproaches and
Contradictions of the World that do attend it: My God take you by the Hand, and
gently lead you through all the Difficulties of Regeneration; and as you have
begun to know and love his sweet and tender Drawings, so resign the whole
Conduct of your Lives to him; dispute not away the precious Sense that you have
of him, be it as small as a Grain of Mustard Seed, which is the least of all
Seeds, there is Power in it (if you do but believe) to remove the greatest
Mountains of Opposition. O precious is this Faith, yea more precious than the
Glory and Honor of this World that perish: It will give Courage, go with
Christ before Caiaphas and Pilate; yea, to bear his Cross without the Camp, and
to be crucified with him, knowing that the Spirit of God and of Glory shall
rest upon them: to the Inheritors of this Faith is reserved the eternal Kingdom
of Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. O be you of that little Flock unto whom
Jesus said, Fear not, for it is my Father's good pleasure to give you a
Kingdom: And to be of this Flock, you must become as Sheep; and to be as Sheep,
you must become harmless; and to become harmless, you must hear and follow the
Lamb of God: as he is that blessed Light which discovers and condemns all
the unfruitful Works of Darkness, and makes harmless as a Dove; which word,
All, leaves not one Piccadillo or Circumstance undiscovered or unjudged; and
the word Darkness takes in the whole Night of Apostasy; and the word
Unfruitful, is a plain Judgment against all those dark Works: Wherefore out of
them all come, and be you separated, and God will give you a Crown of Life,
which shall never fade away.

O! the lowness and meanness of those Spirits that despise or neglect the Joys
and Glories of Immortality, for the sake of the things which are ^een that are
but Temporal, debasing ^he Nobility of their Souls, abandoning the Government
of the Divine Spirit, and embracing with all ardency of Affection the sensual
Pleasures of this Life; but such as persevere therein, shall not enter into
God's Rest for ever. But this is not all that hinders and obstructeth in the
holy Way of Blessedness; for there is the World's Fear as well as the World's
Joy that obstructeth many, or else Christ had not said, Fear not, to his little
Flock. The Shame of the Cross is a Yoke too uneasy, and a Burden too heavy for
Flesh and Blood to bear, it is true; but therefore shall Flesh and Blood never
enter into the Kingdom of God. And not to them that are born of the Flesh, but
to those that are born of the Spirit through the Word of Regeneration, is
appointed the Kingdom, and that Throne which shall judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel, and all the World. The Lord perfect what he has begun in you, and give
you Dominion over the Love and Fear of this World* And, my Friends, if you
would profit in the Way of God, despise no^ the Day of small things in you^
selves: Know this, that to desire an^ sincerely to breathe after the Lord, i^ a
blessed State; you must seek before you find. Do you believe? make no^ haste,
extinguish not those small Beginnings by an over-earnest or impatient desire of
Victory. God's time is the best time; be you faithful, and your Conflict shall
end with Glory to God, and the Reward of Peace to your own Souls. Therefore
love the Judgment, and love the Fire; start not aside, neither flinch from the
scorchings of it, for it will purify and refine you as Gold seven times tried;
then comes the Stamp and Seal of the Lord upon his own Vessel, Holiness to him
for ever; which he never gave nor will give to reprobate Silver, the state of
the Religious Worshippers of the World. And herein be comforted, that Sion
shall be redeemed through Judgment, and her Converts through Righteousness; and
after the appointed time of Mourning is over, the Lord will give Beauty for
Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness: then shall you be able to say, Who is he that condemns us? God
has justified us; there is no Condemnation to us that are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Wherefore, my dear Friends,
walk not only not after the fleshly Lusts, but also not after the fleshly
Religions and Worships of the World: for that that is not born of the Spirit,
is Flesh; and all Flesh shall wither as the Grass, and the Beauty of it shall
fade away as the Flower of the Field before God's Sun that is risen and rising;
but the Word of the Lord in which is Life, and that Life the Light of Men,
shall endure for ever, and give Life Eternal to them that love and walk in the
Light. And I entreat you, by the Love you have for Jesus, have a care how you
touch with fleshly Births, or say Amen, by Word or Practice, to that which is
not born of the Spirit: for God is not to be found of that, in your selves or
others, that calls him Father, and he has never begotten it in them; that
Latitude and Conformity is not of God, but secretly grieveth his Spirit, and
obstructeth the growth of the Soul in its Acquaintance and intimate Communion
with the Lord. Without me, says Jesus, you can do nothing; and all that came
before me are Thieves and Robbers: If so, O what are they that Pray, Preach and
Sing without Jesus, and follow not him in those Duties, but even in them
crucify him? O that I may find in you an Ear to hear, and an Heart to perceive
and embrace these Truths of Jesus. And I can say, I have great cause to hope,
and patiently to wait till the Salvation of God be further revealed to you, and
the whole Family; with whom (I must acknowledge) I was abundantly refreshed and
comforted, in that God in measure made known the Riches of his Grace, and
Operation of his Celestial Power to you; and his Witness shall dwell with you,
(if we never see you more) that God magnified his own Strength in our Weakness.
With him we leave our Travels, affectionately recommending you to his holy
Spirit of Grace, that you may be conformed to the Image of his own dear Son,
who is able and ready to preserve you: O stay your Minds upon him, and he will
keep you in perfect Peace, and abide with you for ever. The Almighty take you
into his holy Protection now and for ever.

I am, Your true Friend ready to serve you, with fervent Love in the Will of
God, William Penn.
My dear Companions G. K. and B.F. do with me give you the dear Salutation of
unfeigned Love, and those in the Family that love and desire to follow the Lord
Jesus in Sincerity and Truth without wavering.

P. S. We are this Evening bound toward Manheim, the Court of the Prince
Palatine, and traveled about twelve English Miles on foot.





Franckenthall.
That Night we lodged at Franckenthall, and go^ the next Morning, being the
seventh Day of the Week, 7.25. 6 th Month. Manheim.
to Manheim; but were disappointed of our Design, which was to speak with the
Prince, for he was gone the Day before to Heydelb^rgh his chief City, about
fifteen English Miles from that Place: and considering that by reason of the
Meeting next Day with Friends at Crisheim already appointed, we could neither
go forward, nor stay till he returned; and yet being not clear to come away, as
if we had never endeavored to visit him, it was upon me to write him this
following Letter, to let him know we had been there, and briefly our End in
coming. To the Prince Elector Palatine of Heydelbergh.
Great Prince,
IT would seem strange that I, both a Stranger and a Subject, should use this
freedom of Address to a Prince, were he not one whose Actions show him to be of
a free Disposition and easy Access to all; would to God all Princes were of
that mind: But I have not chosen this way of Application, I am driven to it by
the disappointment thy absence from this Court gave me, and the necessity I am
under to expedite my Return. And though I cannot so fully, and consequently not
so clearly, express by Letter the Grounds inducing me to attempt this Visit;
yet this being all the way that is left me, I shall declare them as well as I
can.

In the first place I do, with all sincere and Christian respect, acknowledge
and commend that Indulgence thou give to all People professing Religion,
dissenting from the National Communion: for it is in it self a most Natural,
Prudent and Christian thing. Natural, because it preserves Nature from being
made a Sacrifice to the savage Fury of fallible yet proud Opinions, out lawing
Men of Parts, Arts, Industry and Honesty, the grand Requisites of Humane
Society; and exposing them and their Families to utter Ruin for mere
Nonconformity, not to Religion, but to Modes and Fashions in Religions.
Christian, since the contrary expressly contradicts both the Precept and
Example of Christ, who taught us to love Enemies, not to abuse our Friends, and
triumph in the destruction of our harmless Neighbors. He rebuked his
Disciples, when they called for Fire from Heaven upon Dissenters, it may be
Opposers: Certainly then he never intended that they should kindle Fire on
Earth to devour Men for Conscience. And if Christ (to whom all Power was given)
and his Apostles refused to employ Humane Force and Artifice so much as to
conserve themselves, it is an Arrogance every way indefensible in those that
pretend to be their Followers, that they assume an Authority to supercede,
control and contradict the Precepts and Examples of Christ and his Apostles;
whose Kingdom not being of the nature of this ambitious violent World, was not
erected or maintained by those Weapons that are Carnal, but Spiritual and
Intellectual, adequate to the Nature of the Soul, and mighty through God to
cast down the Strongholds of Sin, and every vain Imagination exalted in Man
above the lowly meek Fear of God, that ought to have the preeminence in the
Hearts of the Sons of Men. Indulgence is Prudent, in that it preserves
Concord: No Kingdom divided against it self, can stand; It encourages Arts,
Parts and Industry, to show and improve themselves, which indeed are the
Ornaments, Strength and Wealth of a Country: It encourages People to
transplant into this Land of Liberty, where the Sweat of the Brow is not made
the Forfeit of the Conscience. And, lastly, it rendereth the Prince peculiarly
Safe and Great. Safe, because all Interests, for Interest-sake, are bound to
love and court him. Great, in that he is not governed or clogged with the Power
of his Clergy, which in most Countries is not only a Coordinate Power, a kind
of Duumvirateship in Government, Imperium in Imperio, at least an Eclipse to
Monarchy, but a Superior Power, and rides the Prince to their Designs, holding
the Helm of the Government, and steering not by the Laws of Civil Freedom, but
certain Ecclesiastic Maxims of their own, to the Maintenance and Enlargement
of their Worldly Empire in their Church: And all the Villainy acted under the
sacred, peaceable and alluring Name of Christ, his Ministry and Church; though
as remote from their Nature, as the Wolf from the Sheep, and the Pope from
Peter.

The next thing I should have taken the liberty to have discoursed, would have
been this; What Encouragement a Colony of virtuous and industrious Families
might hope to receive from Thee, in case they should transplant themselves into
this Country, which certainly in it self is very excellent, respecting Taxes,
Oaths, Arms, etc.

Further, to have represented the condition of some of our Friends, and thy own
Subjects; who though they are liable to the same Tax as Mennists, etc. (not by
part the Case of other Dissenters) yet the Vaught of the Town where they live,
came yesterday to forbid all preaching amongst them, which implies a sort of
Contradiction to the Indulgence given.

And in the last place, for as much as all Men owe their Being to something
greater than themselves, to which it is reasonable to believe they are
accomptable, from whence follow Rewards or Punishments.

I had an earnest desire to have spoken of the Nature of Truth, Use, Benefit
and Reward of Religion, and therein as to have discoursed what is Christian
Religion in it self, (freed from those unreasonable Garbs some Men make it to
wear, so justly offensive to wise and thinking Men) so to have proved the
Principle and Life of the People, in scorn called Quakers, to have been suitable
to the true Followers of Holy Jesus. But as the Particulars would swell a
Letter to a Book, I shall take the Freedom to present thee upon my Return with
some Tracts treating upon all these Subjects.

Prince, my Soul is filled with Love and Respect to thee and thy Family; I wish
you all true and lasting Felicity, and earnestly desire that you may never
forget your Afflictions, and in the remembrance of them be dehorted from those
Lusts and Impieties, which draw the Vengeance of Heaven upon the greatest
Families on Earth, that God may look upon you with the favorable Eye of his
Providence. And blessed is that Man, whose God (by profession) is the Lord in
reality, viz. that is ruled and governed by the Lord, and that lives in
subjection to his Grace, that having a Divine Sense of God in his Heart,
delights to retain that Sense and Knowledge of him, and be meditating in his
Noble Royal Law, that converts the Soul to God, and redeems Man from the
sensual Pleasures of this World, to the true Satisfaction of the Intellectual
and Divine Life. O the meanness and lowness of their Spirits, that abandon
themselves to the Government of Sense, the animal Life, thereby debasing their
Natures, rejecting the Divine Light, that shines in their Hearts, saying, Let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die; forgetting whence they are
descended, and not considering the Peace and Joy of the Virtuous!

I desire that the Lord would put it into thy Heart to think of thy latter End,
and with the Light of Christ in thy Conscience examine how it stands with thy
Soul, that thou may know, and diligently watch to do those things that
belong to thy eternal Peace.

One thing more give me leave to recommend to thee, and that is, to be very
careful of inculcating generous, free and righteous Principles into thy Son,
who is like to succeed thee, that when thou art gone, the Reputation of the
Country may not sink by contrary Practices, nor the People of diverse Judgments
(now thy Subjects) be disappointed, distressed or ruined. Which, with sincere
desires for thy temporal and eternal Good, conclude this,

Thy unknown, but sincere Friend, William Penn.
From Manheim 25th of 6th Mo. 1677.


Which being done, 1.26. 6th Month.
and having refreshed our selves, we returned that night by the Rhine to Worms,
Worms.
from whence we the next Morning (being the first day of the Week) walked on
Foot to Crisheim, Crisheim.
which is about six English Miles from Worms. We had a good Meeting from the
tenth till the third Hour, and the Lord's Power sweetly opened to many of the
Inhabitants of the Town that were at the Meeting; yea, the Vaught or chief
Officer himself stood at the Door behind the Barn, where he could hear and not
be seen, who went to the Priest and told him, that it was his Work, if we were
Heretics, to discover us to be such, but for his part he heard nothing but
what was good, and he would not meddle with us.

In the Evening we had a more retired Meeting of the Friends only, very weighty
and tender; yea the Power rose in high operation among them, and great was the
Love of God that rose in our Hearts at the Meeting to visit them; and there is
a lovely, sweet and true Sense among them: we were greatly comforted in them,
and they were greatly comforted in us. Poor Hearts, a little handful surrounded
with great and mighty Countries of Darkness; it is the Lord's great Goodness,
and Mercy to them, that they are so finely kept, even natural in the Seed of
Life; they were most of them gathered by dear William Ames.

2.27. 6 th Month.
The next Morning we had another Meeting, where we took our leave of them, and
so came accompanied by several of them to Worms; Worms.
where having refreshed our selves, we went to visit the Lutheran Priest, that
was at the Meeting the sixth Day before at Crisheim; he received us very
kindly, and his Wife, not without some sense of our Testimony. After we had
discoursed about an Hour with him of the true and heavenly Ministry and
Worship, and in what they stood, and what all People must come unto if ever
they will know how to worship God aright, we departed, and immediately sent
them several good Books of Friends in High Dutch.

Immediately we took Boat about the third Hour in the Afternoon, 3.28.
and came down the River Rhine to Mentz, Mentz.
where we arrived about the fifth Hour in the Morning, and immediately took an
open Chariot for Frankfort, Frankfort.
where we came about the first Hour in the Afternoon.

We presently informed some of those People that had received us the Time
before, of our return to that City, with desires that we might have a Meeting
that Afternoon; which was readily granted us by the Noble Women, at whose House
we met, whither resorted some that we had not seen before. And the Lord did,
after a living manner, open our Hearts and Mouths amongst them, which was
received by them as a farther confirmation of the coming of the Day of the Lord
unto them; yea, with much joy and kindness they received us.

The Meeting held till the ninth Hour at Night; they constrained us to stay and
eat with them, which was also a blessed Meeting to them: before we parted, we
desired a select Meeting the next Morning at the same Place of those that we
felt more inwardly affected with Truth's Testimony, and that were nearest unto
the State of a silent Meeting; which they joyfully assented to.

4.29. 6 th Month.
We went to our Lodging, and the next Morning we returned unto them, with whom
we had a blessed and heavenly Opportunity, for we had room for our Life amongst
them; it was as among faithful Friends, Life ran as Oil, and swom a-top of all.

We recommended a silent Meeting unto them, that they might grow into an holy
Silence unto themselves; that the Mouth that calls God Father, that is not of
his own Birth* may be stopped, and all Images confounded, that they may hear the
soft Voice of Jesus to instruct them, and receive his sweet Life to feed them
and to build them up.

About the ninth Hour we departed from that Place, and went to Vander Walls,
where the Meeting was the Time before, and there we had a more public Meeting
of all that pleased to come: The Lord did so abundantly appear amongst us, that
they were more broken than we had seen them at any time, yea they were
exceeding tender and low, and the Love of God was much raised in their Hearts
to the Testimony. In this sensible frame we left them, and the Blessings and
Peace of our Lord Jesus Christ with and among them.

And after having refreshed our selves at our Inn, we took Boat down the Main
to Mentz, Mentz.
where we arrived about the fifth Hour: it is a great City, but a dark and
superstitious Place, according to the Popish Way, and is under the Government
of a Popish Bishop; we stayed not longer there, than till our Boat was ready,
which might be better than half an Hour. From Mentz we went on our way down the
Rhine six German Miles, and came that Night to Hampack; Hampack. 5.30. 6 th
Month.
from thence the next Morning we went by Bacherach, Coblentz, and other places
upon the Rhine, Tresy.
to Tresy that Night, being about eleven German Miles.

6.31.
Next day (being the sixth Day of the Week) we got to Cullen, Cullen.
a great Popish City, about the third Hour in the Afternoon.

We gave notice to a sober Merchant in that Town, a serious Seeker after God,
that we were there arrived; who presently came to us. We sat down, and had a
living and precious Opportunity with him, opening to him the Way of the Lord,
as to us it had been mani^ested; entreating him, if he knew any in that City,
who had desires after the Lord, or that were willing to come to a Meeting, that
he would please to inform them of our being here, and of our desire to meet
with them: He answered, That he would readily do it.

This night when we were in Bed, came the Resident of several Princes (a
serious and tender Man) to find us out; we had some discourse with him, but
being late, promised to see us the next Day.

The next Morning came the aforesaid Merchant, informing us, 7.1. 7 th Month.
that it was a busy Time, several preparing for the Mass or great Fair at
Frankfort; yet some would come, and he desired it might be at his House in the
Afternoon about Three.

In the Morning we were to visit that Resident, whom we met coming to see us;
but he returned and brought us to his House. We had a good Time with him, for
the Man is an ancient Seeker, oppressed with the Cares of this World, and he may
be truly said to mourn under them: his Heart was opened to us, and he blessed
God, that he had lived to see us. We gave him an Account, how the Lord appeared
in the Land of our Nativity, and how he had dealt with us, which was as the
cool and gentle Showers upon the dry and scorched Desert. About Noon we
returned Home; after we had eaten, we went to the Merchant's House to the
Meeting; where came four Persons, one of which was the Presbyterian Priest, who
preached in private to the Protestants of that Place, for they are no ways
allowed in that City. Surely the true Day and Power of the Lord made known it
self to the Consciences of them present; yea, they felt that we were such as
had been with Jesus, and that had obtained our Testimony through the Sufferings
and Travels of the Cross. They were tender: the Resident and Merchant conducted
us to our Inn, and from thence to the Boat, being about seven at Night. We set
out toward the City of Duysburgh of the Calvinist Way, belonging to the
Elector of Brandenburgh, in and near to which we had been informed there were a
retired and seeking People. 1.2. 7 th Month. Duysburgh


We arrived there next Day about Noon, being the first Day of the Week; the
first thing we did after we came to our Inn, was to inquire out one Dr.
Mastricht a Civilian, for whom we had a Letter to introduce us from a Merchant
of Cullen: Whom quickly finding, we informed him what we came about, desiring
his Assistance; which he readily promised us. The first thing we offered was an
Access to the Countess of Falchensteyn and Bruch: He told us she was an
extraordinary Woman, one in whom we should find things worthy of our Love; that
he would write to her to give us an Opportunity with her; that the fittest time
was the present time, in that we might find her at the Minister's of Mulheim,
on the other side of the River from her Father's Castle; for that she used to
come out the first Day Morning, and not return till Night: That we must be very
shy of making our selves public, not only for our own sakes, but for hers, who
was severely treated by her Father for the Sake of those Religious Inclinations
that appeared in her, although her Father pretended to be of the Protestant
Religion.

We therefore dispatched toward Mulheim, having received his Letter, and being
also accompanied by him about one third of the way; but being six English
Miles, and on foot, we could not compass the Place before the Meeting was over,
for it was past three before we could get out of Duysburgh; and following that
way which led to the backside of the Greaf's Castle and Orchard, which was
also a common way to the Town, (tho if we had known the Country we might have
avoided it) we met with one Henry Smith, Schoolmaster and Catechiser of
Speldorp; to whom we imparted our Business, and gave the Letter of Dr.
Mastricht of Duysburgh to introduce us to the Countess. He told us, he had just
left her, being come over the Water from the Worship, but he would carry the
Letter to her, and bring an Answer suddenly, but notwithstanding staid near an
Hour: When he came he gave us this Answer, viz. that she would be glad to meet
us, but she did not know where; but rather inclined that we should go over the
Water to the Minister's House whither, if she could, she would come, but that a
strict hand was held over her by her Father. After some more serious Discourse
with him, concerning the Witness of God in the Conscience, and the Discovery,
Testimony, and Judgment of that true Light, unto which all must bow that would
be Heirs of the Kingdom of God; recommending him to the same, we parted, he
returning homewards, and we advancing to the Town: but being ^^cessitated to
pass by her Father's Castle, who is Seignour of the Country, it so fell out,
that at that very instant he came forth to walk: And seeing us in the Habit of
Strangers, sent one of his Attendants to demand who and from whence we were,
and whither we went, calling us to him, and asking us the same Questions. We
answered, that we were Englishmen come from Holland, going no further in these
Parts than his own Town of Mulheim. Mulheim.
But not showing him, or paying him that worldly Homage and Respect which was
expected from us, some of his Gentlemen asked us, if we knew whom we were
before? and if we did not use to deport our selves after another manner before
Noblemen, and in the presence of Princes? We answered, we were not conscious
to our selves of any Disrespect or unseemly Behavior: one of them sharply
replied, Why don't you put off your Hats then? is it respect to stand covered
in the presence of the Sovereign of the Country? We told them it was our
practice in the presence of our Prince, who is a great King, and that we
uncovered not our Heads to any but to the Almighty God. Upon which the Graef
called us Quakers, saying unto us, We have no need of Quakers here; get you out
of my Dominions, you shall not go to my Town. We told him, that we were an
innocent People that feared God, and had goodwill toward all Men; and that we
had true Respect in our Hearts toward him, we would be glad to do him any real
Good or Service; and that the Lord had made it Matter of Conscience to us, not
to conform our selves to the vain and fruitless Customs of this World, or words
to this purpose. However he commanded some of his Soldiers to see us out of
his Territories, (to whom we also declared somewhat of the Reason and Intention
of our coming to that Place in the Fear and Love of God) who were civil to us.
We parted with much Peace and Comfort in our Hearts; and as we passed through
the Village where the Schoolmaster dwelt, (yet in the Dominions of the Graef)
we called upon him, and in the sense of God's Power and Kingdom opened to him
the Message and Testimony of Truth, which the Man received with a weighty and
serious Spirit. For under the Dominion of the Graef there is a large
Congregation of Protestants called Calvinists, of a more religious, inward and
zealous frame of Spirit, than any Body of People we met with or heard of in
Germany. After we had ended our Testimony to him, we took our leave, desiring
him not to fear, but to be of good Courage, for the Day of the Lord was
hastening upon all the Workers of Iniquity; and to them that feared his Name,
wherever scattered throughout the Earth, he would cause the Sun of
Righteousness to arise and visit them, with Healing under his Wings; and to
remember us with true Love and Kindness to the Countess, Daughter to this
Greaf, and to desire her not to be offended in us, nor to be dismayed at the
Displeasure of her Father, but eye the Lord that has visited her Soul with his
holy Light, by which she sees the Vanity of this World, and in some measure
the emptiness and deadness of the Religions that are in it; and he would
preserve her from the Power of the Wrath of Men, that works not the
Righteousness of God: So we left the Peace of Jesus with him, and walked on
toward Duysburgh, being about six English Miles from thence, and near the
eight Hour at Night. The Lord was with us, and comforted our Hearts as we
walked (without any outward Guide) through a tedious and solitary Wood (about
three Miles long) with the Joy of his Salvation, giving us to remember, and to
speak one unto another of his blessed Witnesses in the Days past, who wandered
up and down like poor Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth, their Eye being to a
City in the Heavens, whose Builder and Maker is God. Betwixt nine and ten, we
reached the Walls of Duysburgh; but the Gates were shut, and there being no
Houses without the Walls, we laid us down together in a Field, receiving both
natural and spiritual Refreshment, blessed be the Lord. 2.3. 7 th Month.
About three in the Morning we rose, sanctifying God in our hearts, that had
kept us that Night; and walked till five, often speaking one to another of the
great and notable Day of the Lord dawning upon Germany, and of several Places
of that Land that were almost ripe unto Harvest. Soon after the Clock had
struck five, they opened the Gates of the City, and we had not long got to our
Inn, Duysburgh
but it came upon me with a sweet, yet fervent Power to visit this prosecuted
Countess with a Salutation from the Love and Life of Jesus, and to open unto
her more plainly the Way of the Lord; which I did in this following Epistle.

And then follows a Letter to her Father, the Graef of Bruch and
Falckensteyn. To the Countess of Falckensteyn and Bruch at Mulheim.
My dear Friend,
JESUS, the Immaculate Lamb of God, (grieved and crucified by all the Workers
of Iniquity) illuminate thy Understanding, bless and be with thy Spirit for
ever.

Tho unknown, yet art thou much beloved for the sake of thy Desires and
Breathings of Soul after the living God: The Report whereof from some in the
same State, has made deep impressions of true Kindness upon my Spirit, and
raised in me a very singular and fervent inclination to visit thee; and the
rather, because of that Suffering and Tribulation thou have begun to endure for
the sake of thy Zeal toward God, my self having from my Childhood been both a
Seeker after the Lord, and a great Sufferer for that Cause from Parents,
Relations, Companions, and the Magistrates of this World: the remembrance
whereof has so much the more endeared thy Condition unto me; and my Soul has
often in the sweet Sense and Feeling of the holy Presence of God, and the
precious Life of his dear Son in my Heart, with great tenderness implored his
Divine Assistance unto thee, that thou may both be illuminated to do, and
made willing to suffer for his Name's sake, that the Spirit of God and of Glory
may rest upon thy Soul. And truly I can say, I felt the good Will of God, his
holy Care and heavenly Visitations of Love to extend unto thee. But one thing
more especially lay upon my Spirit to have communicated unto thee, which made
me the more pressing for an Opportunity to speak with thee, and that was this;
That thou should have a true, right and distinct Knowledge of thy own State,
and what that is which has visited thee, and in what thy Faith, Patience, Hope
and Salvation stand; where to wait, and how to find the Lord, and distinguish
between that which is born of God, and that which is not; both with respect to
thy self in all the Motions and Conceptions of thy Heart, and with respect to
others in their Religious Worships and Performances, to the end that thou
may not be deceived about the things relating to God's Kingdom, and thy
Eternal Peace; this is of greatest weight. Now know certainly, that which has
discovered unto thee the Vanities of this World, the Emptiness and the Fading
of all earthly Glory, the Blessedness of the Righteous, and the Joy of the
World that is to come, is the Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith he has
enlightened thy Soul; for in him was Life, and that Life is the Light of
Mankind, John 1.4, 9. Thus God promises by the Prophet Isaiah, to give him,
viz. for a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and for his Salvation to the ends of
the Earth. So that Christ the Light is God's Gift, and eternal Life is hid in
him; yea, all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, who is the Light of the
Gospel-Temple, true Believers, Rev. 21. And all that receive this Light into
their Hearts, and bring their Deed to it, to see in what ground they are
wrought, whether in God or in the evil One, and make this Blessed Light the
Guide of their Life, fearing with a holy Fear to do any thing that this Light
manifests to be evil, waiting and watching with a godly Care to be preserved
blameless before the Lord: I say, all such become Children of Light, and
Witnesses of the Life of Jesus. O blessed will thou be for ever, if in the way
of this Holy Light thy Mind walks to the end.

Let this that has visited thee lead thee, this Seed of Light and Life which
is the Seed of the Kingdom; yea, it is Christ the true and only Seed of God that
visited my Soul even in my young Years, that spread my Sins in order before me,
reproved me, and brought godly Sorrow upon me; making me often to weep in
solitary Places, saying within my Soul, O that I knew the Lord as I ought to
know him; O that I served him as I ought to serve him: yea, often was there a
great Concern upon my Spirit about my eternal State, mournfully desiring that
the Lord would give my Soul rest in the great Day of Trouble. Now was all the
Glory of the World as a Bubble; yea, nothing was dear to me that I might win
Christ: for the Love, Friendship and Pleasure of this World was a Burden unto
my Soul. And in this seeking-state I was directed to the Testimony of Jesus in
my own Conscience, as the true shining Light, giving me to discern the Thoughts
and Intents of my own Heart; and no fooner was I turned unto it, but I found it
to be that which from my Childhood had visited me, though I distinctly knew it
not: and when I received it in the Love of it, it showed me all that ever I
did, and reproved all the unfruitful Works of Darkness* judging me as a Man in
the Flesh, and laying Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet in
me: And as by the brightness of his coming into my Soul, he discovered the Man
of Sin there upon his Throne, so by the Breath of his Mouth, which is the
two-edged Sword of his Spirit, he destroys his Power and Kingdom; and having
made me a Witness of that Death of the Cross, he has also made me Witness of
his Resurrection. So that in good measure my Soul can now say, I am justified
in the Spirit; and though the State of Condemnation unto Death was glorious,
yet Justification unto Life was and is more glorious. In this state of the new
Man all is new; behold new Heavens and a new Earth, old things come to be done
away, the old Man with his Deeds put off. Now new Thoughts, new Desires, new
Affections, new Love, new Friendship, new Society, new Kindred, new Faith, even
that which overcomes this World through many Tribulations; and new Hope, even
that living Hope that is founded upon true Experience, which holds out all
Storms, and can see to the Glory that is invisible (to carnal Eyes) in the
midst of the greatest Tempest. Now it is the same blessed Seed of Light, Life
and Grace, that from God the Father is sown in thy Heart, and has moved and
wrought there that Change which thou have witnessed from the Spirit of this
World: turn to it, watch in it, that by it thou may be kept from all that it
discovers to be contrary to God; especially from thy self, from thy own
runnings, willings and strivings: for whatsoever is not born of the Spirit is
Flesh, and that inherits not the Kingdom of God; and all that sow to it, shall
inherit Corruption. By this thou will come to feel, not only all Sin to be a
Burden, but all thy own Righteousness, yea, all Man's Righteousness to be a
Burden. Thou will see the difference betwixt the Duties and Prayers which thou
begettest, and the Duties and Prayers which in thy true silence from all
self-activity of Mind the Lord begets in thee. O that thou might know the
Mystery of the new Birth, and what that is that can truly call God Father, even
that that is begotten of him, which lives and breaths, and has its
Beginning and Being in that Life which is hid with Christ in God, and by which
it has been quickened to the Knowledge and Worship of Christ and God; and this
thou shall not fail to know and enjoy* as thou patiently suffer the Lord to
work his own Work in thee by his own blessed Spirit. And that which will give
thee to savor and discern the right Motions and Conceptions, Duties and
Performances in thy self, from the false, will give thee to savor and discern
that which is right in others, from that which is false; that which is of God,
from that which is of Man. Have a Care of gathering of Sticks, and kindling a
Fire of thy own, and then compassing thy self about the Sparks of the Fire
which thou have kindled; for the end of this State is to lie down in Sorrow,
because the heavenly Fire is absent, which makes the Sacrifice acceptable;
yea, the Lord may stir in thy Heart, and thou may bring forth: but he that
gives to conceive, he brings to the Birth, and he gives Power to bring forth,
for without Christ we can do nothing; and blessed are they that stir not before
the Angel moves the Waters, and go not before Christ, but are led by him, and
that awaken not their Beloved till he please, in whose Hand the Times and the
Seasons are. O blessed are they, whose Eyes are opened to see him always
present, a God always nigh at Hand, whose Hearts are stayed upon his holy
Appearance in them, and they are thereby translated into his Likeness, whose
Faith and Hope is in Christ, in them the Hope of Glory.

My dear Friend, weigh these Things with a serious, retired, sweet and tender
frame of Spirit; and the God that has called me and thee, by the Light of his
dear Son, open thy Understanding to perceive the Truth as it is in Jesus, and
what is the Mystery of the Fellowship of the Saints in Light. So to the Lord I
recommend thee, the Watchman and Keeper of Israel: the Lord be thy Strength and
holy Comfort, and speak Peace to thee, and never leave thee nor forsake thee
till he has conducted thee through all Tribulations to his everlasting Kingdom
of Rest and Glory.

O dear Heart, be valiant, and stay thy self upon Christ Jesus the Everlasting
Rock, and feel him a Fountain in thy Soul; feel his Blood to cleanse, and his
Blood to drink, and his Flesh to eat; feed upon him, for God has given him for
the Life of the World.

I had seen thee had not thy Father's strange sort of severity hindered: I
confess I do not use to be so treated in my own Country, where the Lord has
raised up many hundreds of Witnesses, that he has gathered out of all Sects
and Professions, to worship him, not in their Spirits or Wills, but in his
Will, Spirit and Truth: and we are generally, after much Affliction and
Suffering, in good Esteem, even with the great Ones of this World. And this let
me add for thy particular Comfort, that though I have been a Man of great
Anguish and Sorrow, because of the Scorn and Reproach that has attended my
separation from the World, (having been taught of Jesus to turn my back upon
all the sake of that Glory that shall revealed) yet to God's Honor I (...) say
it, I have an hundred friends one, yea, God has turned (...) Hearts of my
Enemies towar^ me; he has fulfilled his Promi^^ to turn the Hearts of the
Paren^ unto the Children. For my Paren^ that once disowned me for this ble^sed
Testimony's sake, (of the Jew^^ Christian, Circumcision, and Ba^tism inward,
against the fleshly Chr^stian) have come to love me abov^ all, and have left me
all, thinkin^ they could never do and leave enoug^ for me. O how good is the
Lord yea, the Ways of his Mercy a^^ even past finding out.

Wheresore, my dear Friend, tru^^ in the Lord for ever; and the Go^ of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, the Go^ of the Prophets and of the Apostles the God of all
the Holy Martyrs o^ Jesus, illuminate, fortify and preserv^ thee steadfast, that
in the end thou may receive the Reward of Life and Eternal Salvation; to
who^ be Glory, and to the Lamb tha^ sits upon the Throne, one God and one Lord,
blessed and magnified for ever and ever, Amen.

Thy great and faithful Love for the blessed and holy Truth's sake. W. Penn.
Duysburgh 13 th of 7 th Month S.N. 1677. P.S. My dear Brethren and Companions
G K. and B F. with me salute thee in the dear Love of God. The enclosed I
received from a religious young Woman at Franckfort: We have a blessed
Opportunity in this Town with some that have a desire after the Lord, in which
we are abundantly comforted. We have just now received thy Message and
Salutation from H.S. which has exceedingly refreshed and revive^ us, for our
trouble wa^ not for our selves, but for thee, and w^ hope our Love will not
turn (...) thy Disadvantage, for we men^^^ned nothing of thy Name, nor the Name
of any other Person, onel^ that we desired to speak with the Minister of
Mulheim, and that wa^ only to the Soldier. The Lord made us a good Bed in the
Fields* and we were very well satisf^^^* We are going this Afternoon out of the
Town toward Wesel, from thence to Cleve, and thence to Herwerden (the Lord
will^^^) s^ farewell in the Lord.



(...) To the Graef or Earl of Bruck and Falckensteyn.
Friend,
I Wish thy Salvation, and the Lord reward thee Good for the Evil that thou
shewedst unto me and my Friends the last night, if it be his Will. But since
thou art a mortal Man, one that must give an Account, in common with all, to
the Immortal God, let me a little expostulate with thee.

By what Law on Earth are Men, not scandalous, under no Proscription, harmless
Strangers about lawful Occasions, and Men not Vagabonds, but of good Quality in
their own Country; stopped, menaced, sent back with Soldiers, and that at
Sunset, exposed to the Night in an unknown Country, and therefore forced to
lie in the Fields: I say, by what Law are we judged, yea, thus punished before
heard: Is this the Jus Gentium or Germanicum, Natural or Christianum? Oh!
Where Is Nature? Where Is Civility? Where Is Hospitality? But where is Christianity
all this while? Well, but we are Quakers; Quakers, What Is that for a Name? Is
there a Law of the Empire against that Name? No, Did we own it? No, but if we
had, the letters of that Name neither make up Drunkard, Whore-master, Thief,
Murderer nor Traitor: Why so odious then? What harm has it done? Why could
Jews pass just before us, that have crucified Christ, and not Quakers that
never crucified him; but Ignorance is as well the Mother of Persecution as
Devotion, and the false Christian, and the false Jew have but one Father.

But Argumentum ad hominem, my Friend bear with me a little: Art thou a
Christian? How can thou be rude, uncivil, and persecute then? Thou art to
love Enemies, not abuse Friends, harmless Strangers. Well, but this Life is
dead, this Doctrine antiquated, Jesus Christ turned out of doors, I perceive:
What art thou for a Christian? A Lutheran? Yes, Can thou so lately forget the
Practices of the Papists, and with what Abhorrence thy Ancestors declared
against such sort of Entertainment? Were not they despised, mocked and
persecuted? And are their Children treading in the steps of their old Enemies?
Friend, it is not reformed Words, but a reformed Life that will stand thee
instead: it is not to live the life of the Unregenerate, Worldly-minded, and
Wicked under the Profession of the Saint's Words, that will give an Entrance
into God's rest: Be not deceived, such as thou Sowest, such must thou Reap in
the Day of the Lord. Thou art not come to the Berean-state that tried all
things, and therefore not noble in the Christian sense; the Bereans were noble,
for they judged not before Examination. And for thy saying, We want no Quakers
here, I say, under favor you do, for a true Quaker is one that trembles at
the Word of the Lord, that works out his Salvation with fear and trembling,
and all the Days of his appointed Time waits in the Light and Grace of God
till his great Change comes, and that takes up the daily Cross to his Will
and Lusts, that he might do the Will of God manifested to him by the Light of
Jesus in his Conscience, and according to the holy Precepts and Examples in the
holy Scriptures of Truth, laid down by Jesus, and his followers, for the Ages
to come. Yea, he is one that loves his Enemies, rather than fears them; that
Blesses those that Curse him, and prays for those that despitefully treat
him; as God knows we do for thee. And O that thou were such a Quaker! Then
would thou Rule for God, and act in all things as one that must give an
account to God for the Deeds done in the Body, whether Good or Evil. Then would
Temperance, Mercy, Justice, Meekness, and the Fear of the Lord dwell in thy
Heart, and in thy Family and Country. Repent, I exhort thee, and consider thy
latter End, for thy Days are not like to be many in this World, therefore mind
the things that make for thy Eternal Peace, least Distress come upon thee as an
armed Man, and there be none to deliver thee. I am

Thy Well-wishing Friend W.P.
Duysburgh 3d. 7th. m. 1677. S.V.


This having done, we went to Dr. Mastricht's to inform him of what had past,
who though of a kind Disposition, and very friendly to us, yet seemed surprised
with fear (the Disease of this Country) crying out, What will become of this
poor Countess! Her Father has called her Quaker a long time, behaving himself
very severely to her, but now he will conclude she is one indeed, and he will
lead her a lamentable Life: I know (said he) you care not for suffering, but
she is to be pitied: We told him that we both loved her, and pitied her, and
could lay down our Lives for her, as Christ has done for us, in the Will of
God, if we could thereby do her good, but that we had not mentioned her Name,
neither was the Letter, that he gave us to her, so much as seen or known of her
Father. But still he feared that our Carriage would incense the Graef so much
the more against both his Daughter, and all those serious and inquiring People
up and down the Country: We answered with an earnestness of Spirit, That they
had minded the Incensings and Wrath of Men too much already, and true Religion
would never spring or grow under such fears, and that it was time for all that
felt any thing of the Work of God in their Hearts to cast away the slavish fear
of Man, and to come forth in the boldness of the true Christian life; yea, that
Sufferings break and make way for greater Liberty, and that God was wiser and
stronger than Man. We asked him if there were any in that City who enquired more
diligently after the way of the Lord, he recommended us (as we had already been
informed in another place) to the Family of the Praetor, or chief Governor of
the Town, whose Wife and Sister more especially were seeking after the best
things: So we parted with him in love, and by the help of his Daughter, were
conducted to this Family. We had not been long there, before a Schoolmaster of
Dusseldorp, and withal a Minister came in enquiring after us, having h^ard at
Mulheim where he preached the day before to the People, or else by the way, of
our attempt to visit that place, and the Entertainment we received at the hands
of the G^^ef; He sat down with us, and though we had already a sweet
Opportunity, yet feeling the Power to rise, the Meeting renewed: And O
magnified be the Name of the Lord, he witnessed to our Testimony abundantly in
all their Hearts and Consciences, who were broken into much tenderness, and
certainly there is a blessed Power and Zeal stirring in that young Man, yea he
is very near the Kingdom. So we took our Leave of them, leaving the Lord's
Peace and Blessing upon them. It was now something past the 12th. Hour of the
Day. In the way to our Lodging we met a Messenger from the Countess, a pretty
young tender Man near to the Kingdom, who saluted us in her Name with much
love, telling us, That she was much grieved at the Ente^tainment of her Father
toward us, advising us not to expose our selves to such Difficulties and
Hardships, for it would grieve her Heart, that any that came in the Love of God
to visit her, should be so severely handled; for at some he sets his Dogs, upon
others he puts his Soldiers to beat them: But what shall I say, That it self,
must not hinder you from doing good, said the Countess, We answered him, that
his Message was joyful to us, that she had any regard to us, and that she was
not offended with us: We desired the Remembrance of our kind Love unto her, and
that he would let her know that our Concern was not for our selves, but for
her: We invited him to eat with us, but he told us he was an Inhabitant of
Meurs, and was in haste to go home; so we briefly declared our Principle and
Mes^^ge, recommending him to Christ the true Light in his Conscience, and
parted: So we went home to Dinner, having neither eaten nor drank since
first day Morning, and having lain out all Night in the Field. We had no sooner
got to our Inn, but the Man was constrained to come after us, and sat down with
us, and enquired concerning our Friends; their Rise, Principles and Progress,
and in all things that he desired satisfaction about, he declared himself
satisfied. Dinner being done, and all cleared, we departed that City, being
about the fourth Hour in the Afternoon, and for want of Accommodation were
forced to walk on foot 8 English Miles to a Town called Holton, Holton.
where we rested that Night.

The next Morning we set out for Wesel and got thither at Noon. 7th. Month.
3.4. Wesel.
The first thing we did (as had been our Custom) was to enquire who was worthy,
particularly for two Persons recommended to us by the Countess of Horns, that
lives with the Princess Elizabeth. But upon enquiry, we found one of them was
gone to Amsterdam with his Wife, who had been formerly a Preacher, but being
conscienciously dissatisfied with his own Preaching, laid it down, and is now
in a seeking State. But in lied of him we found out three more* with the other
Person that had been recommended to us. We bespoke a Meeting amongst them after
Dinner; which ac^ordingly we had at a Woman's House of good Note in the Town*
who told us, That she had been long in a solitary Estate, dissatisfied with the
Religions generally professed in that Country, waiting for Salvation, and she
hoped that now the time was come, and that we were the Messengers of it.

The Lord was with us in the Meeting, and their Hearts were opened by the Word
of God, to receive our Testimony as glad Tidings of Salvation. Meeting being
done, we immediately returned to our Lodging, desiring we might see them
together in the same place the next Morning to take our Leave of them, 7 th.
Month. 4.5.
to which they readily assented.

Next Morning we came, and had a precious Meeting with them, and there were
some present that were not there the Night before: So we left them in much
Love, and went to our Inn, where after having refresht our selves we went to
Rees, Rees.
where we met with a Counselor of Gelderlandt, with whom we had a good
Opportunity to declare the Testimony of Jesus, who received it, and parted with
us in much kindness.

From thence we went to Emrick, Emrick.
and there called upon an eminent Baptist-teacher, recommended to us by one of
Wesel, we spent some time with him, opening to him the way of Life, as in the
Light it is manifested to all that love and obey the Light, and of that more
spiritual and pure Ministry that from the Living Word of God is received by
many true Ministers in this Day; the Man was somewhat full of Words, but we
felt the living Visitation of the Love of God reached to him, and so we left
him, making all the haste we could to get to Cleve that night, Cleve*
which accordingly we did, though late, being forced to walk one third-part of
the way on foot.

That Night, notwithstanding, one of us went to a certain Lady, to whom we had
Recommendations from the Princess, and that was particularly known to one of
us, informing her that we were come to that City, desiring to know what time
next day we might give her a Visit; she appointed Eight in the Morning. About
that time we went to see her, 7th. Month. 5.6.
she received us (considering her Quality and Courtship) far from any
appearance of Offense at our Deportment: We told her our Message and Visit was
to those of that City, that had any Inclinations or Desires, Hunger or Thirst
after the true and living Knowledge of God; for that end we had left our own
Country, and had wandered up and down in several parts of Germany; she told us,
That some there were that searched after God, but the feared the Name of Quaker
would make them shy, because they were called Quakers themselves by People of
the same Profession, only for being more serious and retired in their
Conversation. We replied, That it was an honor to the Name, that all Sobriety
throughout Germany was called by it; this ought to make the Name less odious,
yea it will make the way easier for those that are truly called so, or that are
Quakers indeed; it will take off much of the wonder, and, it may be, of the
Severity of the places where we come, that the Name is gone before us, and has
received a Dewlling Place in their Towns and Cities. In fine, to all such God
had committed to us the Word of Life to preach, and such we seek out in all
places where the Lord brings us; and hitherto we can say it to the praise of
our God, he has vindicated our Service and Testimony, by his own blessed
Power, shed abroad in their hearts to whom we have been sent.

So she told us she would send for an Attorney at Law, one that was more than
ordinarily eminent, having deserted the Church, and being therefore reproached
with the Name of Quaker.

In this Interval we had close discourse with her, a Woman certainly of great
Wit, high Notions, and very ready Utterance; so that it was hard for us to
obtain a true silence, a state in which we could reach to her. But through some
travel of Spirit more than ordinary, we had (...) sweet time of refreshment,
and the Witness was raised in her, and we really and plainly beheld a true
Nobility, yea that which was sensible of our Testimony, and did receive it.

By this time the person she sent for came, and a blessed sweet time we had,
for the power and presence of the Lord our staff and strength, into which our
eye has been throughout all our travels, that we might only be acceptable in
that, plenteously appeared amongst us (the Lord have the glory of his own work)
both confessing to the truth of what had been said, and the Attorney to the
living sense in which the truth had been declared. We would have returned to
our Inn to eat, according as we had appointed in the morning, but she laid a
kind of violent hands upon us, and necessitated us to stay and eat with her,
which we did. And we had no sooner sat down, but her Brother in Law, a Man of
quality and employment in that Court of the Elector of Brundenburg came in, who
dined with us. As we sat at Meat, we had a good meeting, for the time was much
taken up about the Things of God, either in answering their questions, or our
ministering to them about the true Christian nature and life; in all which her
Brother behaved himself with great sweetness and respect. After Dinner we took
our Ch^istian leave of them in the fear of God, recommending unto them the
Light of Christ Jesus, that brings all that receive it into the one Spirit, to
live in holy Peace and Concord together, particularly and alone speaking to the
Lady, and the Attorney what was upon us to their States.

And so we departed, and soon after took Wagon for Nimwegen, Nimwegen.
where arriving about the 7th hour that night, we immediately took Wagon for
Utrecht, Utrecht. 7 th. Month, 6.7.
and got thither about the 10th hour next morning. We hear there is a People in
that City, but had not now time to visit them, referring it to another
opportunity.

About the first hour in the afternoon G. K. and B. F. took Wagon for
Rotterdam, and I took Wagon for Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
where I came safely that night about six in the evening* and I found Friends
generally well* though it is a sickly time in thi^ Country. The Meeting House
i^ much enlarged, and there is a fres^ enquiry among many people afte^ Truth,
and great desires to hear the Testimony and Declaration of it. I also
understand that dear G. F. is returned from Frederickstadt an^ Hamburgh into
Frieslandt, whether T. R. and I. Y. are gone from this City to meet with him*
he has had a hard time of travel with respect to the Weather, yet I hear is in
good health through the Lord's power that has kept him.

This day at night (being the seventh day of the week) came John Hill from
Frieslandt to the House of G. D. in Amsterdam. 7 th. Month, 7.8.


The next day (being the first day of the week) we had a blessed and large
Meeting, 7 th. Month. 1.9.
larger then ordinary, because a great addition of room since our Journey into
Germany; indeed there was a great appearance of sober professing people, yea
several of the chief of the Baptists, as Galenus and Companions the Lord's
heavenly Power was over all, and the Meeting blessedly ended about the fourth
hour.

That night after Supper, having taken my leave in a sweet little Meeting among
Friends, Horn.
I took Boat for Horn ( P. Hendrick's accompanying me) about the seventh hour
at night, 7 th Month. 2.10.
and got thither about two in the morning; where lying down till about six, we
took Wagon for Enckhuysen, Enckhuysen.
we came thither a little after eight in the morning; where having refresht our
selves, about the 9th hour we took Ship for Workum in Urieslandt, Workum.
and arrived about one; and thence immediately took Wagon for Harlingen,
Harlingen.
where we arrived about six, there we met with dear G. F. J T. I Y. T R. J C.
and his Wife.

7 th. Month. 3.11.
The next day we had two blessed meetings; one amongst Friends, being the first
monthly meeting that was settled for Frieslandt, Groningen and Embden; the other
a public meeting, where resorted both Baptists, Collegians and others; and
among the rest, a Doctor of Physic and a Presbyterian Priest, all sat with
great attention and sobriety, but the Priest and Doctor more especially: The
Priest having a Lecture-Sermon to Preach that evening, went away; but
notwithstanding speedily returned, G.F. still speaking; but as a Man in pain to
be gone, yet willing to stay, sat at the door till G.F. had done, and then
stood up, and pulling off his Hat, looking up to Heaven, in a solemn manner,
and with a loud voice, spoke to this purpose: The Almighty, the All-wise, the
O^^ipotent great God, and his Son Jesus Christ, who is blessed for ever and
ever, confirm his Word that has been spok^n this day: Apologizing, that he
could not longer stay, for that he was a Minister of the Reformed Religion, and
was now going to Preach, where all that would come, should be welcome; and so
left the Meeting. The Physician also was called away, but returned and stayed
till the Meeting ended: Just as the Meeting ended, came the Priest again, who
said in the hearing of some Friends, That he had made his Sermon much shorter
than ordinary, that he might enjoy the rest of the Meeting. At night came the
Physician to see me, who, after a serious and Christian discourse, expressing
great satisfaction in most things relating to Friends, left me; withal telling
me, That if I had not been to go the 4 th hour next morning, he would either
have stayed longer with me, or come again: He also remembered the Priest's Love
to us, and told me, That if it had not been for fear of giving offense, or
coming too much under the Observation of the People, he would have come to have
seen us; adding, That it was great pity, that this People had not printed their
Principles to the World: To which the Doctor answered, That he had, some of our
Books, and he would lend him them. Blessed be the Lord his precious Work goes
on, and his Power is over all: It being now the tenth hour at night, I took my
leave of G.F. and Friends.

This day it came upon me to write a Letter to Joanna Eleonora Marlane, the
noble young Woman at Franckfort. Dear Friend J. E. M.
MY dear and tender Love which God has raised in my Heart by his living Word
to all Mankind (but more especially unto those in whom he has begotten an holy
hunger and thirst after him) saluteth thee: and amongst those of that place
where thou live, the remembrance of thee, with thy companions, is most
particulary and eminently at this time brought before me; and the sense of your
open-heartedness, simplicity and sincere love to the testimony of Jesus, that
by us was delivered unto you, has deeply engaged my heart toward you, and
often raised in my soul heavenly breathings to the God of my life, that he
would keep you in the daily sense of that divine life, which then affected you;
for this know, it was the life in your selves that so sweetly visited you by
the Ministry of life through us. Wherefore love the Divine Life and Light in
your selves; be retired and still; let that holy seed move in all heavenly
things before you move; for no one receives any thing (that truly profits)
but what he receives from above; thus said John to his Disciples. Now that,
that stirs in your hearts, draws you out of the World, s^ayeth you to all
the vainglory, and pleasure and empty worships that are in it; this is from
above the heavenly seed of God, pure and incorruptible, that is come down from
Heaven to make you heavenly, that in heavenly places you may dwell and witness
with the Saints of old, this heavenly Treasure in earthen vessels. O stay your
minds upon the appearance of Jesus in you, in whose light you shall see light;
it will make you of a weighty considering spirit more and more, that you may
see how the mystery of iniquity has wrought, and how mankind is corrupted in
all things, and what part you yet have, that belongs not to the paradise of
God, that you may lay it all down at the feet of Jesus and follow him, who is
going up and down, doing good to all that believe in his Name. So possess your
Souls in the sensible feeling of his daily divine visits, shinings and
breathings upon your spirits, and wait diligently and watch circumspectly, lest
the enemy surprise you, or your Lord come at unawares upon you, and you be
unprepared to receive his sweet and precious visitations; that so those holy
beginnings, which thou art a witness of with thy companions, may not be lost,
or as if they had never been, but that you may from day to day feel the growth
of his light, life, power and kingdom in your souls, that you may be able to
say, the kingdom of God is come, yea it is given to the Saints. And what I say
unto one, I say unto all that received our Testimony in that City, to whom thou
may give, if thou please, the remembrance of my dear Love, who travel in
the Spirit for their redemption, that they may be brought into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God: particularly salute me the young Woman, that met
with us at thy Lodging. The Lord Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, dwell
amongst you, keep your hearts steadfast in his holy Light, without wavering,
all the days of your appointed time, until your great and last change shall
come, when he will receive his own Sheep into his own everlasting Kingdom from
the power of the Foxes ai^d Wolves, and all the devouring Beasts and Birds of
prey, when he will wipe away all tears from their eyes, and sighing and
sorrowing shall be no more, and when it shall be said, There is no more death,
no more night, no more time.

So dear I. E. M. know, that the Lord has brought us well to Amsterdam, not
without good service by the way; for at Cullen we had a precious Meeting, and
were received with much gladness of heart: We also went to Duysburg, and from
thence toward Mullheim, being the first day of the week, hoping to get an
opportunity with the Countess of Bruch, and to deliver thy Letter; but her
Father (who is a cruel and severe Man) meeting us near his Castle, stopped us;
and after some little time, finding what we were, said, There wanted no Quakers
there, and sent us with some of his Soldiers out of his Territory; it was
about Sunset, so that we were forced to return toward Duysburg; but the Gates
of the City being shut, and there being no Houses without it, we were forced to
lie in the Fields all night, where the Lord made us a good and comfortable Bed;
we told the Graef at parting, we were Men that feared the Almighty God, we
desired the good of all Men, and we came not thither for any evil design, but
he would not hear; the Lord, if he pleases, forgive him. Nevertheless we had a
good Meeting at Duysburg, where we had our heart's desire, the blessed power
and life of God making its own way in the hearts of those that heard our
Testimony: I also writ a large and tender Letter to the Countess, and received
a sweet and loving Message from her; and I have great hopes that all things
will work for the best.

From Duysburg we went to Wesel, Wesel.
where we inquired out who was worthy, where we found four or five separated
from all Congregations, waiting for the Consolation of Israel, with whom we had
two precious Meetings; and leaving the peace of Jesus with them, went to
Emrick, where we visited the chief Baptist-teacher, who confessed to our
Testimony, and received us lovingly: We directed him to that gift of God in
himself, that pure and eternal Word in the heart, that he might know the pure
Ministry of that, from the Ministry of Man's Spirit, which cannot profit or
give life to the Soul. From thence we went to Cleve, where at a Lady's House
belonging to the Court, we had a precious Meeting, and we found some that had
deserted the public Ministry, as not being anointed of God to preach, neither
knowing by a true experience the way and travel of the new birth, but are made
and maintained by Men, we sounded the joyful Gospel amongst them. And from
thence by the way of Nimmegen and Utrecht we came the last sixth day to
Amsterdam, which was the 7 th of the 7 th Month. This last first day I had a
great and blessed Meeting at Amsterdam almost of every Quality and Religion;
the Lord's heavenly Power (that is quickening People into a living sense of him,
that they may say the Lord lives, and he lives in me) reigned that day over
all. In the Evening I took Boat for Horn, and from thence came last night
(being the second day of the Week) to this City of Harlingen, where we met with
some of our Brethren, that had been up at Hamburgh and Frederickstadt; and this
day we are to have two Meetings in this City, the one among our Friends, the
other public for the Town. It is upon me to visit de Labadie 's People, that
they might know him in themselves, in whom their Salvation stands; for these
simple people are to be pitied. From thence I think to visit Leeuwaerden,
Groningen, Embden, Bremen, Herwerden, Wesel, Emrick, Cleve, Utrecht, and so to
return to Amsterdam, the Lord enabling me by his Power.

This arises in my Heart to thee, give not thy Bread to Dogs, spend not thy
Portion, feed not the Serpent, neither hearken to him; abide with Jesus, and he
will abide with thee, that thou may grow in Wisdom and in Righteousness
through the Cross that crucifieth thee to the World, and the World to thee. So
in the Love, which over-cometh the World, that is divine and from above, and
leads all thither that receive it into their hearts, I take my leave of thee,
with thy Companions, and all the rest of that City known to us, remaining

Thy faithful Friend, and the Lord's Day-labourer. W.P.
Harlingen 11. 7th. Month, 1677.



Next Morning about the 4th hour I took Boat for Leeuwaerden, J. Claus who had
been at Frederickstadt with G.F. went with me. G.F. J.Y. and T.R. with P.
Hendricks returned that day toward Amsterdam.

Leeuwaerden.
At Leeuwaerden we came about 9, and began the Meeting about 10; which we
enjoyed with peace and refreshment, several being there (as in other places)
that were never at a Meeting before.

The Meeting being done, and having refresht our selves with food, we took
Wagon for Wiewart, Wiewart.
the Mansion House of the Family of the Somerdykes, where De Labadie's Company
resideth, it being strong upon my Spirit to give them a Visit. We got thither
about 5, and as we were walking over a Field to the House, we met a young Man
of that Company who conducted us in. I asked for Ivon the Pastor, and Anna Maria
Schurmans: Ivon presently came with his Co-pastor who received us very civilly,
however they seemed shy of letting me speak with A. M. S. objecting her
Weakness, Age, taking Physic, etc. but putting them in mind how unhandsomely I
was used at Herwerden six Years a-go, by de Labadie their Father, who, though I
came a great Journey to visit him and his People, suffered me not to speak with
them; they presently complied, and went in to let her know, that such a Person
desired to speak with her, and quickly returned, desiring me to come in: But
foreseeing my time would be too short for my Message, the Sun being near
setting, and having 2 English Miles of unknown way to our Lodging on foot,
desired them that they would give an Opportunity the next Morning, which they
readily complied with. So I took my leave of them, who in a Friendly manner
brought us a little on our way. That night a great weight was upon my Spirit,
and especially the next Morning, yet my Faith was in the power of God, and I
had a plain sight, that I should have a good service among them, however I
should clear my Conscience, and my Peace should rest with me.

7 th. Month. 5.13.
The next Morning I returned to them, and John Claus along with me; so soon as
we came, we were brought into A.M. Shurman's Chamber, where also was with her
one of the three Somerdikes.

This A. M. S. aforesaid is an ancient Maid, above 60 Years of Age, of great
Note and Fame for Learning in Languages and Philosophy, and has obtained a
considerable place among the most learned Men of this Age. The Somerdikes are
Daughters to a Nobleman of the Hague, people of great Breeding and
Inhe^^^ances. These, with several other Persons, being affected with the
zealous Declamation of de Labadie, against the dead and formal Churches of the
World, and awakened to seek after a more spiritual Fellowship and Society,
separated themselves from the common Calvinist Churches, and followed him in
the way of a refined Independency. They are a serious, plain People, and are
come nearer to Friends; as in Silence in Meetings, Women-speaking, Preaching by
the Spirit, Plainness in Garb, and Furniture in their Houses than formerly, and
more than any other People I know. With these two we had the Company of the two
Pastors, and a Doctor of Physic: After some silence, I proposed this Question
to them, What was it that induced them to separate from the common Way they
formerly lived in? I desired them that they would be pleased to be plain and
open with me, as to the ground of their separation, for I came not to cavil,
but in the Christian Spirit to be informed.

Upon this Ivon the chief Pasto^ gave us the History of de Labadie'^ Education,
how he was bred among the Jesuits and Deserted them, and embraced the
Protestant Religion, and finally of his great Satisfaction with the Protestant
Churches of France, and that if God would not give them a purer Church, they
three would set down by themselves, resolving never more to mix themselves
among the Babylonish Assemblies of the World, adding several solemn Appeals
concerning the Simplicity and Integrity of their Hearts in these things.

Ivon having done, A. M. Shurmans began in this manner, I find my self
constrained to add a short Testimony. She told us of her former life, of her
pleasure in Learning, and her love to the Religion she was brought up in, but
she confessed she knew not God or Christ all that while; and though from a
Child God had visited her at times, yet she never felt such a pow^rful Stroke
as by the Ministry of de Labadie: She saw her learning to be vanity, and her
Religion like a Body of Death; she resolved to despise the Shame, desert her
former way of Living and Acquaintance, and to join her self with this little
Family that was retired out of the World, among whom she desired to be found a
living Sacrifice, offered up entirely to the Lord. She spoke in a very serious
and broken Sense, not without some trembling; These are but short hints of what
she said.

After she had done, One of the Somerdikes began, in a very reverent and
weighty frame of Mind, and in a Sense that very well suited her Contempt of the
World: She told us how often she had mourned from her young Years because she
did not know the Lord, as she desired; often saying within her self, If God
would make known to me his Way, I would trample upon all the Pride and Glory of
the World. She earnestly expressed the frequent Anguish of Spirit she had because
of the Deadness and Formality of the Christians she was bred among, saying to
her self, O the Pride, O the Lusts, O the vain pleasures in which Christians
live! Can thi^ be the way to Heaven? Is this the way to Glory? Are these
followers of Christ* O no! O God, Where is thy little Flock! Where is thy
little Family that will live entirely to thee, that will follow thee? Make me
one of that number; and when the Servant of the Lord de Labadie came into
Holland, I, among others, had a curiosity to hear him, and, among several
others, was deeply affected by him. He spoke the very Thoughts of my heart;
me-thought my heart was pricked when I heard him, and I resolved by the grace
of God to abandon all the Glory and Pride of this World to be one of those that
should set down with him in a separation from the vain and dead Worships of
this World. I count my self happy that I ever met with him, and these Pastors,
who seek not themselves but the Lord; and we are a Family that live together in
love; of one Soul, and one Spirit, entirely given up to serve the Lord; and
this is the greatest Joy in the World.

After her du Lignon, the other Pastor, gave us also an account of his
Inducement to embrace J. de Labadie, but not so lively.

After him the Doctor of Physic, that had been bred for a Priest, (but
voluntarily refused that Calling) expressed himself after this manner: I can also
bear my Testimony in the presence of God, that tho I lived in as much
Reputation at the University, as any of my Colleagues or Companions, and was
well reputed for Sobriety and Honesty, yet I never felt such a living sense of
God, as when I heard the Servant of the Lord de Labadie; adding, The first Day
I heard him, I was so struck and affected, that I can truly say, through the
good Grace of God, and the Conduct of the Holy Spirit, it was to me as the Day
of my Salvation, he did so lovingly touch my heart with the sense of the true
Christian Worship: Upon which I forsook the University, and resolved to be one
of this Family; and this I can say in the fear of the Lord.

P. Ivon concludes, This is what we have to say concerning the Work of God
amongst us.

All this while I minded not so much their Words, as I felt and had Unity, with
a measure of divine Sense that was upon them: Certainly the Lord has been
amongst them; yea, I had a living Sense in my heart that somewhat of the Breath
of Life had breathed upon them; and though they were in great mixtures, yet
that God's love was toward them.

After some silence I began on this wise: I come not to judge you, but to visit
you; not to quarrel or dispute, but to speak of the things of God's Kingdom,
and I have no prejudice, but great love and regard in my heart toward you:
Wherefore hear me with Christian patience and tenderness. I do confess and
believe that God has touched your hearts with his divine finger, and that his
work is amongst you; that it was his Spirit that gave you a sight of the vanity
and folly of this World, and that has made you sensible of the dead Religions
that are in it. It Is this Sense I love and honor; and I am so far from
undervaluing or opposing this tender sense I feel upon you, that this is it I
am come to visit, and you for the love of it: And as for the reproaches that
may attend you on the score of your separation, with all the Reports that
therefore go concerning you, they are what I respect you for, being well
acquainted with the nature and practice of this World toward those that retire
out of it. Now since I have, with patience, and I can truly say with great
satisfaction, heard your account of your Experiences, give me the like
Christian freedom to tell you mine, to the end you may have some sense of the
Work of God in me: For those who are come to any measure of a divine Sense,
they are as looking-glasses to each other, seeing themselves in each other, as
face answers face in a glass.

Here I began to let them know, how and when the Lord first appeared unto me,
which was about the 12th. Year of my Age, Anno 1656. How at times, betwixt that
and 15, the Lord visited me; and the divine Impressions he gave me of himself:
Of my Persecution at Oxford; how the Lord sustained me in the midst of that
hellish darkness and debauchery; of my being banished the College, the bitter
Usage I underwent when I returned to my Father; whipping, beating and turning
out of doors in 1662, of the Lord's dealings with me in France, and in the time
of the great Plague in London: In fine, the deep sense he gave me of the Vanity
of this World, of the Irreligiousness of the Religions of it: Then of my
Mournful and Bitter Cries to him that he would show me his own way of Life and
Salvation, and my Resolutions to follow him whatever Reproaches or Sufferings
should attend me, and that with great reverence and brokenness of Spirit, How
after all this the glory of the world over-took me, and I was even ready to
give up my self unto, it, seeing no such thing as the Primitive Spirit and
Church on the Earth, and being ready to faint concerning my hope of the
restitution of all things; and that it was at this time that the Lord visited
me with a certain sound and testimony of his eternal Word, through one of those
the World calls a Quaker. I related to them the bitter Mockings and Scornings
that fell upon me, the Displeasure of my Parents, the Invectiveness and Cruelty
of the Priests, the strangeness of all my Companions, what a Sign and Wonder
they made of me; but, above all, that great Cross of resisting and watching
against my own Inward vain Affections and Thoughts. Here I had a fine
opportunity to speak of the Mystery of Iniquity and Ungodliness in the Root and
ground, and to give them an account of the Power and Presence of God, which
attended us in our public Testimonies and Sufferings; after an indirect manner
censuring their Weaknesses, by declaring and commending the contrary practices
among Friends, too large to be here related. And notwithstanding all my
Sufferings and Trials by Magistrates, Parents, Companions, and, above, all from
the Priests of the false Religions in the World, the Lord has preserved me to
this day, and has given me an hundred fold in this World, as well as the
assurance of Life everlasting: Informing them of the tenderness of my Father to
me before, and at his death, and how, through patience and long-suffering, all
opposition was conquered: Then beginning my Exhortation unto them, which was on
this wise.

That therefore since God had given me and them a divine Sense of him, our Eye
might be to him, and not to Man, that we might come more into a silence of our
selves, and a growth into that heavenly Sense. That this was the Work of the
true Ministry, not to keep People to themselves, ever teaching them, but to
turn them to God, the new Covenant-teacher, and to Christ the great
Gospel-teacher. Thus, John did, and thought it no dishonor, that they left him
to go to Christ. Behold the Lamb of God, says he, that takes away the Sins of
the World! And even John's Disciples left him to follow Christ: Nay, John
testifies of himself, That he was to decrease, and Christ was to increase.
Wherefore I pressed them to have their eye to Christ that takes away the Sin,
that is from Heaven, heavenly; to see that he increase in them. Yea, that
henceforward they should know no Man after the Flesh, no, not Christ himself.
That their knowledge of* and regard and fellowship one with another, would
stand in the Revelation of the Son of God in them, which is God's great Prophet
by whom God speaks in these latter days: And if their Ministers be true
Ministers, they will count it their glory to give way to Christ, and that they
decrease, and Christ increase; that the instrument gives way to him that uses
it, the Servant to the Lord; which though it seems to detract from the
Ministers, yet it was and is the glory of a true Minister, that God and Christ
should be all in all, and that his Will should be fulfilled: For the day of the
Lord God was come, and all People must look to him for Salvation: That all
People must now come to keep God's great Sabbath, to rest from mere Man, and
the Spirit of Man, and all Men's thoughts, words and works; and that if they
were true Believers, they were, at least, entering into their rest. I closely
recommended that to them, that they might not be of those that begin in the
Spirit, and end in the Flesh; for that those that should do so, and thereby
break God's Sabbath Day, should be stoned to death by the Stone which is cut
out of the Mountain without hands; yea, that should fall upon them as a
Millstone and grind them to Powder. Therefore let Christ have his honor, let
him preach and speak among you, and in you, and you in him, and by him only to
sigh, groan, pray, preach, sing, and not otherwise, least Death come over you;
for thereby the Apostasy came in, by their going before Christ, instead of
Christ going before them. And wait in the Light and Spirit of Judgment that
has visited you, that all may be wrought out that is not born of God, so will
you come to be born of the incorruptible Seed of the Word of God that lives
and abides for ever. That you may be a holy Pri^sthood, that offers up a
living Sacrifice with God's heavenly fire, that God may have his honor in you
all and through you all by Christ Jesus. And turning my self toward the
Somerdikes, with a serious and tender Spirit I thus expressed my self: That you
should be Pilgrims in the Inheritance of your Father, I have a deep and
reverent sense of: O that you might dwell with him for ever, and exalt him that
has so visited you, with whom are the Rewards of Eternal Blessedness!

So I left the blessing and peace of Jesus among them, departing in the love
and peace of God; and I must needs say, they were beyond expectation, tender
and respectfull to us; all of them coming with us but the ancient A. M. S. (who
is not able to walk) to the outward Door* giving us their Hands in a friendly
manner, expressing their great satisfaction in our Visit; and being come by the
Porch, and meeting several persons of the Family, I was moved to turn about,
and to exhort them, in the presence of the rest, to keep to Christ, that had
given them a sense of the Spirit of this World, and had raised desires in them
to be delivered from it, and to know no Man after the Flesh, but to have their
Fellowship in Christ, Union and Communion with God, and one with another, that
all their Worship and Performances might stand in him, that he might be all in
all; desiring that the Lord might keep them in his fear all the days of their
appointed time, that so they might serve him in their generation in his own
universal Spirit to his glory, who is blessed for ever.

The two Pastors and the Doctor came with us a Field's length, where we took
Wagon; and the chiefest of them took occasion to ask me, If the Truth rose not
first amongst a poor, illiterate and simple sort of people; I told him yes,
that was our comfort, and that we owed it not to the Learning of this World:
Then, said he, let not the Learning of this World be used to defend that which
the Spirit of God has brought forth; for Scholars now coming among you, will
be apt to mix School-learning amongst your simpler and purer Language, and
thereby obscure the brightness of the Testimony: I told him it was good for us
all to have a care of our own Spirits, Words and Works, confessing what he said
had weight in it; telling him, it was our care to write and speak according to
the divine Sense, and no humane Invention.

The Lord comforted my Soul in this service; yea, all that is within me
magnified his holy Name, because of his blessed Presence that was with us! O
let my Soul trust in the Lord, and confide in him for ever; O let me dwell and
abide with him that is faithful and true, and blessed for ever-more! So in a
very sober and serious manner we parted, being about the 12th. hour at noon:
This night about ten we got to Lippenhusen, Lippenhusen.
where there is a little Meeting of Friends, being about 25 English Miles.

7 th. Month. 6.14.
The next morning we had a blessed Meeting among Friends, many of the World came
in, were very serious and well-affected; one whereof was a Magistrate of the
Place: The Lord pleads his own Cause, and crowns his own Testimony with his own
Power. There is like to be a fine Gathering in that place.

After Dinner we took Wagon for the City of Groningen, Groningen.
where we arrived at eight at night, being about 25 English Miles.

The next morning we had a Meeting among Friends of that City, 7.15.
whether resorted, both Collegiant and Calvinist Students, who behaved
themselves soberly; the Lord's Power was over all, and his Testimony stands.
When Meeting was ended, they went out; and as I was concluding an Exhortation
to Friends, came in a flock of Students to have had some Conference with us;
but having set the time of our leaving the City, we recommended them to the
Universal love of God, promising them some Books of our Principles; with which
they expressed themselves satisfied, and civilly parted from us.

After Dinner we took Boat for Delfzyl, Delfzyl.
and came there about six at night.

The next morning about seven we took Boat for Embden, 7 th. Month. 1.16.
which is about three Leagues: On Board of that Vessel it came upon me to write
a Letter to Friends in England* concerning the present Separatists, and their
Spirit of Separation, which has several times been opened unto me, and had
remained some days upon my spirit. The Letter follows.

This came upon me in the Ship, between Delfzyl and Embden, upon the the 16th
of the 7th. Month, 1677, to send amongst you. To Friends every where concerning
the present Separatists, and their Spirit of Separation.
Friends and Brethren,
BY a mighty Hand, and by an outstretched Arm, has the Lord God everlasting
gathered us to be a People, and in his own Power and Life has he preserved us
a People unto this Day; and praises be to his Eternal Name no weapon that has
yet been formed against us, either from without, or from within has prospered.
Now this I say unto you, and that in his Counsel that has visited us, whoever
goes out of the Unity with their Brethren, are first gone out of Unity with
the Power and Life of God in themselves, in which the Unity of the Brethren
stands, and the Member of the Body in the Unity stands on the top of them,
and has a Judgment against them, unto which Judgment of both great and small
amongst the living Family that in the Unity are preserved they must bow, before
they can come into the Unity again; yea, this they will readily do, if they are
come into Unity with the Life and Power of God in themselves, which is the holy
Root, that bears the Tree, the Fruit and the Leaves all receiving Life and
Virtue from it, and thereby are nourished unto God's praise.

And let all have a care how they weaken that, or bring that under their
exaltation and high imagination that it is revealed against: For I feel that
unruly Spirit is tormented under the stroke and judgment of the Power, and in
its subtilty is seeking occasion against the Instruments, by whom the Power
gave it forth: Let all have a care how they touch with this Spirit in those
Workings, for by being one with this Spirit in judging those that have been
faithful, according to the Gift of Wisdom they have received from God, they
will feed it and fortify it, and in the end come to be one with them against
the power it self, and at last run out and become open Enemies and Despisers,
for whom is reserved the blackness and darkness for ever.

Wherefore all that labor for the Restoration of those that are out of Unity
with the Brethren, let them be such as are of a sound mind themselves; Else,
What will they gather from? Or, What will they gather to? And let them labor
in the Simplicity, Integrity, Love and Zeal of the Power that first gathered us
to God. For that which is rightly gotten will endure, but that which is
obtained by the Contrivance, Interest and Persuasions of Men, gets no
farther than Man, and is of the Flesh, and what is of the Flesh is fleshly, and
shall never inherit the Kingdom of God.

Therefore let none look out of the Seed for help, for all Power is in it, and
there the true Light and Judgment stand for ever; and that Seed has God
ordained to bruise the Serpent's head. They that would save it, and those that
would bruise it by any other thing, are Breakers of God's great Ordinance, and
fly to Egypt for strength. For it is David, the Stripling, that shall be too
hard for Goliath the Giant, and that not by Saul 's Armor, but with God's
living little stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, without Man's
Invention and Contrivance. O this has wrought all our mighty Works in us, and
for us to this day! Wherefore let us be still, and trust and confide therein
for ever. Let none look back, faint or consult, for if they do, they will
darken their pure eye, and lose their way, and into the Eternal Rest of the
Flocks of the Companions will never come.

Brethren, the Judgment given forth against this Spirit (and all those that
have resisted our love and forbearance that are joined to it) must stand, and
all that are out of Unity with the Judgment are judged by it; therefore as all
would stand before the Lord, and his People, let not this Spirit be reasoned
withal; enter not into Proposals and Articles with it, but feed it with
Judgment, that is God's Decree, so may the Souls that are deceived come by the
right Door into the heavenly Unity. My Brethren, look forwards, and lift up
your Eyes, for the Fields are even white unto harvest up and down the Nations,
remember the great Name of the Lord, and behold the great Work that he is doing
before all People; whose saving health is visiting the World, and whose eternal
Word and Testament must from us go forth to gather the Nations; let that, that
will be unjust, be unjust still, let the Dead bury the Dead, to whose
appearance the King and the Kingdom of the Gentiles shall bring their glory:
Let us all who have received the Gift from God, wait in deep humility, to be
raised up and empowered by him more and more to eye and prosecute his universal
Service in the World; which noble Work had those that are gone into the
Sepation but laid deeply to heart, they would never have sat at home murmuring,
fretting and quarrelling against the comely and godly Order and Practice of
their Brethren: But Love, Peace and Joy had filled their hearts, and not the
troubler and accuser of the Brethren; who has opened an evil Eye in them, and
begotten them into a discontented self-separating mind, and this Image they
bear, and the pure Eye sees it. O let none tempt the Lord! let none provoke the
eye of his jealousy; let us all dwell in that divine sense, that he has
begotten in us: Where our love as a fresh and pure stream will always flow to
God and one another. Here all his ways are pleasantness, and all his paths are
peace; for where he keeps the House who is Prince of Peace, he will keep all
in his heavenly peace. We are but as one Family, and therefore we have but one
Lord and Master, we are but as one Flock, and we have but one heavenly Shepherd
to hear, who goes before us, and gives us eternal like to follow him: And if
any are offended in him or in his, it is their own fault; if faint and grow
weary we are truly sorry, if through unwatchfulness the Enemy has entered,
begotten coldness to the Brethren, and carelessness of embracing the
opportunity by which the Unity is renewed and increased, so that what is done by
the Brethren without them, is locked upon, first with a slight eye, and then
with an evil eye, which begets distance, and this distance in a time
separation, and separation continues enmity, and this enmity death it self: We
are in our Spirits truly grieved for them, however the Judgments of God must
stand against them, and that Spirit which leads them, in which they gather
not to God but to themselves, and woe to them, that strengthen their hands and
despise counsel, they will have much to answer for before the Lord. I feel a
slighting, scornful, laughing Spirit often flying at me with its venomous
Sting, but the Seed of Life is over it, and the Lord God will destroy it.
Wherefore Friends, in all places where the Spirit has entrance keep sound
Judgment upon it, if you will keep your Garments clean, and enter not into
Disputes and Contests with it, it is that it seeks and loves; but go on in
your Testimony and business for the Lord, in the Lord's peaceable Power and
Spirit, and his blessing and presence of Life shall be with you, and in
multiplying he shall multiply you, for no good will be withhold from you, we
can say it of a truth, God is good to Israel, and to all that are of an upright
heart. And let us be of good cheer, for it is God's determination, that the
House of David shall grow stronger and stronger, and his Branch shall increase
and spread, and of his Government, Kingdom and Dominion there shall be no end.

Your faithful Friend and Brother in the service of our dear Lord W.P.
God's blessed work increases and prospers in these Lands, magnified be his
everlasting Name.


From on Board the Passage, between Delfzyl and Embden, 16. of 7 th. Month,
1677.


We arrived at Embden about the 11 th hour. This is the City, Embden.
where Friends have been so bitterly and barbarously used, the like has
scarcely been known in any place, where Truth has broke forth in our day, they
having here been banished some 30, and some 40 times and above. The first
Family that received truth in this City was Doctor John William Haesbaert and
his Wife, at whose house also the first Meeting was set up among Friends to
wait upon the Lord by way of public Testimony: they are now both Dead, but the
Memory of their Fidelity is a precious Ointment among the Righteous; they were
with me at a Meeting six years ago in this City, and I remember the power had
that operation upon them, that I said to B F. and T R. then with me, it will
not be long before they will publicly own and bear testimony in this place;
and about three months after he came forth, and she about a year after him; and
from their fidelity and integrity, notwithstanding all the sore and bitter
tempest of Persecution, a fine Meeting sprang, but at this day they are
scattered, being still sent away as fast as they return. We visited his
Mother's Family, where we found three of his Sisters in the love of Truth, his
fourth Sister being also a Friend, and is Wife of John Claus living at
Amsterdam. We had a little sweet comfortable Meeting with them. After it,
returning to my lodging, as I was writing to Doctor Andrews, President of the
Counsel of State (who is reported to have been the Author of this cruelty to
our Friends) a burden came upon me, my writing would not serve turn, but I must
go my self, and in the fear and name of the Lord to plead the innocent and
suffering cause of our Friends with him: So away we went to his house, he was
at first astonished to see what manner of Men we were; but after a little time
he comported himself with more kindness than we expected at his hand: I asked
him if He and the Senate had not received a Letter in Latin from an
Englishman about two years since concerning their Severity toward the People
called Quakers? He told me he had: I replied, I was the Man, and I was
constrained in Conscience to visit him on their behalf; and I could not see how
he, being a Common-wealth's-man and (...) Protestant, could persecute; I
pleaded with the Unnaturalness, the I^christianity and Imprudence of such
proceedings, and pressed ^ur Reason^ earnestly, but tenderly upon him, he
assaulted us with several Objections, but, blessed be the Lord, they were
mostly fictitious, and therefore easily removed and answered: He also promised
me, That if I would write to the Senate a Remonstrance of the Case of our
Friends, and express my Request therein, and enclose it to him, he would both
present it and get it to be read, and make it appear, that he was not so much
our enemy as we looked upon him to be* I promised to send him some Books
containing a Defense of our Principles, which were accordingly put into the
hands of Eliza. Haesbert to deliver him in my name. Having taken our leave of
the Old Woman and her Daughters, and a Man-friend residing in that City, and
left the blessings and peace of our God amongst them.

We took Ship for Lier, Lier. 17 th. 2.
where we arrived the next morning; thence we took Wagon for Bremen, Bremen.
7th. Month. 3.18.
where we came safe, through the Lord's goodness the next day, where we met our
Friends and Companions G. Keith and B. Burly, who were come hither some hours
before us from Amsterdam. In this City there is a work of the Lord begun,
though yet obscurely: We had a travel upon our spirits, that the blessed and
precious Truth of our dear Lord and Master might find a place to rest its foot
upon; to that purpose we wrote to two Ministers under some Suffering from their
Brethren, because of their great zeal against the formality and deadness of the
so called reformed Churches: This we sent by a Merchant, who we formerly met at
Herwerden: With some difficulty we got to them, but the person chiefly struck
at was shy to speak with us, his reason was this, it was known that we were in
Town, and it was one of the accusations against him, that he was a Fosterer of
all the strange Religions that came through the Town: Also he was then actually
under Process, and that the People that had heard of the innocence of his cause
conceived a prejudice against our Name, though it might be without cause; he
could not at present confer with us, and said he was sorry for it with all his
heart, but what we should say to his Brother should be the same as if it been
said to him, to whom he referred us, however I took hold of his Arm and said, I
have this Message to deliver to thee, that I may disburden my self before the
Lord, which was this: Mind that which has touched thy heart, let that guide
thee, do not thou order that, consult not with Flesh and Blood, how to maintain
that cause, which Flesh and Blood in thy enemies persecuteth thee for. He
answered, rather than I will betray that cause or desert Christ, by Gods
strength they shall pull my flesh of my bones: So he left us in his house, and
truly we had a good time with his Companion the other Minister about three
hours testifying unto him, that the day was come and coming in which the Lord
would gather out of all Sects (that stand in the oldness of the Letter) into
his own Holy Spirit, Life and Power, and in this the Unity of Faith and Bond of
Peace should stand, and therefore that he and all of them should have an eye to
the principle of God, that being turned to that, they might speak from it, and
that therein they would Glorify God and be edified. So we parted leaving the
man in a sensible and savoury frame. We visited the Merchant twice and had a
very good time with him, the man is of a loving and simple Spirit, and the Love
of God opened our hearts to him often.

We also visited Doctor Johan Sophrony Cozack, an odd Compositum of a man, he
had great and strange openings, he has writ several hundred tracts, some of
them are now printed at Amsterdam, he is a great enemy to the Priests, and in
society with none, of a merry yet of a rough disposition, without any method or
decency in his Clothes, Food, Furniture and Entertainments; he wants but three
of fourscore, yet of a wonderful Vigor and pregnancy, we were twice with him,
and we have reason to think he was as loving to us as to any body, and truly he
did show at parting some serious and hearty kindness; but we could fasten
little upon him as to God's Power, or any inward sense of us or our testimony,
yet we had little to object against what we had said, nay, some things were
very extraordinary.

From him we went to Doctor Belingham, an English Physician a man of a lowly
and tender spirit, who received us in much love, lamenting when we left him,
that he had no more time with us. At the Inn we had frequent opportunity to
declare the way of Truth, and we must needs say, we were heard with patience
and Sobriety, particularly of a Doctor of Law who lodged at the house, and an
ancient Man of Kiel in Holstein, we left Books amongst them all, and in the
Love and Fear of God we took our leave of them on the fifth day after dinner,
7th. Month. Herwerd^n. 7.22.
and begun our journey toward Herwerden the Court of the Princess, where we
arrived on the Seventh day in the morning every way well, through the Mercies
of the Lord. We sent to inform her of our arrival, and to know what hour it
would be convenient for us to visit her, who returned us this answer, that
being then employed in the business of her Government, it would be the 2d. hour
in the afternoon before she could be at leisure. The time being come we went to
visit her, and found her and the Countess ready to receive us, which they did
with much love and tenderness: I observed them to be much lower than ever, and
that our former blessed opportunities had had a blessed effect upon them. That
afternoon was employed in the narrative of our travels, which they heard with
great attention and refreshment, the whole discourse ended with a precious
little meeting. The house being clear of Strangers, they both earnestly pressed
us to sup with them, which being not well able to decline we submitted to. At
Supper the Power of the Lord came upon me, and it was a true supper to us, for
the hidden Manna was manifested amongst us, yea a blessed Meeting it proved to
us: O the reverent tenderness and lowly frame of Spirit that appeared this
Evening both in the Princess and Countess. The French-woman we found greatly
improved both in her Love and Understanding, yea, she is very zealous and very
broken, she was always with us on these occasions. After supper we returned to
the Princesse's Chamber, where we stayed till it was about 10. at Night, at
parting I desired the Princess would give us such another opportunity next day,
being the first day of the Week, as we had the last time we were with her; she
answered me, With all my heart, But will ye not come in the Morning too? I
replied, Yes willingly, What time will thou be ready to receive us, she
answered, at 7.

About 7 the next Morning we came, 7 th. Month. 8.23.
about eight the Meeting began and held till Eleven, several Persons of the
City, as well as those of her own Family being present, The Lord's power very
much affected them, and the Countess was twice much broken as we spoke. After
the People were gone out of the Chamber, it lay upon me from the Lord to speak
to them two, the Princess and the Countess, with respect to their particular
conditions, occasioned by these Words from the Countess; I am fully convinced,
but O my Sins are great. Whilst I was speaking, the glorious Power of the Lord
wonderfully rose, yea, after an awful manner, and had a deep entrance upon
their Spirits, especially the Countesse's, that she was broken to pieces, God
has raised, and I hope fixed his own Testimony in them.

We returned to our Inn, and after dinner we came back to the second Meeting on
that day, which began about the second Hour in the afternoon: And truly the
Reverent, Blessed, Sure Word of Life was divided a^right, the precious sense of
Truth was raised in the Meeting; There came more of the City than in the
morning, and we were much comforted in the Lord's power that was with us. For
the Truth had passage, and the hungry were satisfied, and the simple-hearted
deeply affected: This day at both Meetings was one of the Princess's Women,
that never was at Meeting before, and she (though very shy of us the last time)
became tender and loving to us, she was truly reached. O, magnified be the Name
of the Lord, whose presence was with us, and whose arm stood by us. After
Meeting the Princess pressed us to stay and sup with her, pleading the quietness
of the Family, and that they were alone; At Supper (as the night before) it was
upon me to commemorate the Goodness of the Lord, his daily Providence, and how
precious he is in the Covenant of Light to the dear Children, and Followers of
the Light. Great was the reverence and tenderness that was upon the Spirits of
both Princess and Countess at that instant. After Supper we returned to the
Princess's Chamber, where we spent the rest of our time in holy silence or
discourse, till about the tenth hour, and then we repaired to our Quarters. 7
th. Month. 2.^4.


Next morning about eight we returned to the Court, where the Princess and
Countess were ready to receive us. The morning was employed in very serious
Conference, relating to the affairs, practice and sufferings of Friends in
England, with which they seemed greatly affected: When about the Eleventh Hour
a rattling of Coach interrupted us. The Countess immediately stepped out to see
what was the matter, and returned with a countenance somewhat uneasy, telling
us, that the young Princes, Nephews to the Princess and the Graef of Donaw,
were come to visit her; upon which I told them, we should withdraw, and return
to our Lodging; but entreated, that for as much as we were to depart that night
with the Post-Waggon, we might not be disappointed of a farewell Meeting with
them; and the rather, for that I had a great burden upon my Spirit, which they
readily complied with, telling me, these persons would only dine and be gone.
As we went to the door, the Countess stepped before us, and opened it for us; and
as I past by, she looked upon me with a weighty countenance, and fetched a deep
sigh, crying out, O the cumber and entanglements of this vain World! they
hinder all good; Upon which I replied, looking her steadfastly in the face, O
come thou out of them then.

After we had dined in our Lodging, something being upon me to write to the
Professors of that Country, I went up to my Chamber that I might be the more
retired; just as I was about the conclusion of the Paper, comes the Steward of
the House to the Princess, with this Message, That the Princess entreated us to
come to her, for the Graef of D^naw had a great desire to see us, and to speak
with us; this brought a fresh Weight and Exercise upon us; but committing all
to the Lord, and casting our care upon him, we went.

Being arrived, the Graef approaches us in French; at first took no great
notice of our inceremonious behavior, but proceeded to inquire of us our
success in our Journey, and what we found answering our Journey and
Inclinations. Then we fell to points of Religion, and the Nature and End of
true Christianity, and what was the way that leads to the Eternal Rest. After
some short debate about complete satisfaction in this life, we both agreed that
Selfdenial, Mortification and Victory was the Duty, and ought to be the
endeavor of every sincere Christian.

From this I fell to give him some account of my Retreat from the World, and
the inducements I had thereto, and the necessity of an inward work, with which
he seemed much pleased. After this he fell to the Hat, etc. This choaketh; and
the rather, because it tells tales; it tells what people are; it marketh
Men for Separatists; it is blowing a Trumpet, and visibly crossing the World,
and that the fear of Man (greatly prevalent with too many serious people in
that Land) cannot abide, starteth at, and runs away from him; howbeit the
Lord enabled me to open the thing to him, as that it was no plant of God's
planting, but a weed of Degeneracy and Apostasy, a carnal and earthly Honor,
the effect, feeder and pleaser of pride and of a vain mind, that no advantage
redounded to mankind by it; and how could they that ought to do all to the
glory of God, use that vain and unprofitable custom, which cannot be done to
the glory of God. I entreated him seriously to consider with himself the rise
and end of it, whence it came, whom it pleased, and what that was that was
angry that it had it not? I also told him of the sincere and serviceable
respect which Truth substituteth in place thereof, and exhorted him to
Simplicity and Poverty of Spirit, to believe that Jesus he professed to be his
Savior, whose outside as well as Doctrine pleased not the Jews, and so we
parted; he took his leave of the Princess, and then of us with great Civility.

After he was gone, the Princess desired us to withdraw to her Chamber, and
there we began our farewell Meeting; the thing lay weighty upon me, and that in
the deep dread of the Lord: and eternally magnified be the Name of the Lord
that overshaddowed us with his Glory; his heavenly, breaking, dissolving Power
richly flowed amongst us, and his ministering Angel of Life was in the midst of
us: Let my Soul never forget the Divine Sense that overwhelmed all, at that
blessed farewell I took of them much opened in me of the Hour of Christ's
Temptation, his Watchfulness, Perseverance and Victory: about the ten Virgins,
what the true Virgin was, the true Oil and Lamp; what the Bridegroom, his
Door, Chamber and Supper: and in conclusion, that torrent of heavenly melting
Love that we were all deeply affected; I fell on my Knees, recommending them
unto the Lord, crying with strong Cries for their Preservation, and beseeched
the Lord's Presence with us, and so ended.

After some pause, I went to the Princess and took her by the hand, which she
received and embraced with great signs of a weighty kindness, being much
broken, I spoke a few words apart to her, and left the Blessing and Peace of
Jesus with and upon her. Then I went to the Countess, and left a particular
Exhortation with her, who fervently beseeched me to remember and implore the
Lord on her behalf. From her I went to the French-woman, and bid her be
faithful and constant to that which she knew; she was exceedingly broken, and
took an affectionate and reverent Leave of us.

Then I spoke to the rest, and took leave severally of them; my Companions did
all the like. They followed us to the outward Room, and there it was upon me to
step to the Countess, and once more to speak to her and take my leave of her,
which she received and returned with great Sense, Humility and Love. So turning
to them all, my Heart and Eye to the Lord, I prayed that the Fear, Presence,
Love and Life of God, with all heavenly Blessings, might descend and rest with
and upon them then and for ever.

Home we went for our Lodging, 7 th. Month. 3.25.4.26.
cleared the House, exhorted the Family, left Books, and then took Wagon for
Wesel about 200 English Miles from Herwerden, we rid three Nights and Days
without lying down on a Bed, or sleeping, otherwise than in the Wagon, which
was only covered with an old ragged Sheet; the Company we had with us made
Twelve in number, which much straightened us; they were often, if not always
Vain, yea, in their religious Songs, which is the fashion of that Country,
especially by Night, they call them Luther's Songs, and sometimes Psalms: We
were forced often to reprove and testify against their Hypocrisy, to be full of
all vain and often profane Talk one hour, and sing Psalms to God the next; we
showed them the Deceit and Abomination of it. We passed through several great
Towns by the way, as Lipstad, Ham, etc. many Discourses we had of Truth, and
the Religion and Worship that was truly Christian, and all was very well; they
bore what we said. But one thing was remarkable that may not be omitted. I had
not been six hours in the Wagon, before an heavy weight and unusual oppression
fell upon me, yea, it weighed me almost to the Grave, that I could almost say,
My Soul was sad even unto Death; I knew not at present the Ground of this
Exercise, it remained about 24 hours upon me; then it opened in me that it was
a travel for the Seed, that it might arise over all in them I had left behind,
and that nothing might be lost but the Son of Perdition. O the strong Cries and
deep Agonies, many Tears and sincere bowings and humblings of Soul before the
Lord, that this holy sense which was raised in them, might be preserved alive
in them, and they for ever in it, that they might grow and spread as heavenly
Plants of Righteousness to the glory of the Name of the Lord.

The Narrative from the 27th of the 7th Month inclusive, to the 10th of the 8th
Month exclusive, is inserted in the following Letter to the Countess of Horns,
beginning in P. 220. and ending with P. 244. For Anna Maria de Horns, styled
Countess of Horns, at Herwerden in Germany.
My dear Friend,
O That thou may for ever dwell in the sweet and tender Sense of that divine
Love and Life which has visited thy Soul, affected and overcome thy heart: O
tell me, has it not sometimes raised thy Spirit above the World, and filled
thee with fervent and passionate desires, yea, holy resolution to follow Jesus
thy blessed Savior; who has given his most precious Blood for Thee, that thou
should not live to thy self, but to him that has so dearly purchased thee,
O the Retired, Humble, Reverent Frame that I have beheld thee in, when this
blessed life has drawn thee into it self, and adorned and seasoned thee with
its own heavenly Virtue; beautifying thy very Countenance beyond all the vain
and foolish Ornaments of the wanton Daughters of Sodom and Egypt, (for therein
are Charms not known to the Children of this World) O that this holy and chaste
Life may be always precious with thee, and that thou may be for ever chastely
kept in the Love and Fellowship of it: That out of this World's nature, spirit
and practice thou may be redeemed by him who is the Way, the Truth and the
Life, who as thou watchest with thy holy vigilance will not only daily manifest
the Devices of the Enemy to thee, but save thee from him. For Christ's work in
thee is thy sanctification, as it is in him his Father's Will, as he said of
old to his Disciples, This is the Will of God even your Sanctification. O my
dearly beloved Friend! ^e steadfast, immovable, without wavering, and work out
thy great Salvation with fear and trembling, and lose not that sweet and
precious Sense that the Lord has begotten in thee, it is soon lost, at least
weakened, but hard to recover, wherefore let not the Spirit of the World in any
of its appearances, vain Company, unnecessary Discourse or Words, or worldly
Affairs prevail upon the civility of thy Nature,; for they will oppress the
innocent Life, and bring grievous weights and burdens upon thy Soul, and
prolong the coming of the Lord, whom thou look for, and put the Day of thy
Redemption a far off. O beware of this compliance! Let me put thee in mind of
that sensible resolution so frequently and so passionately repeated, Il faut
que je rompe, Il faut que je rompe. Ah this speaks a weight, this weight a
sense, and this sense a strong Conviction. Now be assured, that till Obedience
be yielded to that present manifestation and conviction, the good things
desired and thirsted after can never be Enjoyed.

Wherefore, my dear Friend, be faithful, and watch against the Workings o^ the
Spirit of this World in thy self; that the Nature and Image of it in all things
may be crucified, that thou may know an entire Translation with holy Enoch,
and walk with God. Jesus the holy Light, is this Cross and Power of God, that
kills and makes alive, and (...) is the heavenly Vine too, if thou abide^^
in him, thou will bring forth fruit, b^^ if thou abidest not in him, thou will
no^ bring forth that fruit, in which his heavenly Father only can be glorified.
O see what the mind daily abides in. O my Soul is even ravished with the sense
of that holy and quiet habitation. In me, says he, you shall have peace, but
in the World trouble, however be of good cheer I have overcome the world, I am
not of the World: as if he had said, I am not of the Worlds ways, Worships,
Customs nor Fashions, for what, ever is of the nature and spirit of this World
has no part in me, and as I am not of this World, neither are you of this
world, for I have chosen you out of the world, out of the invention, out of the
worships and fashions ^f the world; you are to leave them all, to come out of
them all, and live and walk as Pilgrims in the world, that is strangers: To
what? To the life and practice of the World, not using but renouncing the vain
Customs and Ceremonies, yea, the whole Conversation of the World, remembering
that the friendship of this World is Enmity with God, and what if the World
hate you, it hated me first, and the Disciple is not greater than his Master,
nor the Servant than his Lord; if you were of the World, the World would love
you, and not reproach and persecute you; for the World loves its own. O my
dear Friend, may thou be perfectly sensible what it is not to be of this
World. But there is yet a farther mystery in these Words, not discerned even of
many, in whom some tenderness and inquiry is begotten, much less of the worldly
Christians. This World has a false Earth and a false Heaven, a false
Foundation, and a false Joy; not only gross Wickedness, but Iniquity in a
Mystery inwardly and outwardly. The Whore, false Prophet and Dragon, and all
their Offspring are here concerned: This is their World, that must be burnt
with fire, that Christ is not of, nor his true Disciples. O the Light of Jesus
discovers it! And he is that spiritual Solomon that gives true judgment, and
that saves the living Child, the true Birth, giving it to the right Mother,
and not to the false pretender. And all that hear his voice and follow him,
shall receive true Light, discerning and Judgment, to whom all Judgment is
given: They shall know his Voice from Man's.

There are two Trees of differing Natures have contrary Fruits and Leaves, the
one is the Tree of Life, that is Christ, the other the Tree of Death, and that
is Satan, the fruit of the one gives life, the fruit of the other brings
Death; the leaves of the first Heal, the leaves of the last Poison, many that
discern the Tree cannot clearly distinguish the Branches: And those that see
many Arms and Branches cannot distinctly behold the fruit, much less the
leaves, this comes by the gradual Discoveries and Revelations of the Light of
Jesus, the Word of God, as it is daily received, and daily obeyed; yea, and
that Word is the Ax and Sword of the Almighty to cut it down, daily feel the
strokes of this eternal searching Light and Word at the very root of this
corrupt Tree, this evil one, and his corrupt Nature, Works and Effects, for
which end Jesus Christ is come, and therefore is called a Savior, which is
little known in truth to the Christians of this World. Ah, my dear Friend, thou
know this Word, yea, thou have fel^ it, O hide it in thy heart! Treasure it
up it up in thy Soul and love it, and abide with it for ever. Alas! Whether
should thou go? This has, and is the the Word of Eternal Life, daily
therefore watch and wait that thou may be grafted more and more into it,
that thou may live and grow by the virtue and life of it, and that it may
grow in thy heart, as it grew among the first Christians, the holy followers of
the persecuted Jesus; and when it searches thy Wound, and cutteth away thy
dead flesh, yea, when it separateth between the Soul and the Spirit of this
World, and divides between Joints and Marrow, when it cutteth off the right
hand, and plucketh out the right eye. O watch unto Prayer, and pray that thou
may endure! O keep the holy patience of this pure and living Word, and this
very Word will keep thee in the hour of thy sharpest Trials and sorest
Tribulations! O all virtue is in it! O it is a tried Word, a sure refuge, the
staff and strength of the Righteous in all Ages. 'Twas David's Teacher and
Buckler, a Light to his feet, and a Lamhorn to his Paths, Walk thou in the
Light thereof, and thou shall not stumble; in this word is life, as in the
root, and this life is the Light of Men: They that receive and love the Light
of it, will therein receive divine Life from it to live to God, this is the
bread of God, that comes from God, and seedeth and leads up to God, by this
only that which is born of God lives, and is nourished; this is that Carcass
to which the wise Eagles gather, see thou gatherest to no other, nor fe^dest on
no other. This is that hidden Manna that comes from heaven that feeds God's
Israel; the World has a Manna but it perishes, but this endures for ever,
for it is not of Man nor from Man but immortal and from God, hid from the
knowledge of all the vain Christians in the World: So that the Israel of God
can say to the Children of this World, and that in Truth and Righteousness, we
have a Bread you know not of. For this Manna wait daily that thou may be
strengthened in thy wilderness-travel to the Land of Eternal Rest. Wherefore
labor not for the Bread that perishes, that is the Bread of Man's inventing
and making, which comes from below, and profits not, because it gives not
life eternal. But labor thou (my dear Friend) for the Bread that never
perishes, that endures for ever, and that gives life eternal to all that
feed upon it. O cast thy care upon this Word, love it, and dwell with it, wait
daily upon it, hear its Voice only and follow it, for it brings the Soul to
the eternal Habitation of rest and glory. Yea, when all Flesh wither, and the
beauty thereof fade away, this Word, and they that are grafted in shall abide
for ever. O that this may be thy choice, and it shall be thy Diadem, and thy
Eternal Crown and Glory.

These are the fervent desires, and these the daily prayers of my Soul to the
God of my Salvation for thee, not only that nothing in thee may be lost besides
the Son of Perdition: But that thou may cast off every weight and burden, and
that Sin that does so easily be-set thee, that grieveth, boweth and oppresses
thee: Under the heavy weight of which thou groanest and sighest that the
Redeemer would come from Zion to deliver thee. O give not heed to the Enemy,
the false accuser, that seeks to devour that which is begotten of God in
thee, neither look upon thy own Sins, Burdens, or Weaknesses, but lift up thy
head and look to Jesus, the Author of thy blessed Visitation, and wholly hunger
and thirst after him, the spiritual brazen Serpent that heals and relieveth
all that in Faith and full Assurance look to him. Want of looking to him,
hearing and obeying him, and having true faith in him, is the cause both of all
the Presumption and Despair that are at this day. He did no mighty things of
old in those places where they believed not. O faint not, look not back,
remember the holy Ancients, the holy Pilgrims of Faith, the Royal Generation of
Heaven, Heb. 11. Thou believe in God, believe also in him for the Work's sake
that he has already wrought in thee: He will minister to thee, as he was
ministered unto by his Father's Angel in the Hour of his Abasement and great
Temptation. O watch and be faithful, and thou shall be a noble Witness for the
Lord.

Once more let me expostulate with thee, would thou overcome the Enemies of thy
Soul's peace, and enjoy the delightful presence of the Lord with thee, then
keep nothing back, let nothing be withheld that he calls for, remember that
Saul of old lost his Kingdom, for keeping that alive, which he should have
slain: Thou know what be^el Ananias and Saphira outwardly. But be thou like
the poor Widow of old, that therefore gave more into the Treasury than all the
rest, because they reserved the greatest part to themselves, but she gave all
she had. O blessed are they that make no Bargains for themselves, that have no
reserves for Self, neither consult with Flesh and Blood, nor in any Sense
conform to the least Ceremony which* is born of them: But that submit their
Wills in all things to the Lord's, that they may be made perfect through
Sufferings as Christ was. Read me in the mystery of Life, I speak not of
deserting or flinging away all outward Substance, but that thy Heart may reign
above all Visibles, and make God its Treasure, and never rest in any thing of
this lower World, or short of Christ the Eternal Rest of all the Seed of Faith.
Here begins the Narrative.
THE Lord brought us well to Wesel on the fifth day after we left Herwerden,
27.7th. Month. Wesel.
having some Service by the way: At Wesel we had a good time with Dr. Schuler
and Rosendale, and the Woman we mentioned to thee, but the Tailor was shy and
fearful of coming to us at the Doctor's.

The next day we went toward Duysburgh, 28th. Duysburgh.
we visited the Schult or Chief Governor that Night, whom we found at home, he
received us with much Kindness. His Wife and Sister, we fear, have been shaken
in their good belief of our Testimony, since we were last there, some Fowls of
the Air have devoured the Seed that was sown. O that sweet and tender frame in
which we left them the time before! however the entrance we had upon the Spirit
of the Schult, a little consolated us. Hence we sent Maria, Martha's Friend, a
Letter, desiring him to let us have his Answer the next Night at Dusseldorp,
enclosed to Neander, when and w^ere we might see him, either at Dusseldorp,
Mulheim, or Duysburgh, and if it were possible, we would gladly visit the
Countess of Bruch.

We got early to Dusseldorp, 29th. Dusseldorp.
next day, being the last day of the Week: but Neander was gone to Mulheim, in
order to Preach on the Morrow; so that we were disappointed of our Intelligence.

8.30. Ceulen.
Next Morning we went toward Ceulen, and there arrived that Evening.

The next day we had a good opportunity with van Durando and Docemius at the
House of the latter, 2.1. 8th. Month. Dusseldorp.
and that Afternoon took Boat for Dusseldorp. 3.2.
Where arriving next Morning we presently sent for Neander, who came to us, and
three more in company; we had a blessed meeting with them, and one of the three
that came with him, our Souls were exceedingly affected with. The Meeting done,
they went away, but Neander returned, and first of our Letter to Mulheim, we
found by him (as also at our return to Duysburgh) that Kuper was so far from
endeavoring ou^ visit to the Countess, that he would not meet us himself
neither at Dusseldorp, Mullheim, nor Duysburgh: nay, it did not please him to
send us an Answer, much less any the least Salutation, I confess it grieved us.
Now for Neander, the Young man has a Zeal for God, and there is a Visitation
upon him, my Soul desires that it may not be ineffectual: but I have a great
fear upon me, for this I know certainly from the Lord God that lives for ever,
and I have a Cloud of Witnesses to my Brethren, that Retirement and Silence
before God, is the alone way for him to feel the heavenly gift to arise, and
come forth pure and unmixt; this only can preach for God, pray to God, and
beget People to God, and nothing else. But alas, his office in that Family is
quite another thing; namely to perform Set Duties of fixed times, Pray, Preach,
and Sing, and that in the way of the World's Appointments. His very office is
Babylonish, namely, a Chaplain; for it is a Popish Invention: In the good old
times, Godly Abraham that was a Prince, and Joshua a great General, and David a
King, with many more, instructed their Families in the knowledge and fear of
God: But now People are too Idle or too Great to pray for themselves, and so
they worship God by Proxy. How can a Minister of the Gospel be at the beck of
any Mortal living, or give his Soul and Conscience to the time and appointment
of another? the thing in it self is utterly wrong, and against the very Nature
and Worship of the new and everlasting Covenant. You had better meet to read
the Scriptures, the Book of Martyrs, etc. if you cannot sit and wait in silence
upon the Lord, till his Angel move upon your Hearts, than to uphold such a
formal, limited and ceremonious, Worship: this is not the Way out of Babylon.
And I have a deep sense upon my Soul, that if the Young Man strive beyond the
talent God has given him to answer his Office and fill up his Place, and wait
not for the pure and living Word of God in his Heart to open his Mouth, but
either studieth for his Sermons or speaks his own Words, he will be utterly
ruined. Wherefore, O Dear Friend, have a care thou art no Snare to him, nor he
to thee: Man's Works smother and stifle the true life of Christ, what have you
to do but to look to Jesus the Author of the holy desires that are in you, who
himself has visited you, tempt not the Lord, provoke not God, what should any
Man Preach from, but Christ? and what should he Preach people too, but Christ
in them the hope of Glory? Consider nothing feeds, that which is born of God,
but that which comes down from God, even the Bread of God which is the Son of
God, which gives his life for the World, feel it and feed on it, let none mock
God nor grieve his eternal Spirit that is come to seal them up from the mouth
of Man that has deceived them: that Jesus the anointing may teach them and
abide with them for ever. Be steadfast and immovable, and this will draw the
Young Man near to the Lord, and empty him of himself and purge away mixtures,
and then you will all come to the Divine Silence: and when all Flesh is silent
before the Lord, then is it the Lord's time to Speak, and if you will hear your
Souls shall live. O my Soul is in great pain, that you may be all chastely
preserved in that divine Sense begotten in your Hearts by the eternal Word of
God that abides for ever, that nothing may ever be able to extinguish it. But
more especially thou, my Dear Friend, may be kept in faithfulness: for the
Lord is come very near to thee and thou must begin the Work, the Lord God
expects it at thy hand: if one Sheep break through the rest will follow;
wherefore watch, O watch, that thou may be strengthened and confirmed, and
strengthen all that is begotten of God in that Family, by thy weighty, savoury
and circumspect life. O how is my Soul affected with thy present condition! it
is the fervent Supplication of my heart, that thou may through the daily
obedience of the Cross of Jesus, conquer and shine as a bright and glorious
Star in the Firmament of God's eternal Kingdom: So let it be, Lord Jesus. Amen.

We tenderly, yet freely spoke ou^ hearts to him before we parted which done,
in God's love we too^ our leave of him and Dusseldorp* and got that Night to
Duysburgh* Duysburgh.
being the third Day of the Week* We first visited Dr. Mastricht, a Man of a
good natural Temper, but a rigid Calvinist. I perceived by him, that they held
a Consultation about seeing us at Bruch; but they all concluded, it was best to
decline meeting with us, because of the Graef, he being ready to fling our Name
in reproach upon them in his displeasure, and this would confirm him in his
Jealousies of them. This might excuse the Countess, but by no means Kuper, and
if I had any sense, Mastricht was there with them, upon design to frustrate the
hopes we had conceived of meeting with her. We from tha^ descended to other
things of weight^ and in love and peace parted.

From his House we returned to our Inn, and after Supper we visited the Schult,
who with much civility and some tenderness received us: his Sister also came to
us, and we had a good little Meeting with them, and our God was with us, and
his pure and tender life appeared for our Justification, and pleaded our
innocent Cause in their Consciences, and so we parted with them, leaving our
Master's Peace amongst them.

The next day we came to Wesel, 3. 8th. Month. Wesel.
being the 4th day, where we understood by Dr. Schuler that thy Sister desired,
that we would be so kind as to see her when we returned; upon that we went and
visited her, she received us very kindly. Thy Brother in Law's two Sisters were
present, we stayed with them at least two Hours. Many Questions she put to me,
which I was glad to have an Opportunity to Answer, for it made way for a
Meeting; she entreated us to come again if we stayed, and told us, our Visit
was very grateful to her; adding, That because we past (...) by the last time,
she concluded wi^^ herself we had no hopes of her* with more to that effect.
From thence we went to Dr. Schuler's, who freely offered us his House for a
Meeting next day; and indeed, the Man is bold after his manner.

5.4.
The next day about Seven, I writ a Billiet in French to thy Sister, to inform
her of the Meeting to begin about Eight. She came and her two Sisters with her,
there was Rosendale, Colonel Copius and his Wife, and about three or four more,
and to our great Joy the Lord Almighty was with us, and his holy Power reached
their Hearts, and the Doctor and Copius confessed to our Testimony.

The Meeting lasted about three Hours, being done, we took our leave of them in
the Spirit of Jesus, and so returned to our Inn. The Tailor all this while
afraid of coming to our Inn, or to the Doctor's to the Meeting: great Fears
have overtaken him, and the poor Man lives but in a dry Land: After Dinner, we
visited Copius and Rosendale, and at Copius's we had a blessed broken Meeting,
he, his Wife, Rosendale, his Wife, and another Woman (Wife to one Dr. Willick's
Brother) present, they were extremely affected and overcome by the Power of the
Lord, 'twas like one of our Herwerden Meetings; indeed, much Tenderness was
upon all their Spirits.

This done, and having left Books both there and with thy Sister, we left Wesel
with Hearts full of Joy and Peace: and let me say this, That more kindness,
more openness, we have scarcely found in all our Travels. O that this blessed
Sense may dwell with them. A Seed there is in that place God will gather; yea,
a noble People he will find out: And I doubt not but there will be a good
Meeting of Friends in that City before many Years go about; my love is great to
that place. O how God is our dear Lord to us, who helps our Infirmities and
carries through all Opposition, and feeds us with his Divine Presence in
which is Life, his Candle has hitherto rested on our Tabernacle, and he has
made us glad in his own Salvation; Eternal Glory to his excellent Name.

8th. Month. 6.5. Cleve.
We immediately took a Post-Carr, and came next day about two in the Afternoon
to Cleve, where we had a very precious Meeting at an honest Procurator's House,
who received us with much love; four or five more were present, all Grave and
Tender, our Hearts were greatly affected with their love and simplicity; We
also visited the Lady Hubner, who was kind to us.

Next Morning we set out for Nimeguen, 8th. Month. 7.6. Utrecht.
and thence immediately to Utrecht, where we arrived that Night, and took the
Night-boat for Amsterdam; because of a pressure upon my Spirit to be next day
at the Meeting, and the rather having intimated as much from Ceulen.

We arrived in the Morning at Amsterdam, 1.7. Amsterdam.
where we found our dear Friends generally well, the City much Alarmed, and
great Curiosity in some, and Desires in others to come to the Meeting; we had a
very great Meeting, and many People of note resorted. God's Gospel Bell was
rung, the great Day of the great God sounded, and the Dead was raised, and much
tenderness appeared in several. O blessed be the Name of the Lord, whose Work
and Testimony prospers.

The next day was spent in diverse Affairs relating to the Truth. 2.8.5. 3.9.


The day following we had a Meeting with Galenus Abraham's (the great Father of
the Socinian Mennists in these Parts) accompanied with several Preachers and
others of his Congregation, diverse of our Friends were also present. It
continued about five Hours, he affirmed in opposition to us, That there was no
Christian Church, Ministry, or Commission Apostolical now in the World; but the
Lord assisted us with his Wisdom and Strength to confound his Attempts.

Here ends the Narrative.


I intend a Visit to the Hague, to the Lady Overkirks, Sister of the
Somerdikes, and some others that have sober Characters of Truth and Friends;
and thence to Rotterdam, where I have much to do, both with respect to Meetings
and the Press, G K. and B F. go with me.

Thus, my Dear Friend, have I given thee a tedious Narrative, yet I hope not
altogether unpleasant; perhaps the brevity of my Letters hereafter may best
Apologize for the length of this: However, I consider two things; one is, That
thou have time enough one time or other to look over it: And next, That I have
plentifully, as were thy requests, demonstrated, I have not forgotten thee. O
Dear Friend, let us live and remember one another (now absent) in that Divine
Sense in which the Lord God dissolved our Spirits when together. O the Unity of
this Faith, the Purity of this Love, and the Bond of this Peace. The Lord Jesus
be with thy Spirit, and keep thee in this the Hour of thy Temptation; that thou
may come forth as Gold seven times tried; so shall thy Testimony shine for
the God that has called thee, and he will reward thee with Honor, Glory, and
Eternal Life. Amen.

Thus, says the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy Youth, the love of
thine Espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that
was not sown. Jerem. 2.2.

Dear Friend, consider this yet again, The way of the just is Uprightness, thou
most upright do weigh the Paths of the Just, yea, in the Way of thy
Judgment, O Lord, have we waited for thee, the desire of our Soul is to thy
Name, and to the Remembrance of thee.

With my Soul have I desired thee in the Night; yea, with my Spirit within me
will I seek thee early, for when thy Judgments are in the Earth, the
Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness.

Lord thou will ordain Peace for us, for thou have wrought all our Works in us.

O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had Dominion over us; but by
thee only we make mention of thy Name.

Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a Prayer when thy
chastning was upon them.

Like as a Woman with Child that draws near the time of her Delivery is in
Pain, and cries out in her Pangs, so have we been in thy Sight, O Lord.

We have been with Child, we have been in Pain, we have as it were brought
forth Wind, we have not wrought any Deliverance in the Earth, neither have the
Inhabitants of the World fallen.

Thy dead Men shall live together with my dead Body shall they arise; awake and
Sing ye that dwell in the Dust, for thy Dew is as the Dew of Herbs, and the
Earth shall cast out the dead.

Come my People, enter thou into thy Chamber, and shut thy door about thee;
hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the Indignation be overpast.

For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the
Earth for their Iniquities; the Earth also shall disclose her Blood, and shall
no more cover her Slain, Isa. 26.7, 8. to 21. So come Dear Lord Jesus that was
dead, but is alive and lives for ever. Amen.

Very dearly Farewell. Thy Friend that faithfully Travelleth for thy
Redemption, W.P.
Amsterdam. 10th. of the 8th. Month, 1677.


The same day we had a blessed Public Meeting never to be forgotten, O the
Majesty, 8 th. Month. 4.10.
Glory and Life that the Lord attended us with, our Hearts were deeply affected
with his Presence; great Reverence and Brokenness was over the Meeting, more
than I had seen. The Meeting done, we were opposed by a Preacher, who was
closely encountered and pursued by several Merchants, etc. (not of us) that
cried he was Rude and Ignorant, and that they had a Testimony for us, who
offered to Dispute in our Defense; but the Priest run away, they followed him
till they housed him, etc.

It was upon me this day to engage Galenus Abraham's to a second Conference,
that we might more fully debate and confute his grand Objections against the
present Dispensation of Truth, and the heavenly Ministry witnessed among
Friends: he refused not my offer of a second Meeting; but sent me word, his
Business would not give him leave to let it be any time this day, upon which
the next was ^ixt for the Conference to begin at Eight, which accordingly it
did, and held till One. 5.11.
The most impartial account of both these Conferences that I am briefly able to
give follows.

The Meeting ended, and having refresht our selves, after a solemn leave taken
of our dear Friends at Amsterdam, G. F. and I, went that Night to Leyden,,
accompanied by B. Furly; Leyden.
coming there late at Night, we forbore to inquire after any worthy in that
place.

8 th. Month. 6.12.
But the next Morning we found out two, one a German of, or near Darmstad, who
not only expressed much love to the Principle of Truth, and unto us the Friends
thereof; but also informed us of a retired Person of great Quality that lives
about two hours back again toward Amsterdam, at a Village called Nortwyck. Our
Resolutions of being that Night at Rotterdam, and having the Hague to Visit by
the way, made our return at that time unpracticable; however the Relation of
the German concerning the good Inclinations of the great Man and his Wife,
their disdain of the World, voluntary retreat from the Greatness and Glory of
it rested strongly upon our Spirits. This Person presently conducted us to the
House of one who had formerly been a Doctor in the University, and there left
us: To this Person both G. F. and my self were more than ordinarily open, he
was of a sweet, yet quick, wise, yet very loving and tender Spirit; there were
few Strangers we felt greater love to; He assented to every thing we said, and
truly his Understanding was very clear and open to the things that lay upon us
to declare, and expressed his firm Belief of great Revolutions at hand, and
that they should terminate in the setting up of the glorious Kingdom of Christ
in the World. What shall I say, the Man felt our Spirits and therefore loved
us, and in the fresh sense of that love, writ a Letter by us to a retired
Person at the Hague like himself; which in several places of Germany was the
way whereby we found out several of the retired People we visited: After near
two Hours time with him, we took Wagon for the Hague, leaving the Peace of God
upon him.

Hague.
The first thing we did there was to enquire out the Lady Overkirk a Person of a
retired and religious Character, separated from the public Worship of that
Country: She was a home, but her Husband with her, being a great Man of the
Army of another Disposition and Way of Living, hindered our Access at that time.

The next Person we went to was a Judge at the Law of Chief Court of Justice in
that Republic, he received us with great Respect, and a more than ordinary
desire to know the truth of our Faith and Principles: We declared of the things
most surely believed amongst us in the Power and Love of God: He made his
Observations, Objections, and Queries upon several things we spoke, to whom we
replied, and explained all Mattters in question, insomuch that he declared
himself satisfied in our Confessions, and his good Belief of us and our
Principles: We took a solemn and sensible leave of him, and we felt the Witness
reached, and his Spirit tendered, which filled our hearts with dear love to him;
he brought us to his Streetdoor, and there we parted.

From him we went to visit that Person for whom we had a Letter from the Dr. at
Leyden, but he was not at home. We immediately took Wagon for Delft, Delft.
Rotterdam.
and from thence an Express-Boat for Rotterdam, where we arrived well about
Eight at Night.

8 th. Month. 7.13.
The next day was mostly spent in visiting of Friends, and the friendly People
in that place, which consisted of several Persons of worldly Note.

8 th. Month. 1.14.
The next day being the first Day of the Week, we had a large and blessed
Meeting, wherein the deep Mysteries of the Kingdom of Christ and Antichrist
were declared in the power of an endless Life. Several of diverse Religions were
there, but no Disturbance and Contradiction, but a profound Silence and
reverent Attention were over the Meeting.

That Night I had a blessed Meeting at my Lodging with those Persons of Note,
that at sometimes visited our public Meetings, as at that day, and have a
Convincement upon them: The Lord's Love, Truth and Life preciously reached
toward them, and they were very sweetly affected.

Next day I bestowed in perfecting and correcting several public Letters, 2.15.
which I was moved to write both in my first and second Journey in Germany, and
after my return to these Low Countries: They are left behind to be Translated
and Printed; they are omitted here, because they are large and likely to be
^ereafter printed in English. The Titles whereof follow,

I. A Summons to Christendom in an earnest Expostulation with her, to prepare
for the great and notable Day of the Lord that is at the door.

II. To all those who are sensible of the Day of their Visitation, and who have
received the Call of the LORD by the Light and Spirit of his Son in their
Hearts, to partake of the great Salvation, wherever scattered throughout the
World; but more especially in the High and Low Dutch Nations. Faith, Hope and
Charity which overcome the World be multiplied among you.

III. To all those Professors of Christianity, that are Externally separated
from the visible Sects and Fellowships in the Christian World, (so called)
wherever hidden or scattered; true Knowledge, which is Life Eternal from God
the Father by Christ Jesus.

IV. A tender Visitation in the Love of God that over-cometh the World, to all
People in the High and Low Dutch Nations, who hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, and desire to know and worship God in Truth, and in Sincerity,
containing a plain Testimony to the Ancient and Apostolical Life, Way and
Worship that God is reviving and exalting in the Earth in his Spirit and Truth.

The sense of the serious retreat of this great Man we heard of at Leiden was
so strong upon me, that I could not see my self clear to leave the Country,
before I had given him a Visit. I purposed therefore the next Morning to set
forward to the Hague, from thence to Leiden, and so to Nortwyck. 8th. Month.
Nortwyck.


I arrived there in the Evening with B F. A Sonnemans and M Sonnemans, and
immediately made known our coming, and the end of it to him and his Wife, by
the means of the young German, who was got thither before us to visit them. An
Invitation came to us all at our Inn, and immediately we repaired to his House,
which was very stately, and yet plain; he presently came to us, took us by the
hand, and bid us heartily welcome. We immediately sat down, and after some
time of retirement, I spoke something of what was upon me, yet not before he
had given us a sober and pathetical Account of his Life, and of the present
frame and disposition of his Spirit. All this was in the absence of his Wife;
but so soon as I had finished what was then upon me to speak of the Witness of
God, and of its Work in Man, upon the occasion of the History he gave us of his
(...); he led us into another Room, (...) his Wife was, he told her here were
^om^ Christian Friends come to vis^t her, she saluted us very kindly.

We all sat down, and after some ^^^ence, the heavenly Power of God did in a
living and tender manner open their States and Conditions to me, and opened my
Mouth to them; the substance of my Testimony was to this purpose, That Death
reigned from Adam to Moses, Moses was till the Prophets, the Prophets till
John, and John till Christ: What Christ's day was, how few see this day; and
whilst People are talking of being in Christ under Grace, and not under the
Law, Death reigns over them, and they are not come to Moses, nor the shaking
Mountain, the Thundrings, Lightnings and Whirlwinds, and what it was that led
to Christ, and what it was to be in him, and under the Government of his Grace;
directing them to the blessed Principle of Light and Truth and Grace, which God
had shed abroad in our hearts. I declared the nature and manner of the
appearing and operating of this Principle, and appealed to their own
Consciences for the truth of what was said: And I can truly say the holy Life
of Jesus was revealed amongst us, and like Oil swom at the top of all: In this
I was moved to kneel down and pray, great brokenness fell upon all, and that,
that was before the World began, was richly manifested in us and amongst us.
The Meeting done, the great Man and his Wife blessed us, and the work of God in
our hands, saying, with tears in his eyes, My house is blessed for your sakes,
and blessed be God that I ever lived to see you.

And thus we left them, though with much difficulty, for they pressed us with
great earnestness both to eat and to lodge with them, and were hard to bear our
refusal. They said it we was a Scandal to their house, that they should let
such good people as were to go out of it; or suffer us to lodge in any other
place: But we declared our pre-engagement elsewhere, and that it was not for
want of true kindness toward them. One passage I had almost forgot to mention,
I was ( said he) once at table with the Duke of Holsteyn at Frederickstadt,
when the Magistrates came to complain against a people called Quakers in that
City. The Duke was ready to be prejudiced against them, but at the very naming
of them I conceived a more than ordinary kindness in my mind toward them. I
asked the Magistrate what they were for a People, he told me that they would not
pull off their hats to their Superiors; I asked him whether they would pull off
their hats to God, he said, yes; said I, that may be the reason why they will
not pull them off to Man. Do they live peaceably? Yes, Do they pay their Taxes?
Yes, Do they rub their hats in your eyes? No, Do they do any harm with them?
No, Why what is your Quarrel then; not they meet in silence, and they will
speak or pray unless they be moved by the Spirit; why, that is according to the
Doctrine of Scripture: If this be to be a Quaker, I would I were a Quaker too,
but, said he, I never saw one before, but I bless God I see you now. He very
much inveighed against the false Christianity that is in the World, and greatly
magnified a tender, mortified and retired Estate. I have great hopes he and his
Wife will eye the truth. We returned to our Inn to supper, and to bed.

8th. Month. 4.17. Hague.
Next morning we took Wagon for the Hague, where we ^^t with Docemius, the King
of Denmark's Resident at Ceulen, who had been at Rotterdam to seek us, and came
back thither with hopes to meet us. We had some service there with a Lawyer,
but were again disap^ointed visiting the Lady Overkirk, because of her
Husband's presence; and the other retired Man before ^entioned was again from
home, the Judge would gladly have received us, but a great Cause then depending
commanded his attendance. That Afternoon we took Boat for Delft, Delft.
Rotterdam. 8th Month. 5.18.
and so to Rotterdam, where we all arrived well.

It was my desire to have been the next day at a Meeting at Dort, but it seems
that Way that we hoped had been open for us was shut, insomuch that we were
prevented of that service. However I applied my self to the perfecting of what
yet wanted to be completed in those Writings, I left behind me to be printed.
6.19.


The next day being the sixth day of the Week, we had a very blessed public
Meeting, taking therein our leave of the Country; and after that was done we
had another amongst Friends, recommending to them the peaceable, tender,
righteous Truth, desiring that they might live and grow in it, and be a People
to the Lord's praise; so should his Work prosper, his Dominion enlarge and
increase among them. In the Evening I had also a Meeting at my Lodging among
the great People of that place, of which I have before made mention, and
magnified be the Name of the Lord, his Power did sweetly visit him, and
effectually reached them, that at their departure some of them fell upon our
Necks, and with Tears of Love prayed that they might be remembered by us, and
that they might have strength to answer our great Travel for them. We
recommended them unto the Lord, and the pure Word of his Grace in their hearts.

8 th. Month. 7.20.
The next day the generality of Friends of that place met at Sim. Johnson's
house early in the Morning, where we took our leave of one another in the Love
and Power of the Lord, feeling his living Presence with them that stayed, and
with us that went.

Several accompanied us to the Briel, Briel.
we arrived about Noon, there accompanied us the King of Denmark's Resident,
who had been with us at those Meetings at Rotterdam, P. Hendricks and Corn.
Roeloffs of Amsterdam, and A. Sonnemans, B. Furly, M. Sonnemans and Sim.
Johnson, with several others of Rotterdam.

The Pacquet-boat not being come we were necessitated to lie there that night.

That Night it was upon me in the earnest Love of God to salute the Princess
and Countess, with a few farewell-lines, as follows. TO THE Princess
Elizabeth, etc. Salvation in the Cross, Amen.
Dear and truly respected Friend,
MY Soul earnestly desires thy Temporal and Eternal Felicity, which stands
in thy doing the Will of God now on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. O dear
Princess do it, say the Word once in Truth and Righteousness, not my Will, but
thine be done, O God. Thy Days are few, and then thou must go to Judgment, then
an Account of thy Talent God will require from thee; what improvement have thou
made, let it prove and show its own excellency, that it is of God, and that it
leads all that love it to God: O that thou may be able to give an Account
with joy.

I could not leave this Country, and not testify the Resentments I bear in my
mind of that humble and tender Entertainment thou gave us at thy Court; the
Lord Jesus reward thee, and sure he has a Blessing in store for thee. Go on,
be steadfast, overcome, and thou shall inherit, do not despond, one that is
mighty is near thee, a present help in the needful time of trouble. O let the
desire of thy Soul be to his Name, and the remembrance of him. O wait upon the
Lord and thou shall renew thy Strength, the Youth shall faint, and the young
Men shall fail, but they that trust in the Lord shall never be confounded. I
wish thee all true and solid Felicity with my whole Soul: The Lord God of
Heaven and Earth have thee in his keeping, that thou may not loose, but keep
in that Divine Sense, which by his Eternal Word he has begotten in thee.
Receive, dear Princess, my sincere and Christian Salutation. Grace, Mercy Peace
be multiplied among you all that love the Lord Jesus.

Thy Business I shall follow with all the diligence and discretion I can, and
by the first give t^ee an Account, after it shall please the Lord to bring me
safe to London. All my Brethren are well, and present thee with their dear
love, and the rest (that love Jesus the Light of the World) in thy Family. Thou
have taught me to forget thou art a Princess, and therefore I use this freedom,
and to that of God in thee am I manifest, and I know my integrity. Give, if
thou please, the Salutation of my dear Love to A.M. de Horns, with the
enclosed. Dear Princess, do not hinder but help her, that may be required of
her, which (considering thy Circumstances) may not yet be required of thee: Let
her stand free, and her freedom will make the passage easy unto thee; Accept
what I say, I entreat thee, in that pure and heavenly love and respect in which
I write so plainly to thee. Farewell my Dear Friend, and the Lord be with thee.
I am more than I can say,

Thy Great Lover and Respectful Friend W.P.
I referr thee to the Enclosed for Passages. We visited Giltall and Hooftman,
and they us, they were at one or two of the Meetings at Amsterdam. Vale in
aeternum.



For ANNA MARIA de Horns, styled Countess of Horns.
Jesus be with thy Spirit. Amen.
BEloved and much Esteemed for the sake of that love which is raised in thy
Heart to the Eternal Truth of God, the increase of which I earnestly desire,
that thou may be more than Conqueror, through the powerful Workings of that
divine Love in thy Soul, which casts out all fear and overcomes the World.
In this eternal Love it is, that I love thee, and would be loved of thee,
blessed are they that hold their fellowship in it: It is Pure, Harmless,
Patient, Fervent and Constant. In fine, it comes from God, and leads all
that receive it to God, indeed it is God, and they that live in God, live in
Love. If we keep and abide in him that has visited us, we shall always feel
his love as a fountain, and Wonderful are the Effects of it. O it can lay down
its Life for its Friend, it will break through all Difficulty, and has Power
to conquer Death and the Grave. This transcendeth the Friendship of the World,
and the Vainglorious Honors of the Courts of this World. O this kindness is
inviolable! our purest Faith works by this Love. O the Tenderness of that
Soul in which this Love lives and has place; the Humility and Compassion that
always keeps it Company, and who can lively enough describe the lovely Image it
gives, the attracting and engaging Conversation it has: but it is discerned
and greatly valued by the Children of Love, who are born of it, which all the
Children of Light are. What shall I say, it is the great Command and keeps
all the Commands, Love pure and undefiled, it fulfilleth the Law and Gospel
too: Blessed are they that feel any of this Love shed abroad in their Hearts;
with this Love it is that God loved us, and by the Power of this Love Christ
Jesus has died for us. Yea, it is this Love that quickens us to Jesus, that
enflameeth our Souls with pure and ardent Love to him and Zeal for him; Yea,
it is this holy Love, that forsakes Father and Mother, Sister and Brother,
Husband, Wife and Children, House and Land, Liberty and Life for the sake of
Jesus, that leaves the Dead to bury the Dead, and follows Jesus in the
narrow Way of Regeneration: that can trust him in the Winds, and in the
Earthquakes, in the Fire, and in the Waters; yea, when the Floods come in even
unto the Soul, this despondeth not, neither murmureth; and as it cannot
despair, so it never presumes, yea, it can triumphantly say, What shall be
able to separate me from the Love of God that is in Christ Jesus; Shall
Principalities or Powers? Things present, or Things to come? Shall Life or
Death? O no, neither Time nor Mortality.

My Dear Friend, let this noble Plant of Paradise grow in thy Heart, wait upon
the Lord that he would Water it, and Shine upon it, and make an Hedge about it;
that thy whole Heart may be replenished with the heavenly increase and fruits
of it. O that thou may grow in thy inner Man* in Wisdom; Strength, and a pure
Understanding, in favor with God; and with all People that are in the same
Nature and Image; for the World only loves its own.

I hoped not to have been so quick upon my last long Letter, but God's pure
Love (that has redeemed me from the Earth, and the earthly Nature and Spirit)
moved fervently upon my Spirit to Visit thee once more before I leave this
Land. I deferred it to this Extremity, and being not clear to go hence, I send
thee my Christian Salutation in this pure Love; that many Waters cannot quench,
distance cannot make it forget, nor can time wear it out. My Soul reverently
boweth before the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ* that it would please
him to preserve thee. Fear him and thou need not fear, for the Angel of the
Lord encampeth about those that trust in his Name. The Angel of his Eternal
Presence guard thee, that none of the Enemies of thy Soul's Peace may ever
prevail against thee. Perseverance and Victory be thy Portion in this World,
and a Crown of endless Glory be thy Reward in that which is to come. Amen.

Since my last (being the next day after the Date thereof) we had a meeting
with Galenus Abraham's and his Company (for they are the most virulent and
obstinate Opposers of Truth in that Land) the success thou may perhaps see
suddenly in Print, and therefore I may defer the Narrative, only in general our
Dear Lord, our Staff and Strength was with us, and Truth reigned over all.

That Night we went to Leyden, where we visited some.

Thence next day to the Hague, where also we had a little Meeting. O the Lust
and Pride of that place, thou came into my Mind as I walked in the Streets,
and I said ^n my self, Well, she has chosen the better part. O be faithful,
and the Lord will give thee an eternal Recompense.

Thence we came to Rotterdam, where the Lord has given us several heavenly
Opportunities in Private and Public.

We are now come to the Briel and wait our Passage, the Lord Jesus be with you
that stay, and with us that go, that in him we may live and abide for ever.

Salute me to my French Friend, bid her be Constant: I wish thy Servants
felicity, but thine as mine own, God Almighty overshadow thee, hide thee under
his Pavillion, be thy Shield, Rock and Sanctuary for ever: Farewell, Farewell.

Thy Friend and the Lord's Servant W.P.
Briel 30. 8th. Month S.N. 1677.


8 th. Month. 1.21.
Next morning the Pacquet-boat arrived, and about Ten we went on board, having
first taken our solemn leave of our Friends that accompanied us thither.

2.22.
We immediately set sail with a great number of Passengers, but by reason of
contrary and tempestuous Weather we arrived not at Harwich till the third day
about the 6th hour. 3.23. Harwich. 4.24.
Whence next Morning I writ this following salutation and Account to the
Friends of Holland and Germany. A Letter from Harwich to Friends in Holland and
Germany, containing the Passages from Holland to England.
Let this be sent to Friends in High and Low-Dutch-Land.
O My Soul magnifieth the Lord, and my Spirit rejoiceth in God my Savior, who
has rebuked the Winds and the Seas, and made us to drink of his Salvation upon
the great Deeps. Yea we could not but praise him in the Tempest, for all things
are full of his Majesty. Blessed is the eye that sees, and the heart that
depends upon him at all times; there is not another God; he is the Lord alone
that the holy Ancients trusted in, and were not confounded, what shall my Soul
render unto the Lord. We are full of his Mercy, he has made us Witnesses of
his care: We can say in righteousness, they are blessed whose God is the Lord,
and that serve all the day long no other Master than our God.

Friends, this is an endeared Salutation to you all in High and Low Dutch-land,
in the deep and fresh sense of the Lord's preserving Power, O that you may
abide in that sense of him which he has begotten in you, and in the reverent
knowledge of him according to the manifestation which you have received of him
in the light of his dear Son. O that you may be faithful and fervent for the
Lord, that his glorious life and power may break through you. And these Lands
long dry and barren, as the Wilderness may spring and blossom as the Rose. For
what have we to do here, but to exal^ him that has visited and loved us, yea,
saved us in great measure. A^ he is worthy, my Spirit reverenceth him, my Heart
and Soul do bow before him, eternal Blessings dwell for ever with him.

Dear Friends, my love follows to you as a fountain, God, even my God, and
your God has made you dear to me, yea, dearer than all natural Kindred. You
are Flesh of Flesh indeed, Sea nor Land, Time nor Place can never separate our
Joy, divide our Communion, or wipe out the remembrance that I have of you; yea,
the living Remembrance that my God often gives me of you in the life of his
Son abides; which breaks my heart to pieces, and I can say I have left most
of my heart behind me, and the Lord only could have outwardly separated me so
soon from you. O this Love that is stronger than Death, more excellent than the
love of* Women that endures for ever; this Privilege have all the Saints.
Jesus the light of the World that saves from the World, be with you, Amen.

We got well last night about Seven to Harwich, being three days and two Nights
at Sea: Most part of the time was a great storm of Wind, and Rain, and Hail,
the We^ther was against us, and the Vessel so leaky, that two Pumps went night
and day, or we ha^ perished, it is believed that they pumpt twice more water out
than the Vessel could contain, but our peace was as a River, and our joy full.
The Seas had like to have washed some of the Seamen overboard, but the great God
preserved all well. Frights were among the People, and Despondencies in some,
but the Lord wrought deliverance for all, we were mightily thronged, which made
it the more troublesome.

But it is observable that though the Lord so wonderfully delivered us, yet
some vain People soon forgot it, and returned quickly to their wanton Talk and
Conversation, not abiding in the sense of that hand which had delivered them,
nor can any do it as they should, but those that are turned to his appearance
in their hearts, who know him to be a God nigh at hand, which may it be your
Experience and Portion for ever.

And the Lord be with you, and refresh and sustain you, and in all your
Temptations never l^ave you nor forsake you, that Conquerors you may be, and in
the end of Days and Time stand in your Lot among the Spirits of the Just made
perfect. Amen, Amen.

Yours in that which is Eternal W.P.
Harwich 24. of the 8th Month, 1677.


Here I left dear G F. G Diricks and her Children, that came over with us, to
follow me in Coach* who having a desire to be that day at Colchester Meeting,
Colchester.
went early away on horseback. G K. accompanying me, we got the Meeting, and
were well refresht in Friends.

That Evening we had a mighty Meeting at J. Furly's house, where we lay, many
being there of the Town, that would not come to a public Meeting; and indeed
the Lord's divine Power and Presence was in the Assembly.

Next day we had a great Meeting at a Marriage, 8 th. Month. 5.25.
where we had good service for the Lord. Afternoon about four we took horse for
London. G. F. etc. through miscarriage of a Letter about the Coach, not being
come to Colchester: That night we lay at I. Ravens, eight miles on our Way;
there we met Giles Barnadiston and Willam Bennet, with whom, and some other
Friends thereabout, we were comforted in the Life and Power of the Lord.

The day following we took our journey for London, 6.26. London.
came there in good time that Evening, where I found all things relating to
Friends in a good condition, blessed be the Name of the Lord. I stayed about a
week in Town, both to visit Friends at Meetings, and to be serviceable to the
more general Affairs of Truth.

The first day of the next week I went to Worminghurst, 9th. Month. 5.1.
Worminghurst.
my house in Sussex, where I found my dear Wife, Child and Family all well,
blessed be the name of the Lord God of all the families of the Earth. I had
that Evening a sweet meeting amongst them, in which God's blessed Power made us
truly glad together; and I can say truly blessed are they, who can cheerfully
give up to serve the Lord: Great shall be the increase and growth of their
Treasure, which shall never end.

To Him that was, and is, and is to come, the eternal, blessed, righteous,
powerful and faithful One, be glory, honor and praises, Dominion and a Kingdom
for ever and ever. Amen.

William Penn.

TO THE Children of Light IN THIS GENERATION, Called of God to be Partakers of
Eternal Life in JESUS CHRIST, the Lamb of God and Light of the World.
My Endeared Friends and Brethren,
MAny Days and Weeks, yea, some Months has my Heart been Heavy, and my Soul
unusually Sad for the sake of this Nation, the Land of our Nativity! For I have
not only long beheld with a grieved Eye the many Abominations and gross
Impieties that reign therein, the Lusts, Pleasures, Wantonness, Drunkenness,
Whoredoms, Oaths, Blasphemies, Envy, Treachery and Persecution of the Just, but
for some time I have had a deep Sense, that the Overflowing Scourge of God's
Wrath and Indignation was just ready to break out upon the People, Confusion
Amazement and Misery! The Weight of which has caused me to Cry within my self,
Who shall Save us! Who shall Deliver us! Is there none to stay the Stroke, to
blunt the Edge, to stop the Fury, and intercede for the People, and mediate for
this poor Land, that the Lord may not utterly depart, and take his Glory and
his Name from it, and make it a Desolation for the Wild Beasts of the Field and
Fowls of the Air, a Land of Judgment and not of Promise; Hague.
of Curses, and not of Blessings.

My Friends, whilst the Sense of this Distress, that is coming as a Dreadful
Visitation from the Hand of the Displeased God upon this Ungodly Land to Stain
its Glory, Bring down its Pride and Punish its Forgetfulness of the Lord and
his many Deliverances, lay so Heavy upon my Spirit, the Lord presented before
me all the Truly Conscientious and Well-inclined People in these Nations; and
more especially You, his Despised but Chosen Generation, for whose sake he
would yet have Mercy. And in the midst of his Judgments: This I received for
you from the Lord, as his Holy Will and Counsel, and it often sprung in my
Heart with a very Fresh and Strong Life;

TO THY TENTS, O ISRAEL!

TO THY TENTS; O ISRAEL! God is thy TENT: To thy God, O Israel*

PREPARE, O Friends, to stand in this Day before the LORD (that is in the first
place) for ye shall also have your Exercise. Yea, Great is that Work, which we
have to do for the Lord by his Powerful, but very Peaceable Spirit; for God
will by all these Hurries, Confusions and Vexations, that are at the Door,
drive People from their False Gods, and bring them home to HIMSELF. He will
throw down Wickedness, and establish Righteousness; he will waste Sin, but
Truth shall grow. He will debase the Mountain of Empty Profession; but the
Mountain of his Holiness shall be Exalted* He has determined to raise up and
renown the Seed of Light, Life and Truth in the Hearts of People; Holy
Patience, Meekness, Wisdom, Love, Faith, Purity and Perseverance (so much
wanting in the World) shall be seen to dwell in it, and only to come from it.
And my witness is, that ye are the People, through whom this Heavenly Seed of
Righteousness must Clearly and Steadfastly so shine unto others in these Uneven
and Rough Times, that are Come and Coming, as that your Heavenly Father may be
Glorified by you.

Wherefore in the Name of the Lord be ye all dis-incumbred of the World and
discharged of the Cares of it; Fly as for your Lives from the Snares therein,
and get you into your Watchtower, the NAME of the LORD! Which is not a Dead
Name* or a mere Literal Name; but a Living Spiritual and very Powerful Name: A
Strong Tower indeed, yea, an Invincible Fortress; where* dwell ye with God, and
in him who speaks Peace to his Children, and ordains Quietness for them that
trust in him. He will make you to lie down Safely, even then when Darkness and
Confusion shall be thick about you; yea, ye shall live in the Fire, that will
Consume the Stubble of the World, and your Garments shall not be so much as
Singed: for the Son of God, whom the Flames, as well as Winds and Seas obey*
will be in the Midst of you.

Next Friends, this know, We are the People above all others, that must stand
in the Gap, and Pray for the putting away of the Wrath, so as that this Land be
not made an Utter Desolation; and God expects it at our Hands. PREPARE ye
therefore to Meet and Sanctify the Lord in his Coming and Judgments! Why stand
any of you Gazing? Let none Gaze or Look out, I beseech you, that is the
Enemy's Work to weaken you within; but be ye Retired, be ye Centered in the
Eternal One, and Meditate upon the Lord and his Living, Pure Law, that ye may
be Wise in Heart* and travel in Spirit for this Poor Land, and that for Enemies
as well as Friends. The Lord is ready to hear you for this people, when ye are
ready to Intercede; and I testify Abraham is amongst you, God's Friend, and
his Just Lot too; yea, Jacob, that Prevailed: and One, that is Greater than
them all, JESUS, the Lamb of God, whose Blood speaks better things, than that
of Abel, in whom is the Mediation and Atonement. Be therefore encouraged to
wait upon the Lord, and to bow before him, and humbly to Meditate in the Life
of JESUS with him: I know, he will put it into your Hearts so to do, if ye wait
upon him. For he will not cast off this Land, as he did Sodom; he has a Right
Seed, a Noble People in it, that he has and yet will gather: many Sheep there
be not yet of our Fold, whom he will bring in, and the foul Weather and the
Storms will but help to drive them Home to JESUS, the Living and True Witness
and Light within, that he whom God has ordained to Reign, may be Great in them.

And Lastly, my Dear Friends and Brethren, by how much this Day draws Nigh, by
so much the more do ye Stand loose in your Affections to the World, but fa^t in
the Faith. And Assemble your selves together, and let God Arise in you, and his
Power and Spirit of Life among you, that ye may not only Wrestle, but in the
End Prevail; That it may be seen, that SALVATION is of the Jews, the Jews
Inward, in Spirit and in Truth: And truly, the time hastens, that Ten shall
take hold of the Skirt of such a Jew, and they shall be saved. But Woe to the
Hypocrite in that Day, the Formalist, the Jew Outward, the Circumcision in the
Flesh and Fleshly Christian, that cannot Resist the Temptations of this World,
the Temporizer, one that Runs with the Tide, he will be Divided. For there will
be more Tides, more Interests on Foot at once, than One; wherefore Perplexity
will take hold on him, his Policy will be Confounded. He will not know what to
do to be Safe, nor what to Join with; this Double-minded Man will be Unstable
in his Counsels and in his Actions, his Sandy Foundation will be Shaken.
Therefore, as I said, Woe to the Hypocrite, and to the Covetous Man too, for his
Gods will fail him; the Thief, the Moth and Rust will invade his Baggs and
surprise his Treasure: his Anguish will be Great in this Day! But my Dear
Brethren, as the Power and Spirit of our Lord God will Preserve and Establish
us, if we Sincerely and Entirely confide therein, and that above our
Solicitation or Need of Carnal Consultations or Contrivances, which we have
therefore laid aside; so shall it Vindicate us in Due Time in the Eyes of all
Nations, and present us a People owned, beloved and protected of God, in whom
we have firmly believed. Nor is this Presumption, as some may think, who being
not so well acquainted with that Entire Resignation and Supreme Faith (of which
Jesus is the Author, that removes Mountains into the Sea) conclude from mere
Natural and Human Considerations against us; yet we know him in whom we have
believed: and the same, that has Cured us of our Diseases, the same said unto
us, Arise and Walk in this Way of Faith; Trust in me, and not in another. And
truly, this is much of that Wonder, which Men shall have in their Minds and
Mouths about us in those Latter Days, In Troubles not to be dejected, and in
Jeopardies not to be concerned to make to our selves Defenses; but as the
Lillies, that neither toil nor spin, yet feed and grow, so we may both be
preserved and become Victorious without Worldly Force or Projections. For we
must show our selves to be that Little City and Hill of God, that has only his
Salvation for our Walls and Bulwarks; by whom he will renown his Arm, and
magnify his Power above the Arts and Contrivances of Men. Our Weapons and our
Armor is Spiritual; it has prevailed, and it will prevail, if we keep in the
Faith, which was first delivered to us: a blessed Shield, by which the Just
live.

And therefore, My Dear Friends, let us be Careful not to mingle with the
Crowd, lest their Spirit enter us instead of our Spirit entering them, and we
thereby come to fall into the same Temptations they are liable to, of Fear and
Flying to the Hills and Mountains to protect them, confiding in the Arm of
Flesh to deliver them; no, no! they must come to us, we must not go to them.
Yet can we not be Unsensible of their Infirmities, as well as we shall not be
free from some of their Sufferings; we must make their Case as our own, and
travail alike in Spirit for them, as for our selves. Let us stand in the
Counsel of our God, and he will make us Preachers-forth to them of the Works of
his Divine Power, and the Virtue of that Faith which comes from Heaven; yea, he
will make us as Saviors to the People, that they may come to know the Holy Law
and Word of the Lord (their Creator) in their Hearts, and have their Minds and
Souls turned to him, and stayed upon them, that Iniquity may no more abound,
nor Ungodliness find a place: but that in Truth, Righteousness and Peace they
may be established, and the Land keep its SABBATH to the Lord for ever! Then
shall God lift up the Light of his Countenance upon us, and water us from
Heaven, and bless us with all Temporal and Spirital Blessings; and we shall be
yet called, THE ISLAND SAVED BY THE LORD! Amen, Amen!

This was upon my Soul from God to you; I could not Visit you all with a
Distinct Message upon many Accounts: besides, the Time is Short, and the
Confusion appears to me to be at hand. Therefore have I sent it by way of
Epistle, with the Brotherly Salutation of Unfeigned and Unalterable Love to you
all in your Respective Meetings and Families. And the Lord God of our
Visitation and Redemption stir you up to these things, and keep us all in his
Holy Fear, Wisdom, Love and Patience through all those Travails and Exercises
to the End of our Days; that having finished our Testimonies, our Heads may go
down to our Graves in Peace, and our Souls be received into the Rest, which is
reserved for the Righteous with God, and with his Blessed Lamb forever! I am

Your Brother and Companion through the many Tribulations of our Day and
Testimony William Penn.
Worminghurst in Sussex, the 4th of the 9th Month, 1678. I desire, that this
Epistle may be read in the Fear of the Lord in your several Meetings.




