CERTAIN CERTIFICATES Received from AMERICA, On behalf of SAMVEL JENNINGS,
Tending to clear him from Scandals, Cast on him by George Keith, and others of
his Opposers.

Made public by John Pennington.

He that hides Hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters a Slander, is a
Fool,

Prove. 10.18. London Printed, and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street and at the Crooked-Billet in Holywell-Land
near Shoreditch, 1695.

The Publisher to the READER.
HAVING read Geo. Keith's Book, Entitled. A further Discovery, etc. pretended
to be in Answer to S. J's. Book, called The State of the Case, and observing
with what heat he flings his proofless Accusations against the said S. J. whom
he might know to be remote, and out of the reach of his Charge (being on his
Voyage to America) I thought it would not be unacceptable to the moderate and
impartial, as well as a Duty to the injured, if I presented him with such
Certificates, as the said S. J. received, after the publication of his Book,
not long before his leaving us, and had deposited with a Friend in London, to
be dispersed, as Service might be seen in the Spreading thereof; having notice
in an Advertisement printed in G. K's. late answer to T. E. that he designed an
answer to his Book.

I shall say little to the Book it self, it chiefly relating to matters of
Fact, transacted in another part of the World, of which I am no Eye-and
Ear-witness; nor is it so proper to be debated, but between persons privy to
those several actions. But in as much as it is probable, that by reason of the
distance of place, and unsafenes of the Seas, G. K's answer may not reach
thither in a long while, and the return from thence must needs be yet longer, I
offer these in the meanwhile, advising all that would not condemn a Man
unheard, to suspend their Judgment in the rest, till the accused can have an
opportunity to defend himself.

Yet two or three Observations (among the many that Book affords to an
Observant Eye) I am not willing wholly to pass by, that, as ex pede Herculem,
by this little the Reader may have a taste of the rest.

First, As to the Style and Language thereof, I freely Submit it to the
Considerate, who has read both Books, to judge which of the two, G. K. or his
Opponent, has showed himself most Master of his own Spirit, it being a true
Maxim delivered by the Apostle James, that if any Man among you seem to be
Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's
Religion is vain, Chap. 1. Ver. 26. Yet let me add, that while he magnifies his
own Patience, saying, God has endued him with a good measure of patience, and
what he has born with much Patience, p. 25. in the next line he Justifies his
calling Friends Blood-thirsty hounds, and in the same page these words, Cut me
in Collops, Fry me, Eat me; the Reader may give a guess, what will pass for
Patience with him.

Secondly, The abovesaid instance leads me to take notice of his Language to
Friends in Pensilvania, what artifices he uses to palliate it, and how he
bespeaks his own Praise, in the slight, vainglorious acknowledgment he makes.

The Ministering Friends, at their Meeting held at Philadelpha the 24, 4th
Month, 1693. relating his calling Friends in their Religious Meetings
Hypocrites, Snakes, Vipers, Blood-thirsty Hounds, Impudent Rascals, and the
like; bidding them Cut him in Collops, Fry him, and Eat him, and saying his
Back had long Itched to be Whipped. And that at the same juncture, he said, he
was like our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Comparing himself to a Dove and a
Lamb, (State of the Case, p. 23.) This Charge he does not deny, but applauds
his own Patience, as hinted already.

For the term Blood-thirsty Hounds, he alleges (but without a proof) that
what he was accused of tended to destroy his Natu^al Life; then flies to the
Hebrew word Nebal, in Latin Nebulo, and translated in the English Bible, vile
Person, to excuse the Epithet of Impudent Rascal (the word Snakes, and Vipers
he touches not upon); and from Friends telling him (as he says) he deserved
to be punished, he feeling great boldness and Courage given him uttered some
such words, as Cut me in Collops, Fry me, Eat me. Thus much in p. 25. of his
Further Discovery. Now, Friendly Reader, where was the Dove-like, Lamb-like
Nature in all this, think thou? But he deems such an imputation injurious,
and that G. F's. saying to the rude multitude, that Beat him on his Head, Arms
and Shoulders, Strike again, here are my Hands, my Head and my Cheeks; bears a
proportion to his Case, as p. 28. That to turn the Cheek to the Smiter, as we
are Counseled Luke, 6.29. is Lamb-like, I confess; but what is this to a Man
that is not smitten? but at most told, he desreves to be punished (and for that
we have but his word in his own Case) that shall retort, Cut me in Collops, Fry
me, Eat me. This is not a meek, quiet, yielding to a suffering already
inflicted (as in the instance of G. F.) but a daring, provoking to it, and that
by Unsavory expressions, which relish of a different tincture. Nor does he
more succesfully come off, when p. 47. he denies not, but he might say, by way
of probability They should hear ere long, he were either Whipped, or Imprisoned;
And in the next page, owns he said in a public Meeting, on a First day, that
his Back Itched for their Whip, assigning as the reason, their interrupting him
in his Christian Testimony, and most extraordinarily, threatening him with their
Magistratical Power (but that depends upon his single say so, and wants proof).
For these passages manifest an incensing, provoking temper which (though
covered over with the Specious pretenses of Godly Zeal) like to what Lawrence
the Martyr said to the Tyrant, that caused to Roast him on a Grid-iron, Oh
gross Comparison of the persecuting Heathen Emperor, to our Christian abused
Friends in Pensilvania: Have they not been more persecuted by his Tongue and
Pen, than he by their Laws and Proceedings?
to G. F. as above noted; and to E. Borough, who said and writ in lines to his
persecutors (but when and where did they say) our Backs are ready for your
Blows: Yet do G. K's. words declare themselves to proceed from a bitter Root.
Now, one reason he gives, why he said, his Back Itched for their Whip, was
their interrupting him in his (so called) Christian Testimony: Did Lawrence do
thus, or G. F. or E. B. either? Let him bring the precedent, when and where;
When they were in their Persecutors Hands, or exposed for their Christian
Testimony, they in a Christian Spirit bore it, and that Cheerfully: But when
did they because interrupted in their Christian Testimony, tell the
Magistrates, they were not only ready (i. e. they were given up to the
suffering, and that without reluctance) but craved it, and their Backs Itched
for it; for there is a difference between a bowed mind to the will of God, that
is prepared (made ready) Patiently and Meekly to Suffer what evil Men may be
permitted to do, and the seeking it, the coveting it, and having an Itch to
tempt and provoke them to it; perhaps through a desire of Popularity and to
increase a Party. Nor will the succeeding instance of what Christ said to
Judas, help him, though it may show the Fond conceit and High value he has of
his own doings, in the very Comparison. The Lord Jesus did not approve of the
Traytour's Act, neither did he seek the Suffering, when he said to Judas, What
thou do, do quickly; but on the contrary, warned against the doing it, and
prayed the Father that the Cup might pass, Mat. 26. v. 24, and 39. Yet
foreknowing the Blessed benefit and effect, it would have toward Mankind in
general, for our sakes he both embraced it, and pressed the doing it quickly,
for he was Straitened till it was accomplished, Luke, 12.50. But G. K. can
assign no good, that his passionate and daring carriage to those Friends, could
produce, or was proposed thereby.

Now when he had said, what he thought fit, toward his own Vindication, he
goes on in the sum 48. p. thus; I have (says he) never Justified all the words
I have said to those my Adversaries (what words has he not Justified? for
these even now cited, I have made appear, he has) but readily have granted,
that it is possible I have at times exceeded on great provocation. But S. I.
etc. have far exce^ded me in hard words, etc. And a few lines after, my great
Comfort is, that whatever Human weaknesses have attended me, as to some
Circumstances, which have been greater on their part, my Cause -- is good, and
with a Sincere and Upright Heart, as to the main, I have managed it, and I have
peace from my gracious God in so doing, as well as a sense of his Pardoning
mercy, wherein I have failed in some particular Circumstances, and this is more
than ever any of my Adversaries, that I know, have acknowledged, who Proud
Pharisee-like, do justify themselves. Now consider, Reader, what is it to Act
the Pharisee, if not to Extol himself and depretiate others. Sincerity and
godly Contrition, would have taught him to think more lowly of himself, and
less aggravatingly concerning others: For his faint acknowledgment of human
Weakness is but ushered in to set a fair gloss upon his own conduct in the
main, while he would insinuate how much worse Men his Adversaries are, and
therein has imitated the style of the proud Pharisee, Luke 18.11. in his
boast, That he was not as other men. But in what follows, ver. 14. he may read
his own doom, viz. Every one that exalts himself, shall be abased, and so
will G.K. when detected not only of Self-applause, but also of
Self-contradiction. For although he declares he never justified all he has
said to his Adversaries, but grants he has at times exceeded; Yet ( in
Causless Grounds, p. 11.) he says, As I have not acknowledged unto any (nor
seen just cause so to do) so they have not proved me guilty, either in words or
deeds, that the truth condemns, etc. so uncertain a sound does his Trumpet
give, that either what he now says, or has said before, must be false, for
they are not reconcilable.

Thirdly, His want of Candor comes also under my Consideration, and that
under two Heads.

First, The Friends of Burlington, in West-Jersey, in their Account, entitled,
The present Case stated, relates the orderly proceeding of that Meeting against
him: He had, it seems, charged Friends, That they were met together to cloak
Heresy and Deceit, and that t^ere were more Damnable Heresies and Doctrines of
Devils among the Quakers, than among any Profession of Protestants; whereupon
they first sent two of their Members, S. J. and G. O. to admonish him; and to
give him notice of their next Meeting, which followed in course Three Months
after, at Philadelphia. But he justifying his Speeches, and declining his usual
appearance (though at home) and having set up separate Meetings, and printed
against Friends; they notwithstanding (for peace sake, and to prevent the
dilateing of his Schism, if possihle) generally inclined to Adjourn their
Meeting for a Fortnight longer, and gave him notice thereof, the same Evening.
At the Fortnight's end, finding him not at Home, they forbore drawing any
Testimony against him for two Days longer, and then sent two of their Members,
William Biles and Walter Faucet, to enquire at his House of his return; but he
being still absent, they gave forth their Testimony, yet with this Caution,
that it should not be published till he had had an opportunity to hear it read,
and such others as he approved of, as may be seen at large, State of the Case,
p. 17, 18, 19. Now what answer does he give to all this? He denies they told
him the precise day, hour or place of their Meeting; and alleges, That called
a Fortnight, sometimes includes fourteen days, sometimes fifteen or sixteen
days, p. 23. Is not this extremely idle and shifting, showing he was hard put
to it for an excuse? And yet they deferred giving Judgment till sixteen days
were expired, waiting his return two days beyond their time; so that had he
been at Home within his longest Fortnight, he had come before Judgment had been
published against him. But he again pretends, They met sometimes at one place,
sometimes at another; sometimes at one part of the day, sometimes at another:
And could not he, in a Fortnight's time (and living in the Town, where the
Meeting was to be held) inform himself, where, and at what time of the day they
met? or did the Friends sent refuse to tell him? Well, but he has a third
Salvo, Their Paper, says he, does not so much as allege, that I had any call
to come to their Meeting: Why then, say I, did they take the pains to give him
notice by the Friends they sent? And yet the Paper does (to use his own terms)
implicitly allege it, if not explicitly, by their delay to pass Judgment in
his absence. And in p. 29. he says, he went out of Town upon his necessary
Occasion, (so not on Truth's account) and how nevcessary that occasion was,
himself best knows: That it was more indispensible, than the attending the
Meeting, he pretends not. Yet as mean and trifling as these excuses are, he
thinks they are too severe in un-ministring and un-christianing him, without
coming again and again, at least twice or thrice, not considering, that by this
time things were too far gone to be very dilatory, a separation was begun
(which if he had not begun, yet the continuation, or remaining separate, if he
will believe himself, Seasonable Information, p. 16. must lie at his own Door)
and he had printed against them; so that the relation between him and them, as
Brethren, ceased, and they under no such Obligation to him that was become an
open Enemy. And although he expostulates, Was this like the restoring me in a
Spirit of meekness; yet afterward, p. 29. says, At that time they neither
owned our Judicatory, nor we theirs, which as I take to be the truest reason of
his Nonappearance, so I cannot but observe, that his insisting on their coming
again and again, that it might be like the restoring in a Spirit of Meekness,
is nothing but Artifice, he designing to make them Journies enough, and at last
deny their Judicatory, which is far enough from sincerity.

Another instance, suitable to this Head, is, that when he would wind himself
off from being Author of ALL that Book (what part he was not Author of, he
says not) which gave a relation of his own and others Trials, called, New
England's Spirit of Persecution, etc. he seeks to palliate the unproved
Accusations, saying, Nor do I find, that the said Book of the Trial does charge
him either with Drunkenness or Horse-racing, but simply (he should have said
invidiously) as to that, narrates the Proceedings of the Court, how things did
pass there, p. 31. But besides that this is a sly, mischievous way of
insinuating a slander, especially from a nameless Pamphleteer (whereby the
Lives and Conversations of the most Innocent may be exposed to every
scurrilous, lurking Detractor) I wish the Reader to observe, that this
Anonymous Author does not narrate Proceedings impartially, as is manifest even
from hence: For whereas that account suggests, p. 19. that a Paper was read,
subscribed by Mary Budd, wherein she says, That Sarah Biddle says, that
William Biddle says, that John Slocum says, that S. J. run a Race, and was
Drunk; yet when S. J. appeals to Geo. Keith in open Court, whether J. S.
himself did not tell him, the matter was not true, (see p. 67. of The State of
the Case, and p. 50. of G. K's Answer to it) that tending to clear in part him,
whom this Book of the Trial was designed to prostitute, we find never a tittle
of it mentioned there. So that the Author being thus partial, and withal
concealing his Name, when by Name he could defame others, manifests Malice, not
Sincerity and Candor; and that he touched on this Charge, not as driven to it,
by its being interwoven with the matter of the Trial, but with an intent to
fasten a Reproach and Slander, leaving out what might tend to the Party's
purgation in any wise. This greatly discredits the whole Undertaking, and
bespeaks Malice.

Fourthly, What G. K. offers for proof, falls short of being so, himself being
judge, cum sua res agitur. For he excepts against S. J's bringing only the
Credit of John White, whom he calls a prejudiced Adversary, p. 4. Again, By
whom will he prove them, seeing he has none but his own Party to give proof in
the Case, which (says he) as it is no Authentic proof among men, etc. p. 31.
And in p. 33. For no man ou^ht to be accused of a thing, and for a ground of
his Accusation, say, he can prove the thing true, and yet give no proof. Also
in p. 48. he tells S. J. he giving no proof but his bare say so, the impartial
Reader will not believe it. And again in his Postscript, allowing evidences on
both sides, being confessedly Parties, to be no proper Witnesses, adds, Nor did
I any farther make use of evidences of that sort, but to make a balance against
the evidences of their side. (But what balance were his Evidences to make, when
he had printed so many Books against them, before they made any defense at
all?) And yet that he may cast an Odium on his Opponent and others, of all the
Charges he brings in this Book, he offers no evidence, but his own, who is
their Adversary, and confessedly a Party indeed; and when he Cites F. Howghil,
p. 33. J. Crook and Geo. Bishop, p. 30. (to favor his Notion of Baptism) and
Edw. Borough, p. 48. he is so far from referring to the Page, that he does not
so much as give the Title of the Treatises, but in general terms, F. H. has
well asserted in one of his printed Treatises against a Romanist; I have the
printed Testimonies of J. C. and G. B. in their Treatises concerning Friends
Principles; and G. B. has said and writ in Lines (so they were not Lineless
Writings) to his Persecutors. Now is this Man fit to reprove another, who
though a Scholar, writes thus loosly? And when he is put to prove any matter of
Fact, he tells us indeed of Witnesses, that some of them are here in England,
and at London, as p. 14. and 36. That an honest Person of good repute here in
Town is ready to witness, p. 47. and an honest Friend, p. 50. and that to a
matter, wherein he charges high. Nay so far is he put to it for Evidence, that
he brings in William Bradford, p. 40. as an Evidence in his own particular
Case. Has not this Man's Envy outrun his Judgment, and drawn Paul's reproof
upon him, who said, Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not
thy self, Romans 2.21. But if he will not see himself, I hope the Judicious will
see him.

Fifthly, But that which renders the Man yet more mean and base, is that he
thus treats (and vaunts over) an absent Person, who upon reading G. K's
Advertisement, wherein he threatened a Reply, wrote a Letter to him, (which a
Friend left at his House for him) pressing G. K. to hasten his, that he might
have an opportunity to Rejoin, before he went off the Coast. Now surely any
worthy Antagonist, if he had protracted his Work, till the other was too far
gone, than to reach him; yet at least would have been sparing in offering any
thing to blemish his Reputation, as a Man, or as a Christian, without very
full, clear and undeniable Evidence, such as might bespeak its Credit, and not
such, as in his own Case, he rejects; and also, in his Reply, have taken some
notice of the offer made; if this occasion, to detract him, had not been rather
industriously embraced, than casual.

Sixthly, If it be not matter of Flourish, and to set off a bad Cause, why
should he insinuate, that he has Evidence so near as in London, many
Witnesses, p. 14. some in London, ready to witness, p. 36. An honest Person of
good repute here in Town, p. 47. An honest Friend here in Town, p. 50. and
produce neither Testimonial from them, nor so much as name them, that others
might be Judges of their Veracity, as well as himself? But the way he has
taken to slur another, slurs himself, and renders his own Charge the more
suspected? And I may tell him, in his own words, p. 20. If it be enough to make
a man guilty by the single Evidence of a prejudiced Adversary, he has hit the
mark; but if otherwise, he only shows his Enmity and Prejudice.

These short Touches, respecting G. K's partial way of managing Controversy,
the ungovernedness of his Spirit, and his unfair way of treating his Opponent
by obtruding as Evidence, what he disallows from others, (and that at a time,
when he could not defend himself, by reason of his distance) as they are
matters deducible from his late printed Books, without dependence upon Evidence
elsewhere, so are they left with the Reader, as Introductory to the following
Certificates; my aim herein being to vindi^ate the Traduced, undeceive the
Deceived, and lay open the Deceiver, and not to trace him through the several
Parts of his Book, which affords matter enough, but shall refer that to the
Friends more immediately concerned, to do it, when G. K's Answer shall come to
their Hands; and so conclude this Epistle, who am

Thy Friend, J. P.

Certain Certificates received from America, etc.
From our Monthly Meeting, held at our Meeting House, in Chesterfield, in the
Province of West-Jersey, the Second of the Sixth Month, 1694. To all our
Faithful Friends and Brethren, that live and abide in the Truth, Greeting.
HAving seen a Paper printed, wherein we find many black and dark Charges
against many Faithful Friends of known Integrity in these Parts, and in
particular, against our Well-beloved Friend and Brother Samuel Jennings,
therein being Charged with such Enormities, as Drunkenness, running Horse-races
and Persecution, etc. which we fully believe, are altogether false, and
unjustly laid to his Charge; arising from the Spirit of Envy and Darkness, and
to be judged by the Light, that discovers from whence it comes; seeing many of
us have known him from the first of his coming into these Parts, and we know
those things wherewith he is charged, were always an abhorrence to him. As to
his Conversation amongst us, we can sincerely testify, it was coupled with the
Fear of God. He was a Man of great Tenderness and Love to all the Faithful. He
was Just to all Men; and as to his Testimony, we had always good unity with it,
and have been often refreshed hy him. An Instrument in the Hand of the Lord for
good unto many, the Lord has made him in these Parts of the World; and it is
our earnest Desires to the Lord, that he may be preserved in the same Love and
Life, in which he left us: And when his Service for the Lord, and his Truth is
over with you for the present; our Prayers and Supplications are to the Lord
for his safe Return unto us again, Amen.

Signed by order, in behalf of the Meeting; by me Mahlon Stacey.

From our Monthly Meeting held at the House of Thomas Gardner, in Burlington in
West New Jersey, the 6th of the 6th Month, 1694.
TO our dear Friends and Brethren in the blessed Truth of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whose habitation and standing is in the same, according to the
Manifestation of it, wherein God, in the Riches of his Love, first visited us,
to our great Satisfaction and Consolation; being by it brought into a blessed
and sweet fellowship, dear and tender love one to another, in which
(notwithstanding all the Subtle workings of the Enemy, the Accuser of the
brethren) we can say, to the Praise and Honor of the Lord, a little remnant is
still preserved, feeling the good presence of our God, often to attend us, and
refresh us, in our waiting upon him: And in this we dearly Salute you, desiring
your welfare, preservation and prosperity, every way as our own.

Now dear Friends, the writing of these few lines to you at this time, is
occasioned, Who should spread this report but G. K's party here?
by a report we hear, that our worthy Friend Samuel Jennings, now with you, is
much Slighted by reason of a Book, We see whom these Friends repute, as the
Authors.
put forth by Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas Budd, and William Bradford,
Printed in the Year, 1693 called New England's Spirit of persecution, etc.
Contrived and Promulgated chiefly, what in them lies, to the defamation of our
said Friend S. J. And because he is a Man, who for several Years past, has
lived amongst us, both as a Minister and a Magistrate; we are free and willing,
to signify unto you something of our knowledge of him in both Capacities: As
to his behavior, and first, as to his Service in the Church of God. He was a
Man very Zealous for good order, and where any that professed the Truth, had
walked disorderly, his censures of them were no other, then were very needful;
for his endeavor has been to keep Truth from being Reproached; not at all
seeking Lordship or Superiority, as his Adversaries would insinuate. And as to
his Testimony, it was Sound and Savoury, assisted by the good Power and
Presence of the Lord therein, to the day of his departure from us; and we hope
you find it so with him still, we pray God preserve him.

And Secondly, as a Magistrate, we believe he managed the Trust reposed in him,
according to the best of his knowledge, and was no way lofty, or more
high-minded then at other times. We could give some instances of it, as his
Laboring with his Servants at Plough, Cart, Splitting-logs, and other such
like servile Employments, even at the same time, when he was in the place of
Governor, and many other things, too tedious here to relate. And as for Fines
and perquisites, we think he was not, neither had cause to be elevated by
reason of them; neither did he seek them, and if any wrong was done, it was his
own estate that Suffered. Now as to the Book in general, and some of the
Witnesses that live amongst us in p rticular: As to that part of it, that
relates to the Trial at Philadelphia, we shall say little, believing that you
will have a large account thereof, from those that know more of it then we do.
Only, we have seen so much of George Keith's insolent and provoking behavior
toward Friends here away, that we believe his carriage toward Friends there,
as Magistrates, was intolerable, and what proceedings were against them there,
are aggravated beyond the bounds of Truth, with a design chiefly, to defame our
Friend Samuel Jennings, as well as others.

Now to be more particular: And first concerning this Man Peter Boss, that
makes such a great Noise, with his Queries, and Witnesses to prove them; we
shall say a little to what comes within our knowledge. First, we believe that
prejudice has entered him against S. J. ever since that time, the Meeting had
to do with him, and gave Judgment against him, concerning a difference he had
with his Neighbor, and that ever since he has been gathering up, and keeping,
all that any could or would say against him, and if he knew of any, that had
found the least dislike with S. J. he would Query with them, flatter, persuade,
etc. till he had made up those bundles of Stuff in the Book; and if Friends or
sober People, did but know, how reproachful his Life and Conversation has been
amongst us, and how Friends have been exercised and concerned with him, upon
the account of his Servant Maid, for his rude and wicked Carriage toward her,
and because he could not obtain his will, was cruel to her: Now though it never
was our manner, nor has been since the Separation, to expose them, as they
have our Friends to the public view of the World; yet we think fit to give
this account as aforesaid, and it is such matter of Fact, as he dare not deny
it; and notwithstanding all the endeavor of Friends, to keep it from the
public knowledge of the World, that so, neither the Truth, nor the Man might be
reproached, yet, behold this is the Man, thought a fit Instrument to appear in
Company with G. K. T. B. etc. in the Title page of the Book, to disgrace
faithful Friends to the World. Thomas Budd, can, if he will, witness to the
truth of this relation.

Now we are willing to give some account, of the Evidence he produces to make
proof of his Queries. First, as to Samuel Jennings's Riding a Race with John
Slocum, you will have an account by a particular Certificate, of the falsehood
of it. Secondly, as to the Query of his being drunk on board of Joseph Briars
Ship, the falsehood of that will appear, by a Certificate under the Hands of
several Friends, and others that were then in his Company. The Third Query is
proved a lie, by Certificate from the Person concerned. The Fourth Query we
need not say any more to, than the Letter S. Jennings at that time sent to
Elias Far, mentions to clear it: Only that we add, that that Witness, has for
many Years, to our knowledge, been a prejudiced Person, and declared that he
has not had unity with the Quakers, since he came into this Country, but has
since fallen in with our Adversaries, to the disgrace of Friends, both in his
Almanacks, and as well other ways. The Fifth: We are sensible that there was a
difference, between S. Jennings and John Skeen, about a Road John Skeen had
only upon Sufferance to his House, through Samuel Jennings's Corn-field, and
the Gates being oftsn left open, and Cattle came in, and did much damage to the
Corn, S. Jennings denied them of coming any more that way; upon which some
difference arose on both sides, but were quickly ended, and they were good
Friends again, and we do believe that John Skeen, would have scorned such a
small thing should have been published. But it is their great mistake (at best)
to say, they never complained to the Magistrate, or took a course in Law about
it; for we have the warrant yet by us, to prove the contrary, but Friends made
up this also. The Sixth Query is such a piece of nonsense, without any pretense
of witness, time or place, we can say little to it, but leave amongst the rest
of the rubbish. We must leave the Seventh Query there too, only with this mark
upon them, that we believe they are two lies. And as to his witness Henry Beck,
his discredit stands upon record in our Court Book, where the Magistrates have
dealt with him, for getting a young Woman with Child. And this John Smith, was
under the like Circumstances, besides his base carriage to his Master and
Family, by ill examples in wasting and purloyning his Master's goods. And as to
John Bainbridge, tho he is now a great Man amongst them, as we hear, appears in
public in their Meetings; yet he has been known, to be a Drunkard, Fighter,
Quarreler, and so rude and wicked to his aged Mother, calling her Old Jezabel,
and other such behavior, which caused her to leave the Country, and come back
to England.

And as for James Silver, we have only this to say, that he said it was
extorted from him, never thinking it should be put in Print.

Truly, Dear Friends, this sort of work is very unpleasant to us, and looks so
much like our Adversaries doings, that were we not hereunto constrained, for
the Vindication of our traduced Friend Samuel Jennings, whose care for
promoting the Truth, and service in the Church, is at this time fresh in our
remembrance, we should not be thus concerned.

Signed by Order and in Behalf of the Meeting; by me James Marshall.

Burlington, the 9th of the 6th Month, 1694.
WHereas we whose Names are here underwritten, have seen a Book published by
Peter Boss, George Keith, etc. Entitled, New England's Spirit of Persecution,
etc. and in the said Book certain Queries, by way of Reflection on our dear
Friend Samuel Jennings; the first, Whether S. J. did Ride a Race with John
Slocum, etc?

This may Certify all to whom this shall come toward clearing Truth, and our
Friend Samuel Jennings, that we have spoken with the said John Slocum, and he
positively affirms, that he never rode a Race, or Wager with Samuel Jennings;
and there is no Truth in the said Query: And further the said John Slocum did
tell us, that George Keith went to enquire of him, if that S. J. and he did not
ride a Race, and John Slocum told him no.

Isaac Marriot, Henry Grubb, Joyce Marriot.


WHereas a Book Published and Printed in Pensylvania in the Year 1693. of the
Trial of Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas Budd, and William Bradford, wherein
several Queries are proposed concerning Samuel Jennings, implicitly
intimating, and charging him, with several Notorious Transgressions and
Misdemeanors. We, whose Names are here underwritten, do as to the Second
Query, viz. Whether Samuel Jennings was drunk on Board Joseph Bryer's Ship at
Burlington, declare, and positively aver, that he the said Samuel Jennings, was
not in the least measure disordered in Drink at that time, nor at any other
time to our knowledge. Dated this first Day of the sixth Month, 1694.

We the Subscribers being then and there present. John Tatham, Elizabeth
Tatham, William Biddle, Francis Davenport, Richard Basnett, Elizabeth Basnett.


WHereas Peter Boss in the Third Query in the Book, makes use of my Name about
a Survey of Land; I do certify all Friends, and others concerned, that it is
nothing but a very Lie insinuated by way of Query: For I do utterly deny that I
had ever begun to Survey, or had any Right there to Land. As witness my Hand,

John Antrum. his mark

Friend Elias Far,
BY thy Letter, I perceive thy Trouble, concerning my late Sufferings, and
withal thy Judgment upon it, which I think is full forward enough; however my
Answer to thee is, that I have Surveyed all the unsurveyed Lands in that place,
and if this thou call Matthews his Meadow be such, then I have Surveyed it,
and not otherways. Thou judge thou can prove it to be Surveyed, and
Recorded some Years ago to Matthews, which if thou can do, it ends the
dispute, but I had Daniel Leads with me, who Surveyed Matthews's Land, who
would give me no account what number of Acres, or what course they steered, in
any Surveyings of Matthews there; but says in some part of it, they marked a
few Trees, which I desired him to show me, but neither he, nor I, could find
them: So if this were a Survey, I shall leave to be tried and judged, and if it
be none, I would be informed what I have done, that would be abominated amongst
sober Heathens, or that might not be done by as good a Christian as Elias Far.
So that my Answer and Resolution is, that as I have Surveyed all that vacant
Land, which on all sides incloseth the Meadow aforesaid, to hold it until such
time I can receive a better account of any other Title to it. For if Matthews
have any, how much? For all was never pretended to; and if not all, but some,
then how bounded, and how to be found, that the remainder may be known. These
things I expect, and resolve to be satisfied in; and if it appear the Land I
have taken, or any part of it, were Surveyed to Matthews, I will give thee no
trouble to recover it, but will readily resign it; but if not, know I will not
be frighted out of it, by being told of Matthews his great Estate and Interest:
For I hope I have enough to defend a Just Cause, which ends this. From thy
Friend,

Samuel Jennings.
I am going just now a Journey, and shall scarce return, in less than a Week,
in the mean while provide thy self, and at my return, I shall not refuse to
meet thee in any way of a decision.



I Benjamin More do testify, that what is mentioned in the Book, about taking
me by the Throat, is as great a Lie as ever was Printed: But I do say he was as
good a Master both to me and other Servants, as I would desire to serve: As
witness my Hand, (I served him three Years).

Benjamin More.

I Thomas Brian having seen an Accusation in a Book, that my Master Jennings
knocked down, and broke his Cane, on one of his Servants. As to being knocked
down, it is a very Lie, but it is true the Cane was broken, but not by
unmerciful Blows, for they were no more than I then deserved. And as for his
dealings with me, it was always as any honest Master ought to do to his
Servants. I did serve him Six Years, and have known him Fourteen Years, and
never saw him any ways disguised in Drink, or run Races. As witness my Hand,

Thomas Briant.

West-Jersey, the third of the sixth Month, 1694.
To all Friends and People, to whose Hands this may come.
I Having heard and seen many dark and black Charges, against my dear Friend,
and former Master, Samuel Jennings, whom the Lord has made Instrumental in his
Hand, for the good of many in this his powerful Day: And notwithstanding this
his Service, yet he has not escaped the reviling of wicked and ungodly Men.
And I living with him about half a Year, am willing to say something, as I did
know him, and in particular concerning those Reflections cast upon him,
concerning his hard usage of his Servants; I have from time to time, and all
times, as occasion has presented, and do at this time freely speak, and from
the bottom of my Heart believe, that he was a real and a very honest-minded Man
toward his Servants. I may omit to speak of diverse Privileges, which his
Servants had, which I think few in the Country had the like, to speak of the
Care which I have known him take for his Servants, expressing that the desire
of his Heart was; however the Lot of him or his Children might be, as to the
outward, that he might have wherewithal, to do justly by his Servants; who were
willing to come with him, and put their Trust in him. Truly it was manifest
both in Food and Raiment, and as far as I did know, in moderation in Labor;
and I being an Eye and Ear-witness to these things, and seeing the whole aim
and drift, of the Backsliders in our day, (as was their practice in former
Ages) to bespatter, defame and belie the true Followers of Christ,
notwithstanding their great talk of him; this I was willing to signify, and do
rest and remain your loving Friend,

John Willsford, Junior.

Burlington, the fourth of the sixth Month, 1694.
THese are to certify all whom it may concern, that I Benjamin More Junior,
having been a Servant to Samuel Jennings for Seven Years together, do testify,
that he was so good a Master to me, as that if I had a Service to perform
again, I should choose him for my Master, as soon as any one I know: But I must
acknowledge, that my self, and other Servants, that were young Lads like my
self, were quarrelsome, and oftentimes disorderly, for which he gave us
moderate Correction. But when it was discovered, and made appear that young
Silver had stolen Oats, Powder, Shot, Wool and other things, as also John
Smith for Stealing Eggs, etc. to bring to his Wife; I cannot remember he gave
them one blow for that. As witness my Hand,

Benjamin w More. his mark.

Philadelphia, the eighth of the sixth Month, 1694.
I Having seen and heard many Aspersions, that are cast upon my Friend Samuel
Jennings, the which I am well assured, and do certainly know, that they are
cast upon him, from the Enmity and Bitterness, of the Spirits of such, who have
not seeked the Peace of Sion, but rather have labored, as much as in them
lies, for to make Breaches within her Walls, and who have worse than in the
Case of Ham, as much as in them lies, not only uncovered Nakedness, but have
endeavored, to make that show like Nakedness, where there was none; whose
Labor and Works will be rewarded according to their own doings, if that they
repent not, which that they may, has been often the Desire of my Heart.

And having seen the Testimonies of several of my Friends, whom I well know,
and whose Testimonies I believe for to be true concerning him, and having had
some certain knowledge of him my self, and been acquainted with him, almost
ever since he came hither, being here before him, and having been at many
Meetings with him, upon the account of Worshipping, as also at Monthly
Meetings: In both of which, I can freely say, that I never had, that I know of,
the least against his Testimony, but was well satisfied with it, and comforted
by it; and as to his Carriage and Management in Monthly Meetings, I never saw
but that it was according to Truth, and I did always believe and know, that he
was serviceable to the Meeting, to the which he belonged upon that account. And
as to other Concerns, I have several times been concerned with him, in outward
Affairs, and I always found him, to be wise to manage an outward Concern; and
when he has been grated upon, I can singly say, both in things Spiritual and
Temporal, that I never saw, but that he behaved himself well. And this I freely
signify for Truth's sake, and to ease my Friend, of those Aspersions.

William Biles.

POSTSCRIPT.
THese foregoing Certificates, relating to some of the Charges exhibited
against S. J. I leave with the Candid, who is willing indifferently to hear,
what may be offered on both sides, and is not prejudicate; withal advising him,
that by a Letter I saw which came with them, more were behind, which could not
be got ready to be sent by that Ship. Yet one observation (occurring from a
Clause in that signed by the Monthly Meeting at Burlington, mentioning G. K's
insolent and provoking Behavior to Friends there, and their Belief that his
Carriage to the Magistrates in Pensylvania was intolerable) I think not
improper to bring in here, from the Analogy or Proportion the one has to the
other. For in p. 47. G. K. discanting upon S. J's Cruelty (as he terms it) to a
Boy and his Master, causing the Boy to be whipped with Thirty Five Lashes on his
Naked Body, with a Horse-whip, and the Master to be put in the Stocks, he
assigns the provocation to be but small, viz. a small default of a poor Boy,
that did throw a little Dirt or Earth at a Constable, and the Master for
calling the said S. J. (who was then Governor) Prick-Louse Tailor. Now is not
the alleviating or extenuating such Offenses, an indirect abetting them, which
shows how lightly he resents an Affront upon Magistracy, while the Persons are
such as he has a pique against, and it gives the greater ground to suspect,
that his late Actions have been correspondent. But is it indeed a small default
to fling Dirt at a Constable (especially when in the Execution of his Office,
and to suppress a Tumult, as this is said to be) or to call a Governor,
Prick-Louse Tailor? Does the Principle he pretends to, teach any such thing? Or
has it been the Custom of Friends here or elsewhere, thus to demean
themselves, toward those that were set in Authority over them, whatever their
Extract might have been? Not that I count it a disgrace to be a Tailor, but the
word Prick-Louse is a by-name, and word of Scorn and Contempt, which whoever
will presume to give to a Governor, must needs be uneasy to the Government.
As for the Severity of the Punishment, he offers no evidence but his own,
though he tells of an Honest Person, of good Report in London, but not
producing him, his Allegation deserves no Credit. As to that part of it, which
he would fasten on S. J. that also wants Explanation, viz. That it is the
Custom there (for it is not here) for the Governor to award the Correction,
which belongs to the Office of a Justice of Peace. However this deduction seems
natural, that things were at an ill pass there, when such Insolences could be
offered to Magistracy; and the Offenders ought to be made Exemplary, to prevent
a growing Evil: But G. K. does not commend his own Conduct, in being Patron to
the Abuse, by making light of it, and yet so virulently attaching them, by whom
those Malignants suffered, as if the Punishment were great, the default small;
nor does he less than betray an implacable Spirit against S. J. to rake up
matter of Accusation against him, of so long standing, as that must needs be,
who was in England in the Year 1684. and has not since been Governor there.
This makes good the saying of the Wise Man, with which I shall close, viz.
Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who shall stand before Envy? Prove.
27.4.

And to these Certificates received from America, let me add one more, received
from a Friend in London, whom I will name, which is more than he does: But what
he wants in Evidence, he makes up in Charge, alleging, p. 50. That S. J. most
cruelly Whipped his Maid in Bed, with a Horse-whip, and a few Lines after
represents the Act as most unmerciful, and obscene. The like Charge was
exhibited, p. 21. of New England's Spirit of Persecution, etc. viz. That he
inhumanely Whipped her Naked in her Bed, the manner and circumstances of which
(says that Nameless Libeller) I here omit for Modesty's sake. The truth of
this, I have endeavored to satisfy my self in; and as I understand that what
was done, was about Twelve Years ago, and nothing so as represented, either
Cruel or Obscene, but the very having a Whip in his Hand, accidental, he being
just ready to take Horse, and had done, had not the Child's crying prevented;
so I presume that what follows will both detect the Asperser's Malice, clear
the Innocent, and satisfy the Unbyassed. The Relation was thus.

There being a Scandalous Report, published in Print more than once, That
Samuel Jennings Whipped his Maid most unmercifully, naked in her Bed, thereby
endeavoring to render him Cruel, Immodest and Obscene, and I being at that
time (when this pretended Act was done) in West Jersey, where I did much
frequent his House, and knowing the Truth of this matter, do certify it, as it
really was, which is thus; The Maid lay with their young Child, which then
cried extremely for a considerable time, and her Master and Mistress knocked and
called very much, but by no means could make her take notice of it, insomuch
that they feared the Child would have been harmed, whereupon her Master run up
Stairs, having his Whip in his Hand, at whose coming she starts and sat
upright in her Bed, and in that posture he gave her Two or Three strokes over
the Back, and no otherwise. The Maid lived with him a considerable time after
this, and I have heard her speak very well of him, never complaining of any
hard usage. This is Attested by me,

London, 23. of 11. Month, 1694. Sarah Collins.

FINIS.

