The Great and Sole Troubler of the Times Represented in A Mapp of Misery: OR
A Glimps of the Heart of Man, which is the Fountain from whence all Misery
flows, and the source into which it runs back. Drawn with a dark pencill, by a
dark hand, in the midst of Darkness.

Lord, What is man? Thou searchest the Heart, Thou tryest the Reins; No man
knows himself, Thou know every man. Lord, What is Man!

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the black spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's. 1649.

To the Reader.
READER,
BEhold (if thou be'st able to bear the sight) a few specks of thine own black
dark Self, some broken fragments of that filthiness which every man thinks he
is free from, and yet the heart of every man is full of. Who is there that looks
not on the more hideous part of Evil, at least, as at a distance from himself?
Little does man think, while he cries out against it, and seems very zealous to
have it purged out of the whole world (if it were possible) that it lodges so
close in his own bosom, that he does not, nay cannot discern it there. I the
Lord search the heart, and try the reins, but no man knows what is in his
heart, or in his reins.

Abundance of wickedness has broken forth in these few years, and every eye
sees it in the spreading, in the budding forth of it, but who sees it in the
root? It appears in the Kings party, in the Parliaments party, in the Armies
party; among the Episcopal sort, Presbyterians, Independents, etc. All these
see it plainly enough in one another, and strengthen themselves in accusations
against one another; but who suspects it at home? Who imagines, while he cries
out against Pride, Covetousness, Cruelty, Treason, Heresy, Blasphemy, etc.
that he himself is the spring whence these issue, and where they would live and
flourish, if all the outward appearances of them were cut off?

What Moses once said to the people of Israel near the time of his death, That
they had seen great works and wonders of God, both in Egypt and in the
Wilderness, yet God had not given them an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see,
nor ears to hear, unto that very day, Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 4. The same may be applied
to me, and every man, in the sense in hand. We have seen great and strange
breakings forth of wickedness; Man has been stripped almost naked, turned
inside out; this have we all seen, but we have not seen our selves in this
sight; our own nakedness is not understood by us: It is the Kings party that is
so unjust, so profane, so tyrannical, so cruel, so self-ish, not the
Parliaments: it is the Parliaments party, not the Armies: it is the Armies, not
the Levellers: So in Religion, It Is the Episcopal party that is so loose, so
formal, so oppressive in matters of Religion, not the Presbyterians: It Is the
Presbyterians, not the Independents; or if some of all these, yet not I, not
such as are of my stamp, of my practice. Ah subtle, whorish Self! who can find
thee in thy cuning shifts, who can lodge wickedness so secretly in thy heart,
that thou thy self know it not to be there? Well, shall I tell thee what I
think? Surely Condemnation is written in every man's forehead: Every man, in
finding fault with others, pronounces judgment against himself daily. When thy
heart shall be opened by the Searcher of it, and the quintessence of that
discovered to be in thee, whereof thou have condemned but some extracts in
others, what will thou be able to plead why that judgment should not pass upon
thee, that thou have passed upon others. Doubtless thou must be forced to
confess, that how unrighteous soever thy Judgment has been concerning others,
(as most of our Judgments passed upon others are, though we think otherwise,)
yet the Judgment of God, concerning thee, is just: And it is a righteous thing,
that thou thy self should undergo that sentence, which thou thy self have
pronounced against others, in a case far short of thine, especially seeing thy
Savior (who can be thy only hope of reserve) bids thee expect it; for he
positively told his Disciples, That with what Judgment they did judge they
should be judged, Mat. 7. 2. Thou have here presented to thee a little taste of
a parcel of thy Self, how thou will relish it, I know not: Thou may think
thy self injured because it is laid somewhat close to thee, without such
limitations and exceptions as thou might have crept out at. Well, be it so,
but know withal, that when thou come to be searched by the Candle of the
Lord, thou must be forced to own these yet farther, and perhaps far more
deeper, and greater abominations then these. However take this as kindly as
thou can from him, who waits, in some measure, as he is enabled, for the
destruction of this whorish Self, both in himself and in thee. Who then shall
become entirely Thine.

Isaac Penington.

The great and sole TROVBLER of the TIMES Represented in A Map of Misery, etc.
FROM
JEREMIAH 17. Ver. 9, 10. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it?

I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins.


HEre are four Eminent things affirmed concerning the Heart of Man.

1. The extreme deceitfulness of it, The heart is deceitful above all things.
There are abundance of deceits in the World, deceits in every Art, in every
Trade, in every Motion, in every Appearance, in all the objects of Sense,
Reason, Religion; but nothing like the heart of man for subtilty, for secrecy,
for depth of deceit. There is deceitfulness, almost in all things, that
presently cozens a superficial eye. All things are painted, and he that looks
but upon the paint in things, and imagines, because he can see and acknowledge
the paint, that he sees and knows the thing, is deceived in all things. But in
some things there is a thicker paint, they are more thoroughly guilt, they are
so curiously wrought, so like the thing they represent, that it will require a
very narrow piercing eye to look through them into the substance it self. Some
things have yet a deeper dye, that it is almost impossible to discern them.
There are such cheats and cheaters abroad in the world in all sorts of things,
in all sorts of objects; in the objects of sense, in the objects of reason, in
the objects of Religion, that it is almost if not altogether impossible for any
man to escape delusion, who meets with an accurate cheat, in the hand of an
accurate cheater.

But all these are nothing to the heart of a man, the heart of a man far
surpasses all these, It is deceitful above all things, it has far more
curious deceits, and it is far more exact at the Art of deceiving then any
thing else can be. It has deceits and skill to cozen it self with: It can seem
to hate sin, and make it self believe it does hate sin; all manner of sin, its
own beloved sin, its inmost sins most, and yet all this while hugg, cherish,
embrace, enjoy them; unseen, unknown to it self: it can kiss sin and suck the
sweetness of sin, even in those very prayers it seems to put up against sin,
and of that very sin which it seems in its own spirit to be most fearful of,
and most bent against. It can feed sin with that stroke which it seems to give
to it, to mortify and stab it. It can seem to be zealous for God, for the
advancement of his glory, for the good of man in general, and more
particularly for the people of God, big with motions and designs this way, and
in the mean time hate God his glory, yea, hate man and the people of God, and
in those very designs and motions, endeavor the throwing of them all down;
and all this so unknown to it self, that it would think, you did it the
greatest injury in the world to conceive so of it; nay, it should be injurious
to it self, if it should suspect any such thing concerning it self. Here is a
deceiver indeed, other deceivers cosen others, and they are very exact in
deceit that can cosen all others, but the heart can cosen it self at any time,
or in any thing it pleases, and so cosen it self too, that it is impossible to
suspect deceit in that thing wherein it cosens it self. The heart is indeed
deceitful above all things.

2. The extreme wickedness of it, and desperately wicked, it is as wicked as it
is deceitful, as filthy within, as finely painted without. It is not for
nothing that it has this large cloak of sin, but it has within proportionable
wickedness to cover with it. There is a Fountain, a Sea, an Ocean of
wickedness, and of the worst kind, the intensest kind, desperate wickedness.
The sin that appears abroad in the world, is but some drops, some rivolets
of that that is in the heart; nay, it is hardly of the same kind. The evil
that appears in the World, it is modest, rational, lovely in comparison of
that which is in the heart; that, there is a more mad, a more desperate kind of
wickedness; that Uncleanness, that Pride, that Cruelty, that Enmity, that
Rebellion against God, that Blasphemy that makes such a noise in the world;
Alas, it is a poor piece of wickedness to that which is in thine and my
heart. If our hearts were opened and compared with such outward actings of
those persons we now think very abominable, Alas, they would be Saints in
respect of us, the sight of such a depth of desperate wickedness would swallow
up a little shallow breakings forth of it.

3. The universal ignorance of man concerning his heart; nay, the
impossibility of any ones knowing it. Who can know it? Such a question
according to the common rule of Interpretation, is a strong negation, more
forcible then if it had been barely thus expressed, No man can know it.

Who can know it? Every man thinks he knows his heart, charge him with any
thing, how confidently will he go to purge himself of it, as if he were
absolutely certain it were not in him. But his heart deceives him about the
knowledge of it self, as well as about other things, for he does not, he cannot
know it. He may take a great deal of pains to search and examine it; he may have
some experience of some evil in it, some guesses at more, but the knowledge of
the evil of it he has not.

Man is not capable of knowing his own heart, it is too bigg for him to
comprehend, too vaste, too deep for his shallow brains, to receve the knowledge
of. The light of Religion may show him much evil in it, and make him sensible
that there is much more, but distinctly to show it him, all the light of
Religion that I have tasted of, or heard of, cannot attain to. At sometime I
have had some astonishing sights of a depth of pride, unbelief, covetousness,
hypocrisy, etc. but distinctly to discern, or measure that depth, has still
been too hard for me, when the light was clearest and fullest. And here I am
told, it is not my condition alone, but the condition of others also; yea of all
men, Who can know it?

4. The work that God is continually about in reference to the heart of man, I
the Lord search the heart, I try the reins. Would you know what God is
continually doing in the World, why he is searching the heart, and trying the
reins. No man can do it, He can, and does. He has a bucket that he can let
down into this great deep, and bring up what kind of filth of it he pleases,
and pour it forth in the sight of the Sun.

This is the work God has always been about-Look into the Scripture, what is
it, but Gods discovery of man's heart, a record of Gods searching the heart, and
trying the reins. It is man's work to hide and cover his heart, and to lay all
his loathsomness deep, and remove it as far out of the sight of himself and
others, as possibly may be. It is Gods work to search out his filth, to fetch
it up out of this dark depth, and set it in order before his and others eyes.
And what a man may seem most free from, and think himself wholly mortifitified
unto, God chooses to draw forth and discover to him and others. Drunkenness out
of temperate Noah, Incest out of chaste Lot, Unbelief out of faithful
Abraham, Rigid sharpness out of meek Moses, Impatience and curses out of
patient and blessing Job, Pride out of newly broken and humbled Hezekiah. And I
have often found, that what evil I have dis-relished in others, and thought
God might justly be meeet with them for, it was soon after opened, and let
loose in mine own heart.

This deserves serious consideration, for as it is the work God is always
about, so he seems now more especially to apply himself to it, he has gone
very far in it, he has so opened this sink in all sorts of men, in every man,
that every man is become abominable, I had almost said, to all but himself, and
his own party. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins.

My intention at present is only to treat a little concerning the second of
these, the desperate wickedness of of man's heart, wherein there may also be a
further touch given about the deceitfulness of it too, it being a part of its
wickedness, as well as cloak for all the rest.

The heart is desperately wicked.

This is his testimony of it, who tries and knows it. I might mention other
Scriptures also which speak to the same purpose, as that in Eccles. 9. 3. The
heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while
they live. He speaks not concerning one man's heart, but generally concerning
every man's, the heart of the sons of men, and couples evil and them
altogether: Nor does he speak restrainedly concerning some kind of evil, but
indefinitely taking in all manner of evil; there is nothing that is called
evil, but is to be found in the heart of man. Neither is there only a spice
or tang of some kind, nay of every kind of evil, but every man's heart is full
of all manner of evil. The heart is a very vast thing, but as vast as it is,
it is full, and that of evil, has as much evil in it, as it can hold.

And madness is in their heart while they live. Madness is the greatest
distemper that can befall man, it quite unmans the man, takes away his reason,
or rather poisons it, that it becomes no way profitable to him, but a strong
engine to entangle him; and the greater and stronger his reason is, the more is
he bound in the fetters of his distemper, and the less able to help himself.
There are three known properties of madness, of mad men. Misehievousness,
especially to themselves, they care not how they cut and would themselves.
Insensibleness, they feel not the smart of blows. And Wilfulness, there is no
persuading of them to any thing, least of all to any thing that is good for
themselves.

This is the true picture, the resemblance of every man; he is mad, what others
appear to him to be in a shadow, he himself is in truth, a mad man, a man
destitute of his true reason, that which is lest, is no more profitable to him,
then that is in him, whom he calls the mad man. He has all the properties of
madness, He is mischievous to himself, cuts, flashes, wounds his soul
unmercifully. He is insensible, insensible of the wounds he gives himself,
insensible of the afflictions God lays upon him. He is wilful, there is no
persuading him to any thing, but what agrees with his madness; you cannot
displease him more then to offer him Physic, nor torment him more then force
him to take it. And when God does force any upon him, and cause it to work, how
does he roar and cry out, as if the healing of his madness were the loss of his
happiness? Nor does this madness lie in some of his motions, but in his heart,
where it keeps possession all the days of his life. And madness is in their
heart while they live, while man lives, while man has an heart of his own,
this madness lies in it when he dies, and has a new heart given him, that heart
is free from it. So that well known place, Mat. 15. 19. Out of the heart
proceeds evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witness, blasphemies. What a bundle of wickedness is here that proceeds out of
the heart, and therefore has its place and residence in the heart.

To illustrate this further, I shall instance in some of the more common sort
of Wickednesses, which lodge in the heart, and contribute somewhat toward the
filling of it, as particularly in these, Pride, Covetousness, Envy,
Unrighteousness, Enmity, Cruelty, Unbelief, Hypocrisy.

I. Pride: Pride is a desperate Evil, it puts every thing out of its place,
thrusts down what is excellent, lifts up what is base and vile, sets all things
in a combustion and contention. What is the reason there is so much trouble and
disorder every where, but because there is so much pride, which is still
begetting, heightning and nourishing them. Now the heart of man abounds with
this desperate Pride. Pride chiefly acts and discovers it self in three things,
in high conceits of Self, in great desires, and vehement endeavors to exalt and
set up Self, and all these are in every man; there is no man (though perhaps
most think otherwise concerning themselves) free from such conceits, from such
desires, from such endeavors.

1. Every man is highly conceited of himself, of what he is, of what he does,
of what he deserves.

There is none so uncomely, but they are lovely in their own eyes; none so
foolish, but they think themselves wise; every man admires his own parts, his
own abilities, his own gifts; every Christian, so far as he is a man, his own
graces; and he is not set high enough thinks himself; he is qualified for
higher employments, in Chruch, in Commonweal, then he is put to.

Then for his Actions, how highly does he think of them also? What ever he does
is well done. Seldom does a man do anything so ill, that he does not justify
himself in, in some respect or other. Is he angry? He has just cause. Does he
any wrong? He was justly provoked, it was not injury, but that which the party
deserved. His good actions are exceeding good, his bad he was drawn to, incited
to, tempted to they did not flow from himself; He has still somewhat before
him, to make himself and his own actions lovely to him, and to take off that
unloveliness which any else may fasten upon them.

Lastly, For his desires, He values them too according to the rate he sets upon
himself, and upon his actions: He thinks he deserves highly of men, of
Christians, for all he does for them, and among them, He is never prized by any
according to his worth, his friends do not value him enough, Church,
Commonweal, where ever his service is, it is not sufficiently esteemed or
rewarded.

These are the thoughts that lie hid in every man's heart concerning himself,
and at sometimes break forth so into his view, that he must needs shut his
eyes, or acknowledge them.

2. Man has great desires to set up himself; it is almost, if not altogether,
the sole of his desires, to please himself, to have every thing subject to
himself; to be esteemed, honored and made use of himself, to have his abilities
employed, commended, rewarded; this is the very heart of the man, this is that
every man pants after, and would fain possess.

3. He uses great endeavors too to attain this; He will run through all
difficulties, use all diligence, venture all hazards and dangers to satisfy
himself, to please himself. What cost will a man be at to set up his own will?
How many contentions are dangerously begun and chargeably maintained, merely to
humor a man's own will? When Reason, Judgment, nay, sense of smart says, Let
them fall; No, says Will, I will rather loose all first, and this alone many
times continues them. What pains will a man take to maintain his own wisdom? He
will rather lay his folly open by multitudes of vain excuses, then suffer a
blemish of indiscretion to lie upon him. How eagerly does he maintain the
excellency of that which he commends, the worthlesness of that which he
dispraises? This is that every man strives for, to have his will the rule, his
wisdom the Counselor; if any thing be amiss, he would have had it otherwise;
if anything prove amiss, it was because his advice was not followed. All a man's
thoughts, reasonings, discourses, beating of his brains (were he able to see
it) tend this way, either directly to advance somewhat that has reference to
Self, or secretly to undermine somewhat that stands in the way of the
advancement of Self-Profit, Pleasure, Honor, either outward or inward, which
draw all men after them, what are they, but several ways of advancing self
more sutably to its temper? This is the first of those evils proposed to be
instanced in, which has its seat in the heart of man, Pride.

II. The second is Covetousness. As man only would set up himself, so he
would only enjoy all himself. He would 'dwell alone; He would be as God is,
alone, and none besides him: He would have all to himself; He is never
satisfied, while there is any thing to be had. His eye is never satisfied with
seeing, nor his ear with hearing, nor his heart with enjoying. Every thing in
man immeasurably covets, oh what a depth then is there in his heart that feeds
all these. We look upon raking and scraping a little silver and gold together,
as the chief part of covetousness; Alas! that is but one branch of it, and but
a poor petty one neither, in respect of what is in, and if occasion serve, can
arise out of his heart.

III. Envy. This is a desperate evil too; it did David much hurt, His feet had
almost slipped, Psalm. 73. v. 1. How? While he envied at the foolish, verse. 3.
Man envies at good that falls besides himself, at others being lift up, at the
thriving of others, either in outward or spirituals. As he would be all, and
have all, so he envies both at God and men that are above him.

IV. Unrighteousness. Man is unjust in all his actions, in all the courses he
takes to lift up himself, to attain the enjoyment of things himself. He is
unrighteous toward God and men in his dealings with them, in his
interpretations of his own, and their actions. He judges favorably of
himself, but severely of them. There is no man almost that has to do with him,
acts well toward him; he acts well toward all others. Nay, for God himself,
it is he that is too blame: He acts well toward God, But God acts not kindly
toward him. He fasts, he prays, he believes, he waits; but God does not
bless him enough, either in outward, or spirituals. He is forward enough in
praying, in fasting; but God is not forward enough in taking notice thereof.
Wherefore have we fasted? etc. The ways of the Lord are not equal.

V. Enmity. Man hates everything but himself. He hates man, he hates God. The
haters of God, it is a Scripture phrase, and it is that which is the temper of
man, it might be used for one of the most proper descriptions of him. Would you
know what man is? why, this he is, one that hates God, and all thoughts of
reconciliation and union with him.

And so he hates man too, hateful, and hating one another, even persons tied
together by the greatest bonds of wickedness (where likeness might breed love)
yet hate one another.

Ah! do not shift this from your selves to others, but know, when ye hear of
any wickedness in the heart of any man, it is but the heart of every man drawn
out. There is hatred to God, and hatred to man in us all. See it drawn out of
any heart, and ye may be sure it is in evey heart: and the reason, why men
cannot believe it is in them, is because there was never occasion to draw it
out forcibly and undeniably from them.

Object. But this is evidently otherwise, will some be ready to reply. Does not
man naturally love his kindred and friends, it is only his enemies that he
hates.

Answ. The answer is as ready. Man only loves himself: and so much as is of
Self in any thing, so much he loves. The reference that is to Self in any
thing, he loves: Therefore he loves his kindred, because they are a part of
Self, they are but Self a little multiplied, and removed. And thus he loves
God, let him look upon him as a preserver of himself, as a Savior of himself,
as one that is good and kind to him: but this is not the love of God, but
self-love. In this sense a man may be said to love most things, for most things
have some reference to him, and that reference he loves; but this is not the
true love of any thing, but the love of Self in that thing. This is not a pure,
but an adulterous love, and the flowings forth of it in every kind, and in
every step, are unchaste.

VI. Cruelty. Man is very cruel indeed, nothing but cruelty. Mercy is Gods;
and when man seems to show mercy, it is Gods acting in him, though he know it
not, it is the bowels of God, streaming forth from God through him as the pipe:
But man himself is cruel, Cruel to the creatures, a very Tyrant over them.
Cruel to men, Homo homini lupus, hence he is resembled to, and called in
Scripture by the name of such creatures as are most ravenous, as a Lion, Bear,
Leopard, Woolf, etc. Cruel to God, he would kill all the discoveries of God in
himself, in others, in heaven, in earth, and put out his very being too, if he
could. This is much shut up within man, by him who bounds all things, and most
of all the heart of man, but let him but once let it loose, and anger and fear
enough in man excite and draw it out, then it will soon appear somewhat like it
self.

VII. Unbelief, distrust of God. Man, there is no faith toward God in him; He
cannot, he will not trust God, but himself, and creatures like himself he will
trust, nay cannot, forbear trusting, how often soever he be deceived and
wounded thereby. The Jews, Gods own people, could never be drawn to trust God,
but the helps and means themselves sought out, though they proved continually
broken reeds to them. All the experiences they had of God, all the miracles he
did for them, all the miseries they felt by declining him in their distresses,
and running to other shifts, could never bring them to trust God, but still
every fresh occasion draws forth unbelief in them, and murmuring from them.

Perhaps some believers may be apt to complain, that here wants distinction
all along, and may have such distinctions in their minds, whereby they can
throw off all this from themselves, and lay it at the doors of unregenerate
and unbeleeving men's hearts.

To such I shall say only this, Oh sirs, take heed, left when you heart come
to be ripped up, and the depths therein laid open, they prove so vaste, as to
confound and swallow up that distinction, which now appears so great and clear
in your eyes.

VIII. The last evil that I now shall mention, is Hypocrisy. The heart is
very deceitful, cozens men, cozens it self, assaies to cozen God. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked. There is that in the heart of man, that will
attempt to mock and deceive God.

Though all these forementioned evils are in man, yet there is no persuading
him, any one of them is in him, at least in any such degree, as is spoken of,
so deeply does his heart deceive him.

For Pride. He is not so lift up in his spirit as was expressed. He has not any
high conceits of himself, or of his own parts, or abilities, or graces; he sees
others go beyond him: And he has no such desires in him to be exalted; nay, he
would not be to high, nor does he use endeavors that way, he takes no pains at
all to lift up himself, or to have himself exalted.

For Covetousness: It is far from him too, he does not rake and scrape as he
sees many others do, but he is very well contented with what he has. Is it not
a strange thing, yet very common? The most wretchedly covetous persons can see
and cry out against Covetousness in others, but they themselves seem to
themselves free of it, and all that they do in this kind is no more then they
ought, or at least are warranted to do.

For Envy; He envies no man, perhaps he will confess he wishes it were somewhat
better with himself, but yet he is not offended or grieved at the prosperity of
any other.

So for Unrighteousness; He is far from that, he will rather wrong himself,
then any one else.

And for Enmity; He bears ill will to none, forgives all the world with all his
heart.

As touching Cruelty; God forbid he should be so wicked as to be cruel to any.
Is thy servant a dog? said Hazael, when the Prophet told him weeping, what
cruelty he would exercise in ripping up women with child, etc. He could not
harbor a thought of any such barbarism lying within him.

Unbelief likewise; which uses to discover it self, both in a man's spirit,
withdrawing from a naked depending on God, and in running to other things for
support and relief, is exceedingly hid in the heart from the man, so that he
cannot see or acknowledge it, unless in the lump, (which the heart in a secret
craft may do, to hide the branches of it the more securely.)

There is a notable example concerning the deceit of the heart about the
unbelief of it, in the coherence of this Verse with the former. The Prophet had
pronounced a curse from the Lord upon the unbeleeving heart, Verse 5. Thus
says the Lord, Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. And had also proclaimed the
believer blessed, Verse. 7. 8. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and
whose hope the Lord is, for he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, etc.
What now would this people say to him, who were always running to other means,
and departing from the Lord, but yet could never be convinced thereof? Why
surely they would presently be blessing themselves; they would look upon the
Gentiles, (who did not know God, nor trust God) as the persons to whom this
curse did belong, but as for themselves, they were heirs of this blessing:
Their hearts could witness within them, that their trust was not in men; indeed
they did address themselves to men sometimes for help as means under God, so
they might make use of the Egyptians or Assyrians in such a sense, but they did
not trust them, their only trust was in God. Ah, says the Prophet, the heart is
deceitful above all things: Little do you know how your hearts cozen you; you
still think, you only use means under God, and your trust is alone in him,
whereas in truth your heart departs from him, you dare not, you cannot trust
him in any distress, looking it in the face, and not shrinking back; but your
heart is raised or dejected, according as the means and helps it has recourse
to, appear unto it.

So exceeding deep is the hypocrisy of the heart, that man can never believe
what is in him, until he see it break forth from him, and long may it break
forth from him before he can be drawn to see it; very palpable must that evil
be, which man's heart cannot at least in some measure shift off from it self.

Thus thou have had a little glimmering of the grosser part of thy self, which
Self is the strange woman that flattereth thee with her lips, alluring thee
from the chaste and pure embraces of thy first love into her unclean bed: But
should I track her in her more refined footsteps and motions, in her several
dresses, attires, ornaments, paintings, and show thee her covered here with a
sweet meek disposition, with modesty, with learning, with a natural nobleness of
spirit, with all the excellencies of nature, covered there with all the
excellencies of Religion, crept into every form of holiness that is visible in
the world, into all duties, into all graces, into all spiritual motions, into
fasting, prayer, believing, waiting, love, joy, peace, sorrow for sin,
humility, patience, etc. what would thou say? What would thou think? How
would thou stand amazed.

And yet is she not now thus laid open to the sight of every observing eye, and
espied under all these by them that watch her?

She was clothed with Civility, with Morality, with Generosity, adorned with
the choicest flowers of nature, learning, art, in the Kings party, so finely
gilded and painted with nobleness and bravery, that her worth seemed to be
real and truly excellent: But how base did Selfbreak forth, and appear under
all these, and put off these at pleasure? What base unworthy actings,
unbeseeming men of honor or ingenuity, did Self put those noble spirits upon?

She was clothed with Religion, the Reformation thereof, and regaining of just
Rights and Liberties, and setting up a perfect Administration of Righteousness
in the Parliaments party; a brave attire, very lovely apparel: but did not Self
too apparently lie underneath it? Did not this appear to be the dress of Self,
which she made use of, and threw off at pleasure?

She was clothed with several of the highest and most beautiful forms of
Religion in the Army, with a flaming zeal of setting open the fountain, and all
the channels of Righteousness, possessing every man with a present enjoyment of
those Rights and Liberties which others had under pretense of preserving,
defrauded them of. Sure here is integrity, here is the naked Glory of God, and
good of the Nation springing up: Who would think to find Self lie lurking close
here too?

Nay, it is commonly reported, that this Harlot is crept into Churches,
Ordinances, Religious Exercises; into Fastings, Prayers, Preachings, Morning
Exercises, where Self-advancement, Self-interests, Self Ends, Self-designs
smell so strong, that they are offensive to all, but such as are engaged in
them.

Blush oh Heavens, and be astonished oh Earth, how are ye both stripped!
There Is no virtue nor strength left in either of you. Natural Excellencies have
now no power to keep Self under in the earth among men, but there she gets up,
and will be Mistress. Neither have spiritual excellencies any power to keep her
under among Christians, but there she lifts her self up as a Queen also. What
Christ says is to little purpose, what Self says is become now the Law to
Christians. If she sow the seeds of enmity and division among them, it must
grow, and the seed of Love which Christ sows must be nipped. Though Christ say,
This is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you; Yet if
Self say, This is my Commandment, that ye hare one another, that ye stir up
hatred against one another; that though other men would agree and be at peace,
yet ye lay about you, and keep up War and bloodshed for your own ends and
interests; while Self is Mistress it must be so, her Law must stand.

But I find my spirit growing weary of this subject, (there is another part
that I would fain be vievving of, and digging into, and I am apt to groan out;
oh that this were shut, and that opened, or rather that this were burnt, and
consumed, and that fourbished and brightened,) I shall therefore only propose
some few Considerations by way of Consequence from the Premises, and so
conclude.

The heart is desperately wicked. Then

1. See what all is, and must needs be, that flows from the man; from such a
bitter fountain what can proceed, but it must be bitter? If the root be so bad,
all the branches and fruit must needs be naught. All the thoughts, words and
actions of man, what are they? surely as they come from his heart, so they
cannot but be like his heart, polluted, unclean, filthy, noisome, offensive to
every pure eye, to every pure taste, to every pure nostril. He that has a pure
eye, a pure palate, a pure nostril, cannot endure the sight, the relish, the
scent of any thing of man.

And this is the Judgment that God, who knows what they are, passes concerning
them, concerning all that flows from man, all his thoughts, all his words, all
his actions. He passes this judgment upon his thoughts, Genesis 6. 5. And God saw
that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. What ever man thinks
of, his thought is evil: If he think concerning God or man, or himself; if he
think to please himself, if he think to cross himself, to deny himself, to
worship God, to please God, to subject himself to the will of God, yet if this
flows from the man, it must needs be evil, the root being so corrupt. The
purity of the object, and the seeming integrity of the action, cannot take off
the impurity which goes from the heart into every motion and thought of it.
There are some kind of thoughts, malicious thoughts, cruel thoughts, passionate
thoughts, covetous thoughts, unclean thoughts, such as these man will easily
yield to be evil; but that his holy thoughts, his religious thoughts, his
Meditations on God, his goodness, his providence, his thoughts of Reformation,
of suppressing evil in others, and searching and purging it out of his own
heart also, that these should be evil, what man does or can suspect? yet this
sentence God passes on all his thoughts: Nay, though he do not go so far as a
thought, if he do but imagine in any kind, the very forming of a thought in
him, the very first motion of a desire before it, and the object can meet, this
is evil; the least, the weakest motion of the heart has strength enough of evil
in it: And this is not only in some imagination, when his heart is framing some
notorious wicked thing, but in every imagination, what ever thought his heart
is framing; the heart is evil, and the thought is evil, and the passage between
the heart and thought is evil. And it is only evil; it is not mixed with evil,
but it is all evil, nothing but evil; it has not only a tincture of evil going
along with it, a savor of corruption sticking to it, but it is all corrupt.
Nor is it only thus sometimes, or now and then, but continually; all the time
of man, in all the several shapes and changes he appears in of civility,
morality, Religion, shifting out of one into another, still it is thus with
him, still of this nature are his thoughts, his imaginations; day and night,
winter and summer, seed time and harvest, His imaginations are not only evil in
the night, in the dark time of his ignorance, but in the day, in his brightest
time, in the time of his clearest light and knowledge; they are not only evil in
the Winter, in time of adversity, while he is under sharp storms of
afflictions, under distempers and oppressions of the outward or inward man, but
in the Summer too, in the time of his prosperity, when he thrives either
outwardly, or in his spirit; they are not only evil in his sad seed time, where
he meets with much trouble, temptation and interruption, but in his harvest,
when he brings in his crop of peace, joy, rest, comfort. Continually,
continually, in every state, in every condition, in every change evil, and only
evil is every imagination of the thoughts of his heart.

His words are evil too, they come from the same root, Out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks; they are unclean, for they defile the man, that
which comes out of the man defiles the man.

So also are his actions, all his actions his very best, his praying, his
hearing, his repenting, his believing, etc. they are unclean. Prove. 25. 27. The
sacrifice of the wicked is abomination; how much more when he bringing it with
a wicked mind. The wicked here is the person in whom this evil heart is, we
look upon him as wicked, whose life is evil in our eyes, but God looks upon him
as wicked, whose heart is evil in his eyes. The sacrifice of this wicked person
is his worshipping God, his serving God in the way of his own appointment; his
praying, hearing, meditating, etc. now this is abomination, that which God
loathes, his very soul abhors; that which he himself would loath, if he had but
eyes to see into it. How much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? It
may be made more loathsome by corrupt ends and desires, gathering into his mind
in the performance of it, but however it is loathsome. When he does it with
never so pure an intention to honor God, when he fasts and prays merely to
abase his spirit, and lay it low before God, yet then it is loathsome, though
much more loathsome, when he does it with a wicked mind, when he fasts and prays
intentionally to smite with the fist of wickedness, to set up his own ends and
designs, and beat down other parties and interests that stand in the way of it.

2. Take notice what a just ground there is, why God should deal sharply with
us, why he should chide and fight with any of us, why he should so contend with
the man in us. Oh there is a desperate root of wickedness in us all; Can you
blame him to be at enmity with it? Is it fit the holy and pure God should let
such a fountain of unholiness of impurity stand in his sight, and not fight
with it, sink it, and subdue it unto himself?

3. Consider what an unfitting thing it is for us to be judging one another,
who are all so deeply guilty in that very thing wherein we judge, or can judge
any other. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge do the same things, Romans 2. 1. There is the root in thee of the
same wicked action thou judge another for, there wants only somewhat to
exhaust the corrupt juice thereof into thy sight; but in the sight of God, who
judges by the heart, thou art as a deep in that wickedness as he, and thou by
judging his wicked action, condemnest thine own wicked heart which is full of
it; Nay, thou have done it in the eye of God, who reckons that done which the
heart would do, and perhaps thou have brought it forth into act too in an
higher kind, then he whom thou judge has done, though thou see it not, and
so can not be sensible of it.

What can thou acquit thy self of, that thou judge another for? Will thou
judge another for Adultery? Thou have it in thine heart, and have acted a worse
adultery, have forsaken the bed of thy unblemished husband indeed. Will thou
judge another for murder? (I speak not concerning judicial proceedings in Courts
of Justice, where Magistrates as they are entrusted with a work beyond man, so
they are enstated in a degree above man, I have said, ye are gods; yet therein
they fall short too, because they are but men at bottom, and so at best can
judge but according to the sight of the eye, and hearing of the ear, which is
opposed to righteous judgment, Isai. 11. 3, 4.) I say, Will thou judge another
for murder? Thou have that cruelty in thee that would commit it, yea, and have
killed the Lord of life. Will thou condemn Antichrist? Thou have the man of sin
in thee, whereof that which thou call Antichrist is, as it were, but a
figure. Will thou judge another for fleshly principles, and fleshly actings?
Alas! How many fleshly principles prevail in thee? How many fleshly actings
issue out from thee, perhaps in an higher kind and degree of spiritual
wickedness, then the party whom thou judge is capable of.

God has still given several outward Representations in the several ages of the
world, of the wickedness of man's inward parts, to point him thereby as with the
finger, to the sight, knowledge and detestation of himself; but this has still
been the subtle course of the deceitful heart of man, to cry out aloud against
evil in those outward dresses, and the mean while to nourish the substance of
it within. And still as persons grow in light and knowledge, and so come to
discern the more secret and spiritual dresses of it, they are ready to give
themselves scope to condemn it in such or such a dress, (wherein now they full
well know it,) not seeing what more spiritual shape the same thing has put on
in them, under which it hides it self, and acts more powerfully, then it did in
those lower shapes and dresses whereby it deluded them before.

If we did but know our selves, we should not dare to be judging one another;
but it is this same looking on evil as at a distance from us, as another, not
our own that makes us so severe toward others.

4. It shows the reason of all that wickedness, that enmity, pride, cruelty,
etc. that now breaks forth in the world, and abounds every where; What is the
matter? How comes this to pass? Why God is ripping up the heart of man, opening
the heart of man, and so that which is in it gushes out and appears. God is
stirring the sink, and that makes it send forth that noisome savor that offends
every nostril.

5. It may be unto us a ground to qualify our spirits, and make them willing
to enter into Gods Furnace, and quietly to endure the force of that fire which
he in wisdom sees needful to purge out this wickedness, and purify the heart
by.

What sober spirit that has the real sense of such pollution in him, would not
loath himself, desire to be delivered from himself, and be willing to have the
fire kindled, and so burn upon him, (though it did scortch and pain him
unsufferably,) as to consume and devour this filth.

Never willhe wonder at the sharpness of God, who is sencible of the desperate
evil of his own heart: Never can he be weary of the Refiners fire, who is weary
enough of his own corrupt heart. It Is because we know not our own hearts, that
we think God might cure us with less launcing. When we come to know our selves,
nothing will be more burdensome to us then ourselves, and nothing will be more
welcome then that sword which is sharp enough, and that hand which comes
resolutely enough, and strikes home enough, to let out the very life of our
hearts, which when once done will make us happy.

FINIS.

