Naked Truth; OR, TRUTH nakedly manifesting it self in several Particulars, for
the removing of Hindrances out of the way of the Simple-hearted, that they may
come to true Knowledge, Life, Liberty, Peace and Joy in the Lord, through the
virtue and power of his precious Truth, revealed and working in them.

Given forth by way of Question and Answer.

Whereunto are added, some Experiences, with some Scriptures very sweet, and
necessary to be experienced in the Gospel-state.

As also, A few words concerning the True Christ; and a few words in the Bowels
of tender love and good will to my native Country.

By a long Mourner and Traveller after, but at length an happy Experiencer of
the Truth, as it is in Jesus.

ISAAC PENINGTON.

Blessed are the eyes, which see the things that ye see. Luke 10.23. London,
Printed in the Year, 1674.

The Preface.
TRue Knowledge, and true Experience, especially concerning things of necessity
and great concern to the Soul, is very precious. As to know the true
Foundation, the Cornerstone, which God lays in his Spiritual Sion; and the
Heavenly Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all that are born of God; and the
gathering out of the spirit of this World (with the vanity and falsehood
thereof) into God's Spirit; which is Truth and no Lie; and the building up of
the holy Temple, in which God appears and is worshipped, and the heavenly
Communion with the Father and Son, in the one pure Light, which shines from
them into the heart; and the one Faith, the one Circumcision, the one Baptism,
the one holy Mountain, the one feast of sat things made thereon, the one Water
of Life, the one Bread, the one Cup of Salvation, etc. Now the things of the
Kingdom, are all at the dispose of the King thereof. To him all Power is given,
in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, he has life in
himself, and he has life to dispose of and dispense to his. He gives the true
Knowledge, which is Life Eternal; He gives Repentance and Remission of Sins. He
teaches to believe in the Father, and he gives Faith also. He is the Shepherd
of the Sheep, who by his Voice quickens and makes alive, and leads and
preserves and nourishes up to Life eternal. Therefore whoever will understand
aright, must receive understanding from him: And whoever will repent aright,
must receive repentance from him: And whoever will believe aright, must receive
Faith from him: And whoever will hear and see aright, must receive an ear and
eye from him: and whoever will come unto him and receive him, must witness that
new heart forming or formed in him, wherewith and whereby he is received. Men
greatly mistake and err about the Gospel-knowledge and Religion, by beginning
therein without the Gospel Spirit and Power.

Therefore, that man that would not be deceived, and lose his Soul for ever;
let him take heed how he begins, how he stands, and how he proceeds in his
Religion. The Jews-state stood in the Revelation of God's Spirit and Power
outwardly: and the state of the Christians, the New-Covenant-state stands in
the revelation of Gods Spirit and Power inwardly. For none can beget a new
birth to God inwardly, but his own Spirit and Power, working inwardly in the
heart. Therefore thou that would live with God for ever, and not perish from
the Presence and Glory of his Power, mind these three things. First, God's
inward visiting thee, and making a real change in thee. I do not mean a change
in thy mind, from one notion to another: but a change in thy heart, from one
nature and spirit to another. This is the great Work, which nothing but the
mighty Power of God, which raised Jesus from the dead, can effect in the hearts
of the children of men! Now that this may be wrought out in thee, wait for the
appearing and working of that Power, which (by its appearing and working) does
effect it daily more and more, in these that unite to it, and give up to its
operations. O wait to feel the Power begetting somewhat of its own nature in
thee, leavening thee into its nature by the pure heavenly leaven, where with
God waits to leaven thy heart. Thu^ feel thy beginning from the true Root, from
the holy Principle, from the Seed of the Kingdom: and then wait to feel that
grows up in thee, and to grow up therefrom: tha^ as the beginning is pure, so
the growth may be pure also. For after God has visite^ thee, and begotten
somewhat in thee, an^ leavened thee in some measure; so the there is true life,
true sense, true hungerings, true breathings after the Lord, an^ his
Righteousness, after the Fountain (...) living Waters: then (in the next place
mind and wait to learn of the true Teache^ how to come to the true Waters, that
the may drink thereof, and of no dirty puddle, of thy own or any others
forming. Where are these Waters dispensed, and where are they to be found? why,
in the New Covenant, which God makes with the hungry and thirsty Souls, as they
come to the Shepherd, and hear his Voice, and learn of him, and follow him.
Therefore, thou must wait to distinguish Spirits, and the knocks of Spirits in
thy own heart. Thou must know when the Shepherd knocks, and when the stranger
knocks: and let in the Shepherd when he knocks; and not let in the stranger
when he knocks. Thus by knowing him, enclining thine ear to him, and hearing
his voice; thou come to have the everlasting Covenant made with thy Soul,
even the sure Mercies of David; wherein the union with God is sure, the Teacher
sure, never more to be removed from thee; the fear which God puts into the
heart sure; the Law of the new life sure, being so written in thy heart by the
finger of Gods Spirit, as none can blot out; the love of God sure, his
preservation sure, the inheritance of life sure. O sweet Covenant! O holy
Covenant! O blessed Covenant! and blessed are all those Souls with whom God
makes this Covenant, and who are kept by him in the sense and enjoyment of it!

Now, lastly; After God has made this Covenant with thee, and spoken peace to
thee, and given thee of the Power, Righteousness, and joy of the Kingdom, and
set the holy Hedge of his Power and Wall of Salvation about thee; thou must
take heed of going forth after any lust, after any desire of the flesh, after
any temptation of the enemy: thou must keep within the holy limits, and not
touch any dead or unclean thing, lest thou be defiled, and so in degree
separated from him who is pure.

The occasion of what follows was briefly thus.

There was a controversy between me and another, about many of these things;
toward whom my love was in a travel, And having a sense on my heart, that the
enemy makes use of the wrong apprehensions and mistakes he begets in men's minds
about these things, contrary to the true knowledge and experience, which God
gives to the Children which are born of the Heavenly Womb, who indeed alone
can rightly plead for and justify their Mother, in this day of great strife
and contention about the Kingdom and right Heir thereof; I say, having this
sense on my heart, and these things naturally springing up and opening in me
upon this occasion, I was drawn in love, and in the motion of life, thus to
give them forth to others, hoping that the Lord may thereby open the minds of
some toward, and confirm the minds of others in the sense and belief of the
Truth, and the inward manifestation of his Spirit, which discovers and strives
against the darkness, lusts, and corruptions in them. The Lord give People the
sense of the strivings and reproofs of his holy Spirit inwardly in their
hearts, and join their spirits thereto, that they may receive Light, Life,
Virtue and Strength from his holy Spirit, and thereby witness the overcoming
and keeping under the enemy of their souls, that they may know what it is, to
have the seed of the Woman bruise the Serpents head in their own particulars,
that so the holy Child Jesus may be exalted (his Horn exalted in them) and he
may reign and exercise his Government in them, and they may become Kings and
Priests to God, and reign in him, over all that his Power is ordained to break
and keep under, yea utterly consume and destroy, in the hearts of those that
submit themselves willingly to him, and walk in the Light and Leadings of his
holy Spirit, Amen.

NAKED TRUTH; OR, Truth manifesting it self in several Particulars, for the
removing of Hindrances, etc. Given forth by way of Question and Answer.
I. Concerning understanding the Holy Scriptures truly and aright.
Quest.

WHether the Scriptures can be understood aright, without the Light of God's
holy Spirit shining inwardly in the heart, and giving the true understanding of
them?

Answ. No, not possibly: for as the outward eye cannot possibly see, without
the shining of some outward Light; no more can the inward Eye see, without the
shining of the inward Light. God who commanded Light to shine out of darkness,
causes the Light of his Spirit to shine in the hearts of People, according to
his holy pleasure; and thereby they come to see. God sees all things in his
own Light, in the light of his own pure, eternal Spirit: and in his Light do
the Children of Light see Light. The things of Gods Kingdom are holy Mysteries,
and the words which he speaks concerning those holy Mysteries, none can
understand, but as he pleases to open and reveal them. He has given us an
understanding to know him that is true, 1 John 5.20. The Inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding (Job 32.8.) without which Man is dead, and can
neither hear nor see, nor understand any of the things of God's Kingdom.

II. Concerning the Illuminating Spirit, and Sanctifying Spirit.
Quest. Whether the Illuminating and Sanctifying Spirit be one and the same
Spirit or no? Because it is affirmed by some (and written by one to me as a
sound distinction of Divines, which distinction, he says, he has a mind I
should learn) that there is a Spirit of Sanctification, and that is peculiar to
the Godly; and there is a Spirit illuminating, and that is often vouchsafed to
the wicked, as it was to Balaam.

Answ. The Spirit which illuminateth and the Spirit which sanctifies, is one
and the same Spirit: and the illumination of the Spirit is in order unto
Sanctification. The same Light which discovers the Darkness, also chaseth
away the Darkness, as it is received and subjected to, and purifieth the mind:
for the Light has not only a property of enlightening, but also of cleansing
and sanctifying. And the reason why Men are not changed, justified and
sanctified in and by the Light, is because they love it not, and bring not
their hearts and deeds to it, and so it is their reprover and condemner, and
not their Justifier and Sanctifier. But the same Spirit, Light and Life, which
Enlighteneth, also Sanctifies; and there is not another.

III. Concerning the holy Spirit of God, and the holy Scriptures.
Quest. Whether they be always joined; or some may have the Spirit, who have
not the Scriptures; and some may have the Scriptures, who have not the Spirit.

Answ. The holy Spirit of God, and the holy Scriptures, are not always joined
together; for some in the dark corners of the Earth may be visited by the
Spirit, become sensible of the Spirit, and receive the Spirit, who never heard
of the Scriptures; and many may have the Scriptures, and yet be very ignorant
of, and strangers to Gods holy Spirit, as the Jews were, who had them read in
their Synagogues every Sabbath day, and yet Christ told them, you neither know
the Scriptures, nor the Power of God.

IV. Concerning the Law of the Lord which is perfect, and which converts the
Soul.
Quest. What is the Law of the Lord which is perfect, and converts the Soul? is
it the outward Law or Writing in the Letter, or the inward Law and Writing in
the Spirit?

Answ. No Man is, or ever was, or ever can be converted to God from the inward
Law of Sin and Death, but by the inward Law of Life and Righteousness written
in his heart. And I am sure that Law is perfect. The New Covenant is perfect,
and the Law thereof perfect, the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus
perfect, which converts the mind to Christ the Righteousness of God, and sets
it free from the Law of Sin and Death. And David was a spiritual Man, and knew
the inward Covenant, and the inward creating of the heart a new, and Gods holy
and free Spirit, and the Law and Testimony thereof. I will grant a great deal
to the Letter and ministration outward; but I must attribute more to the
inward; or else Gods Light, and the holy Experience which he has given me,
will condemn me. And as the Jew outward had the Law, and Testimony and Statutes
outward: so I am sure the true Jew, the Jew inward has the Law, and Testimony
and Statutes inward, written in his heart by the finger of Gods Spirit; yea and
the same Spirit put within him, to cause him to keep this Law, and the holy
Testimony, Statutes and Judgments of the Lord: and the spiritual Jacob and
Israel of God, in this the day of their Redemption and Salvation from on high,
do follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and walk in the Light of the Lord.

V. Concerning David's longings, expressed in Psalm. 42. Psalm. 43. and Psalm. 119.
and other places.
Quest. Were David's longings more after the Law outward, or after the Law and
Light of Gods Spirit inward?

Answ. David was a man after Gods own heart, a man that knew an inward and
clean heart of Gods creating, and knew the free Spirit of the Lord, and the
fresh springing Life thereof, and the leadings of the pure living Truth
inwardly in his heart, and this was it he most especially prized and longed
after. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me,
and take not they holy spirit from me, etc. says he ( Psalm. 51.10, 11.) after
his fall, showing what he had been acquainted with before, and what he now (God
having touched his spirit afresh) began to long after again. And, says he, in
another place, O send out thy Light and thy Truth; let them lead me, let them
bring me unto thy Hill and to thy Tabernacles, Psa. 43.3. O the sweetness of
Light within, Truth within, O the precious leadings and drawings thereof; which
where once felt, upon a fresh and tender remembrance thereof, cannot but be
longed after again!

VI. Concerning the Sun, or Fountain of Spiritual Light.
Quest. Whether the holy Scriptures, or written Testimonies be the Sun or
Fountain, and the Light within but a ray or stream from them? (as is affirmed
by my Antagonist.)

Answ. It is just quite contrary: for the holy Men spoke the holy words, from
the inward Light and quickening Life of Gods Spirit within them: so that that
was the Fountain in them, and is so still. With thee is the Fountain of Life,
And he that believes, as the Scriptures have said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. This spoke he of the Spirit (Joh. 7.39.) that is the
Fountain. The water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of Water
springing up into everlasting Life, Joh. 4.14. Who esteems and honors the
Scriptures aright? He that believes their Testimony, comes to Christ, and makes
his Spirit Light and Life all: or he that sets the Scriptures in the stead of
that Word of Life which they came from, testify of, and point men to, as the
fountain and foundation of Life and Salvation to all mankind?

VII. Concerning the Words being a Fire and a Hammer, to burn up the Chaff and
break the Rocks in pieces.
Quest. Is the Word which is a fire and hammer, the Testimonies and
Declarations of the holy Scriptures without, or the Word nigh in the mouth and
heart?

Answ. That which I have felt hammering inwardly, that which I have felt
burning inwardly (unquenchably, as the mind has been kept to it) has been the
Word of Life it self, from which the good words and holy testimonies proceed.
That which does the work in the inward Jew, is the inward Ministration of the
inward Covenant, the appearance of God there: He is the consuming Fire, he is
the Spirit of Judgment and Burning, who by his holy flamings inwardly, burns up
the filth of the daughter of Sion. A man may be exercised in the letter all his
days, and yet witness nothing of this inwardly in Truth and Righteousness: but
he whom the Spirit of Judgment and Burning inwardly comes nigh, and whose flesh
is kept in that holy furnace, it will be consumed there day by day, until it be
quite wasted and destroyed; and so he come to be judged according to the flesh,
and to live to God in the Spirit.

VIII. Concerning God's writing his Law in the heart.
Quest. How does God write his Law in the heart?

Answ. By his Spirit and Power working there, whereby he both creates a new
Heart and writes the new Law, even the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, in the new Heart The Isles shall wait for his Law. Whose Law The Law of
the Messiah, the Law of Grace which gives dominion; the Law of the Anointing,
the Law of the New Birth, the Law of the Holy Seed. His Seed remains in him,
1 John 3.9. In that Seed is the new Nature, and the new Law both. What is the
Law of Sin? what is the Law of Death? how is it written in the Heart? How does
the enemy write it there, but by his corrupt spirit and nature? And does not
God by his holy Spirit and Nature write the new Law, the Law of Life in the
hearts of those that are renewed, and made tender to the impressions of his
holy quickening Power: every motion and drawing whereof, is a Law to them who
are born of the Spirit, and taught of God to eye and walk after the quickening
Spirit.

IX. Concerning the inward Light of God's Spirit.
Quest. What is it which the mind is to be turned to, to enlighten it, and to
work the darkness and corruption out of it?

Answ. It is no less than the Light of God's Spirit; nothing else can do it.
The dayspring must arise from on high in the heart, or there will be night for
ever there. All notions or apprehensions concerning the Light will not do it:
it is the shining of the Light alone inwardly, which is able to expel the
darkness there. It was not for nothing that Christ came a Light to enlighten
men; and directed men to follow him the Light, that they might not abide in
Darkness; and that he sent his Apostles with this message, that God is Light,
and in him is no darkness at all; and so gave his Apostles wisdom, authority
and power to turn men from the darkness to the light. And if the darkness was
within, which they were to be turned from, surely the light must shine within,
to discover the darkness; and to that light must they be turned. And in this
light the holy Spirit is received, and dwells there; but out of this light, and
the limits thereof, in every heart, dwells the unclean and dark spirit, and
has power and rule there: for nothing but the light and strength of Gods
Spirit is able to break his Kingdom and dominion inwardly in the heart.

X Concerning the Ministers and Ministry of the Gospel.
Quest. Who are the ministers, and what is the ministry of the Gospel?

Answer. They are the ministers of the Gospel who have received that spirit and
power wherein the ministry of the Gospel stands. For Christ came in the spirit
and power of the Father, and he sends his Apostles and Ministers in the same
spirit and power, that they might be able to beget, and reach to that birth,
which is to be begotten and ministered to. It is one thing to be a Minister of
the Law, and to minister Letter: and another thing to be a Minister of the
Gospel, and to minister Spirit. The Apostles were able Ministers of the New
Testament; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit: and so are all in a degree,
who succeed them in any measure or proportion of their Ministry. For the
Ministry of the Gospel is in the Light, Spirit and Power of the most High, to
turn peoples minds to a proportion of the same Light, Spirit and Power in
themselves, and so to come to the manifestation and quickening of the same Life
in themselves, that so they may walk in the same Light. For the Life is the
Light: and he can never have Light, or see Light, who comes not first to feel
some virtue from the quickening Power. O how precious is this ministry! blessed
be the Lord, for his renewing of it in these our days! And this ministry is not
to be confined to an outward order of men, as the ministry of the law was: but
whoever has received the gift, so he is to minister, as the Lord guides, leads
and orders him in the use of that gift which he has bestowed upon him for that
end. And what if he be an herdsman, a fisherman, a Tent-maker or the like? yet
if God has poured out his spirit upon him, and opens his mouth, he has not
only liberty, but more, even authority from the Lord God almighty to speak in
his name, either for turning men unto Christ, the light and life of men, or for
building men up in their holy faith in him, whose spirit and power was and is
the resurrection of the life for evermore.

XI Concerning trying of Spirits and searching the Heart.
Quest. What is it which searches the heart, and infallibly tries Spirits?

Answ. Gods Spirit, Gods word nigh in the heart and mouth, separateth and
gives true discerning and judgment there, to all whose ears are circumcised
and inclined to it. Gods Spirit is the spirit of judgment; and where he is
given, the spirit of judgment is given; and he judges in his children by the
quickening life and sense he bestows on them, which distinguishes between
life and death, between truth and deceit yea between the same words, when they
come from the dead spirit, and when they are spoken in his living power: Christ
gives his spirit to his sheep, which gives them to know his voice; to know when
life speaks, and when words are living, and food for the living; and in what
mouth they are dead, and cannot yield living nourishment.

XII. Concerning things necessary to Salvation.
Quest. Whether all things necessary to Salvation be contained in the
Scriptures?

Answ. The Scriptures give testimony concerning the one thing necessary to
salvation: but the thing it self, Christ himself, the seed it self is not
contained in the Scriptures, but revealed in the shinings of the true light,
and so received or rejected inwardly in the heart. Behold I stand at the door
and knock. Blessed are they that hear his voice, and believe him knocking, and
open to him; and receive him who gives eternal life, and power to become Sons
of God, to as many as receive him, and believe in and give up to the inward
revealings of his redeeming arm and power therein, To whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed? They in and to whom this arm is revealed, Christ is revealed:
and they, in whom and to whom Christ is revealed, know the one thing necessary,
even him who is life eternal, in whom all other necessary things are wrapped
up, and by whom they are conveyed to the soul, according to its need, by him
who is faithful in all his house, and takes care of every sheep which the
Father commits to him.

XIII. Concerning the true Gospel Church. or Society.
Quest. What is the true Gospel Church or society?

Answ. A company of true believers in the spirit and power of the Lord Jesus
Christ. A company of true Jews, inward Jews, Jews in Spirit, of the true
circumcision, whom the Father has sought out, and made true inward
worshippers: Such as are gathered to the name and gathered together in the name
of the Lord Jesus, to offer up spiritual sacrifices to God through him. A
company of living stones, who have received life from him the foundation-stone,
and met together to wait upon and worship the Father, in the life and Spirit
which they have received from him. This is the holy Church, or living assembly
of the New Testament: blessed are they that are of it! For about this Church is
the wall of Salvation: and they that are added by Gods spirit and power to this
Church, and abide in it, shall certainly be saved.

XIV. Concerning the way to Salvation.
Quest. Which is the certain and infallible way to Salvation?

Answ. It is a new and living way; it is such a way, as none but the living can
walk in. It is an holy way, which none but the cleansed, the ransomed, the
redeemed of the Lord, can set one step in. The way, the life and the truth are
all one: blessed are they that find it, and walk in it. In plain and express
terms, It is the Lord Jesus, the light of the Lord Jesus, the life of the Lord
Jesus, the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, the Truth as it is in him, his wisdom, his
power, he himself the covenant or holy limit between God and the Soul. He that
comes into him comes into the way: he that abides in him, abides in the way: he
that walks in him walks in the way. He that comes to his light, his life, his
Spirit, his truth in the inward parts, comes to him: he that abides therein,
abides in him: he that walks therein, walks in him: and he that walks out of
the light and leadings of his Spirit, let him walk in what form he will, yet he
walks not in him the way.

XV. Concerning Christ's saving the Soul.
Quest. How does Christ save the Soul?

Answ. By visiting inwardly, knocking inwardly, appearing inwardly, causing the
light of life to shine inwardly; and so enlightening and quickening inwardly,
breaking the strength of the enemy inwardly, and bringing out of the region and
shadow of darkness inwardly, into the region and path of light. By the light
and power of his spirit he begets a child of light, which child of light he
brings out of Egypt the dark land, out of Sodom the filthy unclean Land, out of
Babylon the Land and City of confusion (where the Spirit of the living God, and
the holy order of life, and his precious government in the heart is not so much
as known) and brings him into the light, where He and his Father dwells. And
this child of light is not of the nature of darkness, but light in the Lord,
and walks in the light, as he is in the light: and by the further shining and
working of the light and life in him, he preserves and saves him daily more and
more.

XVI. Concerning Regeneration or the New birth.
Quest. What is the Regeneration or the new birth?

Answ. It is an inward change by the spirit and power of the living God, into
his own nature. It is a being begotten of his Spirit, born of his Spirit,
begotten into and born of the very nature of his Spirit. ( That which is born
of the Spirit is Spirit Joh. 3.) It is not every change of mind, which is the
right change: but only that which God by the very same power, wherewith he
raised our Lord Jesus Christ from the Grave, makes in the hearts of those whom
he visits, who are sensible of, receive and are subject to his inward Life,
Light and Power.

XVII. Concerning true Holiness.
Quest. What is true Holiness?

Answ. That holy nature and those holy actions, which arise from the holy root:
all else are but imitations of holiness, not the true holiness. The tree must
be made good first, and then the fruit will be good also. There are many
likenesses of the true holiness, up and down in several professions: but there
is no real holiness to be found nor righteousness neither, but in the trees of
Gods planting, in the branches which are by him ingraffed into the true Vine
and Olive Tree, whose strength of virtue and holiness lies in the lap, which
they daily receive from him.

XVIII. Concerning Christ's works outwardly in the days of his flesh, and
inwardly in the day and inward shining of the light of his spirit in the heart.
Quest. Which are greater, the works which Christ did outwardly on the Bodies
of men, in the days of his flesh, or which he does inwardly in men's Minds and
Spirits, by the powerful appearance and operation of his Spirit? because Christ
said, the works that he did, those that believed on him should do, and greater
also, because he went to the Father, Joh. 14.12.

Answ. Doubtless to reach to the Soul, and quicken the Soul, and raise the Soul
out of the grave of death, and cure the blindness, deafness, hardness, and
diseases of the soul, is greater than the outward; and was signified by the
outward.

XIX. Concerning the yoke or cross of Christ?
Quest. What is the yoke or cross of Christ?

Answ. It is inward, as that which is to be crucified is chiefly inward. It is
that gift of God, that light of his Spirit, which is contrary to the darkness,
contrary to all that is corrupt; which wills against it, and wars against it;
and being received, subjected to and born patiently, takes away the life of the
flesh, the will and wisdom of the flesh, and all the subtle reasonings and
devices of the fleshly part; and so that languishes and dies, and Gods plant is
eased of it; and the soul, abiding under this cross, comes into the true, pure
and perfect liberty, where it has scope unto holiness, freedom unto
righteousness, and is in strait bonds and holy chains from all liberty to the
flesh, and from all unholiness and unrighteousness of every kind.

XX. Concerning making our Calling and Election sure.
Quest. How may a man make his Calling and Election sure?

Answ. By making the gift of God sure to him: by making that sure to him,
wherein the Calling and Election is. For the choice is of the seed, the holy
seed, the inward seed, the seed of Gods Spirit, and of the creature, as joined
to the seed. God would have none to perish but would have all come to the
knowledge of Christ the Truth, who is the seed in whom the Election stands: and
his holy advice to men is, whom he begins to call and to lead toward the
Election, To make their Calling and Election sure. So that the way of making
the Calling and Election sure, is to make the gift sure, the seed sure, the
leaven sure, the pearl sure, which God will never reject, nor any that are
found in true union with it, and in the love and obedience of it. O therefore,
as God visits with power (with his powerful gift) and as thou receivest power,
dominion and authority over sin (for in this gift is God's dominion and
authority revealed) be faithful to the gift, be faithful to the power, give up
to the truth in the inward parts, come into it, dwell in it, that thou may
feel its virtue and delivering nature, from every enslaving and embondaging
thing: and then stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ the Lord (by the
life virtue and power of his truth) sets thee free. And so here thou will read
thy Calling, and read thy Election day by day; and find them sealed and sure to
thee in that truth, in that gift, in that Heavenly Light, in that holy seed,
which came from God, and is of him and which he delights to own and will never
reject.

XXI. Concerning Prayer.
Quest. Which is the true Prayer?

Answ. The breathings which arise from the true birth, from the living sense,
which God gives to the true birth; that is the true prayer. There is a spirit
of prayer and supplication given by God to his children, to wrestle and prevail
with him by. All prayer that arises from and is given by that Spirit, is true
prayer: all other prayer is not right and true, but at best but an imitation of
the true. We know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. Mark, the very
groanings that come from Gods Spirit, from his breathing and work upon the
heart, are right prayers in Gods sight: but other sighs and groans are not so.

XXII. Concerning Repentance.
Quest. Which is the true Repentance?

Answ. That which Christ gives, whom God has exalted to be the Prince and
Savior, to give Repentance and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.31. It is not in
man's power to repent: his heart is hard and impenitent. It is God's power
which melts, tendereth and changes the heart. So that there is a great
difference between the sense and sorrow of man's nature, and the sense and
sorrow which God gives to the heart which he renews and changes. The one is of
an earthly, the other of a heavenly nature. The one is like the early dew, or
morning cloud, it soon passes away: the other is written in the new heart, and
abides. So that in it there is a real sorrow and mourning over the corrupt
nature, and all the dead works of the flesh, and a turning from them and
meddling no more with them. This is the Repentance of the renewed ones, which is
the gift of the Lord Jesus Christ unto them, and is a godly sorrow for sin, not
to be repented of.

XXIII. Concerning Faith.
Quest. What is the true Faith?

Answ. It is a belief, in the power which saves, from a true sense and
experience of it in the heart. For the power which saves must first manifest it
self, before it can be believed in. And how does it manifest it self but by
shining in the heart, which has been darkened by transgression, to open the
eye of the understanding, which the God of the World has Blinded, and to
unstop the deaf Ear? and so it begets and creats somewhat capable to receive
its further manifestation. The Scripture speaks of a new Creation in Christ.
Indeed all true believers are so: and they have the ability, the faculty, the
power of believing from him who creates them anew. There is that which is
called Faith in unregenerate men: but that is not the Faith I am now speaking
of, but that which is the gift of God to his own birth, to his own begotten. To
you it is given, not only to believe etc. Phil. 1.29. Mark, it is given to
believe. O, this holy gift! this Faith of the new birth is the Faith which
pleases God, prevails with him, purifieth the heart to which it is given,
gives access to God, interest in his power and promises and victory over the
worldly nature, and over all the Soul's enemies. Blessed be the Lord for
bestowing and increasing it in the hearts of his Children.

XXIV. Concerning Obedience.
Quest. What is the true Obedience?

Answ. The Obedience which slows from the true understanding of God's will, and
from the holy nature which he begets in the heart. It is the Obedience which
slows from true sense true understanding, and true faith. There is no birth can
believe aright, but one: nor is there any birth can obey aright, but that birth
which believes aright. The true believing is from the quickening virtue of God's
spirit (all other Faith is but dead Faith: and the true Obedience is in the
newness of the spirit (Romans 6.4. an^ 7.6.) Man may strive to understand and
obey all his days; but he can do neither, but as he i^ quickened, taught and
enabled of the Lord Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, Psalm 119.33.
There is a mystical path of life. The way of wisdom, the way of holiness, the
holy skill of obeying the truth is hid from all living from all mankind; but
such as are begotten and brought up by him, in the holy skill and mystery of
subjection to the Lord. The people shall be a willing people in the any of thy
^^^er. It is the power of God that works the will in the heart, and the same
power works to do also: and none can learn either to will or to do ^righ^^, but
as they come to be acquainted with that power, joined to that power, and feel
that power working in them. And here; in this power, to this new birth, faith
and the Holy Obedience are as natural, as unbelief and disobedience is to the
birth of the flesh. It is frequently and abundantly experienced by his holy
birth, by the child of his begetting. Blessed be the name of the Lord.

XXV. Concerning Justification.
Quest. What is Justification, or how is a man justified in the sight of God?

Answ. By a true sense of and Faith in that which justifies, which is the
spirit, the life, the water, the blood, the virtue, the power of the Lord
Jesus. All these are one in nature, and they go together. Man is sinful
naturally, fallen from God, found a transgressor against him. Now he needs
Justification from his sins and he needs Justification in respect of what God
has entrusted him with, and requires of him and in the new birth, and joining
to the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, he meets with both. Being quickened by
his holy spirit, turned from the darkness, coming into the light, and walking
in the light; there his sins are done away, blotted out as if they had never
been, for his names sake: and there he receives a new ability, a new heart, a
new spirit; yea the spirit of the living God, to quicken him and work in him:
and whatever he does in this spirit (or rather what God does by him, in and
through this spirit) is justified, owned, and accepted; God finds no fault in
any of the fruits of his own spirit (in any of the children of men) but only in
the fruits of the flesh. And if for want of watchfulness the enemy should
prevail and draw into a snare, yet upon turning to the light of Gods holy
Spirit, which discovers and reproves for it; in the holy light the water flows,
the blood is sprinkled, the conscience is cleansed, and so becomes clean even
in God's sight. O blessed is he, who is not deceived with dead notions of
Justification, but feels the Justification which comes from God, and is
accompanied with a living sense, and with the testimony of his holy Spirit.

XXVI. Concerning Good Works.
Quest. What are Good Works?

Answ. The Works that flow from God's good Spirit, the Works that are wrought
in God, they are good Works. The Works of the new birth, of the new creature,
are good Works; whereas all the works of the flesh are bad, though never so
only painted. All its thoughts, imaginations, reasonings, willings, runnings,
hunting to find out God and heavenly things, with all its sacrifices are
corrupt and evil, having of the bad leaven, of the bad nature in them. Make the
tree good, or its fruit can never be good. So that they are only the good
Works, that flow from the good tree, from the good root. And here all the works
of the flesh, though never so glorious and taking in man's eye, are shut out by
Gods measure, by Gods line and plummet of righteousness and true Judgment: and
every work of God's Spirit, the meanest work of faith the least labor of true
love, the least shining of life in the heart, and the giving up thereto, ^s
owned by God, as coming from him and wrought in him, who works both to will
and ^o do of his own good pleasure He that is ga^hered to the light, which God
has enlightened him with, has received the light, dwells in the light, and
walks in the light; the spirit of the living God is near him, and dwells
with him and works in him; and h^ brings his deeds to the Light, where it
(...) manifest that they are wrought in God. B^ he that is out of the inward
Light of God's holy Spirit, his works are not wrought in God and so can but
make a fair show in the Flesh ((...) the fleshly eye) but are not good in God's
sigh^ The erring man's way and works are often rigi^ in his own eyes: ah, but
blessed is he when way and works are good and right in the ey^ of the Lord, in
the judgment of his searchin^ unerring Light and Spirit.

XXVII. Concerning Love.
Quest. Which is the true Love.

Answ. The Love which arises from the nature which God begets, and from his
circumcising the heart from the other nature. Lo^^ is the beautiful thing. What
can be high^^ expressed concerning God himself, than to sa^ he is Love? Love is
greatly commended and admired, and there are many pretenders to it: b^^ none
have the true Love, but only those that ar^ born of God, and circumcised by
him. T^ Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to
love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou
may live, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Mark, The true Love arises from the true
circumcision. And the more a man comes to have his heart circumcised from the
fleshly nature, and to grow up in the pure and heavenly nature, the more he
loves. God is Love: and the nigher any one comes to him and the more he
partakes of him, the more he becomes Love in the Lord, and the more he is
taught of God to love the Lord his God, and his brethren in the spirit, and all
mankind, who are of his blood (for of one blood God made all mankind) according
to the flesh, or according to a natural consideration.

XXVIII. Concerning Meekness and Patience.
Quest. Which is the true Meekness and Patience.

Answ. The Meekness and Patience which arises from the Lambs nature. Deceit
will put on an appearance of Love; and deceit will put on also an appearance of
Meekness and Patience: but it cannot put on the true Love, the true Meekness
and Patience. That is only learned of the Lamb, and received of him by
receiving of his Spirit and nature from him. And O how precious is this how
sweet is it felt in the heart To feel a meek, a quiet, a patient spirit in the
midst of all trials, all troubles, all fears, all doubts, all temptations of
every kind. Indeed this is of much price in the sight of the Lord, and also in
the eye of him who has received it from the Lord, and enjoys it in him, and
possesses his soul in it.

XXIX. Concerning the Knowledge of the new Covenant.
Quest. What is the knowledge of the new Covenant?

Answ. The Knowledge which is given by God to the new birth: for to it the new
Covenant belongs, and the knowledge thereof. The truly begotten of God, the true
disciples of Christ, to them it is given to know the Kingdom of God, but to
others it is not given. The Jew outward, the first birth, the birth after the
flesh; for hem the Priests lips were to preserve knowledge, and they were to
seek the law a^^ his mouth, and to them God sent Prophets to speak to them and
taught them by his prophets* but concerning the inward Jews, the Children of
the new Covenant, the Children of the Jerusalem which is above, concerning her
seed it was prophesied, that they all should be taught of the Lord, they all
should hear and know the voice of the Shepherd himself, they should all be
gathered to the Sheepherd and Bishop of the Soul and taught by him. So that in
this new, holy, living Covenant, God himself is the Sheepherd, God himself is
the Teacher: not only of the greatest, but of the very least, Heb. 8. For he
teaches them all to know the Lord, and to know his Son, and to come to his
Son, and to love him their Father, and one another. So that he that is taught
of God, he has the true knowledge, the living knowledge, the substantial
knowledge, the knowledge of the thing it self, of the life eternal it self. All
that are not thus taught (but learn only from a literal description and
relations of things) have not the knowledge of the new Covenant, the knowledge of
the thing it self: but only an outward knowledge, such as the first birth may
catch at, lay hold on and comprehend.

XXX. Concerning the Fear of the new Covenant.
Quest. What is the Fear of the new Covenant?

Answ. It is the Fear which God puts in the hearts of his children, which Fear
cleanses their hearts, and keeps them from departing from their God. There
is a great deal of difference between the Fear, which may be learned from
precepts from without, and the Fear, which God puts into the hearts of his
Children, from a root of life within; which Fear is of an heavenly nature, and
is the free gift of God to his own heavenly Birth, and none else: which no man
can possibly attain by any thoughts or reasonings of his own, but only by the
springings of life from God. And he that would have this Fear, must know the
place of wisdom, and wait there for it and when he has it, this Fear will soon
begin to make him wise toward Salvation and teach him to depart from evil,
which is the cause of destruction; Job. 28.28.

XXXI. Concerning Hope.
Quest. What is the true Hope.

Answ. The stay of the Mind upon the Lord, the stay of the heavenly birth upon
its Father. For we must distinguish between Hope and Hope. There is the Hope of
the hypocrite, or false birth, which shall perish: and the Hope of the true
birth, which will never fail it, nor make it ashamed; because that birth is
taught of God to hope aright. Now in Hope, there is both the ground of it, and
the Hope it self. The ground of the Hope is God's Love, God's Truth, God's
Faithfulness, God's Grace, his Seed, his Christ felt within; being of him,
united to him, in him, he in me: here is the ground of my assurance of the
everlasting glory and inheritance, which is sure to the seed, and to all that
are of and in the seed. So knowing Christ within me, feeling Christ within me,
living in him and he in me, I have an anchor sure and steadfast, within the
vail; which no storm no tempests, no trials, no temptations, present or to
come, have power over. And then there is the Hope or hoping it self, that is,
the staying of the Mind upon the Lord, the leaning upon the Lord, the retireing
beyond all thought, or reasonings, or lookings out, to the inward life; to feel
somewhat spring from it, for the soul to Hope and trust in, beyond all outward
appearance. And this Hope never deceives nor makes ashamed, those who are
taught of God thus to stay their minds upon him. Nay though the state be
darkness and no Light seen; yet beneath the darkness, there is somewhat to stay
the Mind of the Child and Servant of the Lord, till he appear and cause light
to break out of obscurity; for light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright, even in their darkest saddest and most distressed conditions: in all
which the Lord is near them, and there is still ground for them to Hope in him.

XXXII. Concerning Peace.
Quest. Which is the true Peace?

Answ. The Peace which God speaks to the Soul: the Peace which Christ gives to
his own disciples. The way of Truth, the way of Life leads to Peace: and the
Peace which is found therein, is of God's giving and is the true Peace. First;
God breaths upon the heart, begets a right birth, a true Child: then he leads
him into the holy way, the righteous way, from that which loads and burdens,
to that wherein is the ease and rest. Thus in the believing and following him,
there is Joy and Peace. This is experienced by all the true travelers, and by
none else. No man, with all his wisdom, knowledge and understanding, can so much
as guess at what this Peace is. The Peace of God, the Peace which he speaks to
his Children, the nature of it, the sweetness of it, the heavenliness of it,
passes man's understanding: but he who is born from above, who has a new and
heavenly understanding, he knows the nature, excellency and preciousness of
it, and would not for all this World, for any fear or danger or expectation of
any thing from without, hazard the breaking off this precious Peace and Rest of
his Soul in his God.

XXXIII. Concerning Joy.
Quest. Which is the true Joy?

Answ. The Joy which flows from God's presence, and the work of his power in
the heart, and the assured expectation which he gives of the full inheritance
and glory of life everlasting. When the Bridegroom is present, when the soul is
gathered home to him, married to him, in union with him, in the holy living
fellowship; when he appears against the enemies of the Soul, rising up against
them, breaking, scattering them, and giving of his good things; filling with
Life, filling with Love, filling with Virtue, feasting the Soul in the presence
of the Father. O what sweet joy! O what fullness of Joy is there then in the
heart! In thy presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures
for evermore, said the Psalmist (Psalm. 16.11.) Surely he had had a taste of the
thing, he had been in God's presence, and that made him cry out, Cast me not
away from thy presence, Psalm. 51.11. and he had drunk of the river of God's
pleasure which is at his right hand, which made him speak so sensibly of it,
Psalm. 36.8. and 46.4. Christ said to his disciples, that because of his going
away, they should have sorrow: but he would see them again, and their heart
should rejoice, and their joy no man should come from them, Joh. 16.22. How, or
when was this fulfilled? What were they sorry for? Was it not the loss of his
outward presence, which had been so sweet and comfortable to them? How would he
come to them again? Was it not by the Comforter? Was it not by his inward and
spiritual presence! So that he that was with them should be in them? Before
they knew Christ with them, now they should know Christ in them, the Father in
them, and they in him Immanuel, the Gospel-state, God with us, dwelling with
us, tabernacling in us, living in us, walking in us; and we living and walking
in him. When the Apostles came to this state; then they came to witness the Joy
in the Holy Ghost, even the Joy unspeakable and full of glory. And hence it is,
that the Gospel-state is a state of Joy and rejoicing in the Lord, even in his
glorious living presence, and in the glory of his power. For in the
Gospel-state, the true light shines inwardly in the heart, the life is
manifested and being manifested, they that come into the manifestation of it,
come into the holy union, and into the holy fellowship with the Father and Son,
where the Joy is, and where the Joy is full; where the power is revealed which
does away that which is contrary to the holy fellowship, and hinders the holy
Joy and rejoicing in the Lord. See 1 John 1.3, 4.

XXXIV. Concerning Poverty of Spirit and Humility.
Quest. Which is the right Poverty of Spirit, and the true Humility?

Answ. That Poverty and Humility of Spirit, which springs from the same root,
from which the Faith, the Love, the Peace, the Joy, and the other heavenly
things arise; and is of the same nature. There is a voluntary Humility, and a
voluntary Poverty, even of Spirit; which man casts himself into, and forms in
himself, by his own workings and reasonings. This is not the true, but the
false image or counterfeit of the true. But then there is a Poverty, which
arises from God's emptying the Creature, from God's stripping the Creature;
and an Humility which arises from a new heart and nature. This is of the right
kind, and is lasting, and abides in the midst of the riches and glory of the
Kingdom. For as Christ was poor in Spirit before his Father; and lowly in
heart, in the midst of all the fullness which he received from him: so it is
with these, who are of the same birth and nature with Christ. They are filled
with Humility, and Clothed with Humility, in the midst of all the Graces and
heavenly riches, which God fills them and adorns them with. Keep in the faith,
keep in the Truth, keep in the Light, keep in the Power; it excludes boasting
in or after the flesh, and keeps the Mind in that Humility and Poverty of
Spirit, which God has brought, and daily further and further brings it into:
and so the Humility and Poverty remains (poor in Spirit for ever, humble in
Spirit forever, nothing before the Lord for ever) even as that remains, which
brought into that frame, and keeps in that frame for ever. And so the Lord of
Life is only exalted; and the Creature kept abased before him, and low for
ever; and is nothing, but as the Lord pleases to fill, and make it to be what
it is. So what I am, I am by God's Love, by his Grace, by his Mercy, by his
Goodne s, by his Power, by his Wisdom, by his Righteousness, b his Holiness;
which he of his own good pleasure communicates and causes to spring in me,
and fills and cloatheth me with, as seems good in his sight.

The Conclusion.
There is mention made in the Book of the Revelations, in the Ep stles from
Christ to the Seven Churches of Asia, of a tree of life, which is in the midst
of the Paradise of God (the fruit whereof is good for food, and the leaves
thereof for the healing of the Nations) and of hidden Manna, and a white stone,
and in the stone a new name written, which none knows but he that receives
it: and of a morning star to be given, and power over the Nations to rule their
spirit even as Christ has received of his Father: and of being clothed in
white, and his Name confessed before the Father (This is the Sheep of my told,
the child of my Father's begetting, who is named by me among the living, I know
him by his name, Joh. 10.3.) as also of being a pillar in the Temple of God,
and of going no more out, but bearing the name of God, and the name of the City
of God, the new Jerusalem (which comes down from God out of Heaven) and of
Christ's new name (Oh what is that!) and of sitting with Christ in his throne.
This is the generation of spiritual Kings, who have a Spiritual Kingdom and a
Spiritual Throne, even Christ's Kingdom and Christ's Throne the royal
Priesthood of God. O precious things! O rich glory! Surely Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of men to conceive what these
things are.

Now he that would witness these things, he that would know, experience and
enjoy these things; must mind that seed, in which they are wrapped up, as in a
seed, and out of which they spring and shoot forth. The Kingdom is in the seed,
the Throne in the seed, the Power in the seed. He that is united to the seed,
and abides in the seed, receives power from the seed and overcomes, shall
inherit all things. And I will be his God and he shall be my Son, Rev. 21.7.
But he that will be so must not be fearful or unbelieving, of overcoming sin or
his souls (...) must depend upon the Almighty and alsufficient Power of God
which will give him vict^ry over sin, and keep him that he touch no unclean
things that he may be h^ly, as the Lord his God is holy; and righteous, even as
the Lord his God is righteous. Indeed it becomes the heavenly Children to
partake of the Divine Life, of the heavenly nature of their Father, and be like
him. And he that partaketh of his nature, of his holiness ( Heb. 12.10.) is
holy as he is holy: and he that from the holy root of purity and righteousness
does righteousness; is righteous, even as he is righteous, 1 John 3.7, So it is
written without, and so it is testified within, by him that is born of God, in
whom the Seed remains, which overcomes the wicked one, bruiseth him and
keeps him under; and the just live by the Faith which gives victory over him.

A PREFACE TO THE EXPERIENCES.
IT has pleased the Lord, to unseal and open the Fountain of Life, in the
midst of his Heritage: so that in his Light do they see Light, and in his Life
do they reap and enjoy Life. And the precious Promises are fulfilled in the
midst of them, of sending the Comforter, and pouring out of the Holy Spirit; so
that he that believes, out of his belly do flow rivers of living water. Yea
the Lord has a vineyard of his own planting, which he keeps night and day
(lest any hurt it) and waters every moment. O the streams of Life, the
streams of Love, the streams of Grace, the streams of Mercy, the streams of
Peace, the streams of Joy and Consolation which flow from him into the Bosoms
of his Children! Indeed Grace and Mercy and Peace is multiplied from God our
Father, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ, daily: insomuch as that saying of
Christ to his disciples (Joh. 14.26, 27.) is now fulfilled, I say not that I
will pray the Father for you: for the Father himself loves you, etc. the
Father in his Love has brought us to the Son, and the Son in the same Love
has brought us back to the Father: and now the Love flows from the Father, in
and through the Son, most naturally and abundantly. And where the heart is
Circumcised, and much forgiven, there also Love returns back most truly and
naturally: So that the Lord our God, in the Lord Jesus Christ, is loved with
all the heart and with all the Soul, and nothing is thought too good to
sacrifice to him, nor any thing too much to suffer for him. O the pure Love
that Springs and Flows, between the heavenly Father and the Spiritual Child!
The best love that is to be found in this world (in the Men of this World) is
not worthy to be a shadow of it. God is Love: and his Children are of him, and
partake of, and dwell in the same love; though the enmity and highest Wisdom of
this World know them not, nor can know them; even as it never could know the
Children of the true Wisdom sormerly.

Now from this Fountain, do not only issue Springs and Streams of Life, to
refresh our own hearts: but testimonies concerning the Life, which we feel and
partake of, and concerning our travels from the dark Land, through the valley
of tears (where he, who gave us Life, was our well) toward our resting place.
These many times Spring up in us for the sakes of others: of which nature are
the things which follow. For not for my own sake did they Spring up in me, at
this time: but to signify to others of the Mercy the Lord has shown me, and
the way wherein he has led me, and what he has given me to taste of an
experience in the way; which will answer every true paalate, every palate that
is seasoned with life and with the true experience. And having received them
from the Lord for this very end, to hold them forth to others: in Love and
tenderness of Spirit, my heart is freely given up to him therein; not aiming at
any thing thereby, but his glory singly and the good of such Souls, to whom he
shall please to extend favor and show Mercy, in opening the heavenly Mystery
of Life and Salvation to them.

I have often said in my heart, Who has begotten me these? Who would have
said, that Sarah should have given Children Suck! My wound was deep, and seemed
incurable. But blessed be the Lord, who has made known to me the Physician of
value, for whom no disease is too hard; but he is able to cure sickness, and to
relieve and rescue all that are captived and oppressed by the Devil, that come
unto him and wait upon him, in the way of his righteous judgments and most
tender Mercies. For after all my Religion, and deep exercises, and inward
experiences and knowledge, I came to such a less of what I once had, that I
sensibly felt I knew not the Lord, and lay continually groaning and Mourning
after him, and deeply afflicted for want of him. O the pure Light, and precious
Life, and sweet presence of my God that my Soul wanted, insomuch that my
moisture was turned into the drought of summer and my bones grown dry and
withered! But at length, the Lord in his goodness (O blessed for ever be his
name!) breathed upon the dry bones, and I felt Life enter from him into me, and
the days of deep sorrow and distress were at length forgotten, because a
manchild was at length conceived and brought forth. And now where is the
Sackcloth? Where Is the Ashes? Oh there is beauty in Life instead of the Ashes in
the state without Life; and the garment of praise, instead of the Spirit of
heaviness! O Glory, Glory to the binder up of the bruised, and brokenhearted,
to the redemer of the captives, to the repairer of the breaches, to the builder
up of the wasted and des la^e ones! Glory to his tender Mercy, Glory to his
Grace, Glory to his Love, Glory to his Wisdom, Glory to his Power for ever and
ever, Amen.

Some Experiences added.
I. Concerning the Seed of the Kingdom.
COncerning the Seed of the Kingdom this I have experienced, that it consists
not in words or notions of the Mind, but is an inward thing, an inward
spiritual substance in the heart, as real inwardly in its kind, as other Seeds
are outwardly in their kind: and that being received by faith and taking root
in man, (his heart, his earth being ploughed up and prepared for it) it grows
up inwardly, and brings forth fruit inwardly, as truly and really, as any
outward Seed does outwardly. This Seed is known by its contrariety and enmity
against the Seed of the Serpent, against all the Seeds of evil in the heart of
Men; it discovering them, turning the mind from them and warning against them,
and bruising and overcoming them in all that receive it, and let in its holy
nature which as an holy leaven or salt, works out that which is unholy and
unrighteous, dark and dead, and seasoneth with Light, with Life, with Grace,
with the Holiness and Righteousness of truth.

II. Concerning the Souls Food.
The Souls Food is that which nourishes it, which is the same with that which
gives it Life. Every word proceeding out of the mouth of God, every motion,
every quickening, every operation of his Spirit is living, and nourishes the
Soul with Life, which receives it and feeds on it. The spiritual Manna, the
spiritual water from the holy Well or Fountain, the Milk of the word, the flesh
and blood of the Son of the living God, his words which are spirit and Life,
nourish up the living birth unto life everlasting. How comes man to live at
first: but by hearing the voice of him that gives life? And how comes man to
live afterward, and to increase in life but by hearing the same voice still?
Incline your Ear and come unto me: hear, and your Soul shall live, etc. Isa.
55.3. This I have always experienced to give me Life, to nourish up and
strengthen me in Life; even fresh Life communicated from the living Fountain
and so my life is not in my self, not in any thing I can comprehend concerning
Christ; but in being joined to him, in being ingraffed into him the holy root,
into him the true Olive Tree, into his Spirit: and so by the sap that springs
up into me from him, my life is maintained and increased in me daily. Glory to
his name for ever.

III. Concerning God's Power.
Concerning God's Power this I have experienced, that that is it which does the
Work in the Soul. It begets to God, it brings out of the land of darkness, it
leads through all the entanglements, and preserves in the midst of them all. It
breaks down the old building of sin and iniquity (both inwardly and outwardly,
both in heart, and also in life and conversation) and raises the new and holy
building. It makes willing, it makes obedient, it gives to believe, it gives to
suffer. O blessed be the Lord for the day of his Power, which is inwardly
broken forth! O what would the poor child do, (the poor Lambs in the midst of
Wolves, inwardly and outwardly) were it not for the Father's hand, the Father's
arm, the Father's Power, which is still with them and compasses them about! O
blessed are they that know the ministration of life inwardly, the Power of Life
inwardly! For in Life, in the Seed of Life is the Holy Power, which is
manifest, appears and works, as it gains ground on the Creature, to put forth
and exercise in it the virtue and strength, which it daily receives from its
Father.

IV. Concerning Temptation.
Concerning Temptations this I have experienced, that the strength and hurt of
them, as to the Soul, lies in the souls looking at them. For the strength of
God is revealed in his Children against the tempter, which being patiently
waited for and trusted in, will never fail them. The least babe, the Lord would
not have let in Temptation, and Sin: but watch to that, and keep joined to
that, which will preserve out of the Temptation, and out of the Sin. God is
faithful who has care of all his, and whose Promise is to all his: and as he
would have none sin; so none that diligently wait shall want his Power to stand
by them, to preserve out of sin. Look unto me and be saved, all the ends of the
Earth. It Is universally true. Look unto me, trust in me; look not at your
selves, trust not in your selves, look not at the enemy, fear not the enemy; I
will save you from every snare, every Temptation as your eye is steadfast upon
me. What if the enemy come in like a flood, if the Spirit of the Lord lift up a
standard against him, can he prevail? what though he cast fiery darts? What
though he be set round about? Will not the shield of Faith quench them all?
Will not the whole Armor of God defend and keep safe from them all? If the
enemy be resisted lawfully, that is, in true Faith in that Power which is
engaged for the Soul against him; Does not the Power of the Lord arise and
scatter him, and strengthen and establish the Soul in the Grace and in the
Truth? O the holy mystery of the heavenly Warfare, and of the working of the
pure Power against the enemy, which overcomes all his impurities, and keeps
clean from them! Look not at the enemy, let not in the reasonings of the Mind,
keep in thy patience, keep in the pure fear, in the holy living sense, be only
what thou art in the seed, in the new birth, in the Life which God has
begotten in thee; then art thou safe, then art thou in the name of the Lord,
which is the strong Tower. The enemy indeed may make a noise about thee with
his lusts, with his temptations, with his floods, with his storms, with his
fiery darts: but he cannot enter thy habitatation. The Spirit of darkness, the
Prince of darkness, is shut out of the Land and Light of the Living. Abide thou
there: dwell in the Light, and walk in the Light, as God is in the Light, and
he shall never have power over thee.

V. Concerning Prayer.
I have experienced Prayer to be the breathing of that birth which God begets,
to the Father of Life which begat it; who by his Spirit makes known to it its
Condition and wants, and gives a suitable sense of heart and cries to it. For
as it is not in man to beget himself to God; no more can he pray to God in his
own will or time, but as God pours out the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication
upon him, and by his Spirit teaches and helps him to pray as he ought.
Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba, Father. I have had a sense of the natural man, and of the
spiritual man; and of the Cries and Prayers of each: and this I have been
taught and learned of God, that the Gospel-Prayer, is the Prayer of that birth
which is begotten by the Spirit and Power of the Gospel, and which prays in the
Spirit and in the springings of the holy Life and Power, whereby it rightly
wrestles, and prevails with God, obtaining the Mercies and Blessings which it
wrestles with him for. For to this Child there is access to God in the Faith,
through that holy Spirit of Life which makes way for it, to obtain Grace and
Mercy in the time of need. And through this Spirit it prays to God, and
prevails with him on the behalf of others also. For the Prayers of the
righteous avail much, as it is written.

VI. Concerning Justification and Sanctification, some things which it has
pleased the Lord, in his tender Mercy, to give me to experience.
First, That it is the same Christ, the same Spirit, the same Life, the same
Wisdom, the same Power, the same Goodness, Love and Mercy the same Water, the
same Blood, which both justifies and sanctifies.

Secondly, That Justification and Sanctification go hand in hand together.
There is none Justified, but he that is in measure Sanctified: and there is
none Sanctified but he that is in measure Justified. For God Justifies by a
rule (by the new Covenant, and according to the Law thereof;) And men receive
and partake of Justification, according as they are brought into and keep
within the compass of that rule. For God acted of old toward, and Justified the
children of the old Covenant according to the Law thereof; and the Children of
the new Covenant are Justified and partake of Justification according to the
Law thereof.

Thirdly, That Justification and Sanctification are both of and through Grace.
It s so in the beginning and it is so all along. By grace ye are saved, says
the Apostle. The whole work of Salvation is began and carried on through Grace.
It is through that God visits and reaches to the Soul, with his quickening
Virtue and Power. He regenerates also thereby. Through that he Just fies;
Through that he Sanctifies, etc. So that as the work goes on, Grace, Grace, is
to be cried for to him that does the work, from his very laying the Foundation
and fastening the Soul thereupon, to his very laying on of the top-stone.

Fourthly, Though Justification and Sanctification be of God's Grace and Mercy
in Christ; yet this does not exclude Faith: but they are also through Faith,
and not without it. God does not Justify man in the unbelieving state, in the
dead state, in his abiding there; but in the coming out of it, in the repenting
and turning from the dead works, to the living God, and in believing in him:
and so he also Sanctifies him.

Fifthly, Faith and Obedience are of the same nature, and always go together.
So that wherever there is Faith, there is Obedience likewise, and wherever
there is Obedience, there is Faith. Obedience flows from Faith, and cannot be
without it: for the very nature and virtue of Faith is in it. And Faith is
Obedience. For this is the command of God, that the soul believe on him (and in
his appearances) whom he has sent to save: and this Believing is Obedience
unto him that commands it. And this Faith and this Obedience is Holy and Just
in God's sight and through it (but not without it) the Soul is the both
Justified and Sanctified.

Sixthly, That the works of Faith, the works of the new Life, are not the works
of the Law, the works of the old Covenant; nor are excluded Justification as
the Works of the old Covenant are. For, I have found the Lord, who has
condemned and excluded all my doings, which ever I have been able to do of my
self, still Justify and accept what his Spirit and Holy Power has done in me.
They are not of the same nature in themselves, nor are they so accounted of in
the eye of the Lord. For the Lord distinguishes between root and root: and
what springs from the holy Root, he Justifies as holy, and what arises from
the unholy root, he condemns as unholy.

Seventhly, That by the Law of Faith all boasting is excluded, in the whole
work both of Justification and Sanctification. What is the Law of Faith? Is not
this its Law to fetch all from the Son, to do all in the Son? to quit self and
its own ability, and to perform all in the newness of the Spirit, in the
ability which is of God, given and continued in and through his Grace and Mercy
to the Soul in the Lord Jesus Christ? All the veins of Life, all the strains of
the new Covenant run here. Here is no boasting of the Creature, here can be no
boasting: for all its ability and strength is shut out; and that which is given
of God to it, is all and does all. Yet every Jew here has praise of God. His
Faith is commended, his Love is commended, his Faithfulness is commended, his
Zeal for the Lord, his Obedience to the Lord, his Patience in suffering is
commended, etc. but the praise and honor of all redounds not to his flesh, but
to the Spirit and Grace of God in him. So that here flesh is laid low, and kept
in the dust for ever, and God alone exalted in this day of his pure power in
the heart. He that truly believes enters into rest. How into rest? From what
does he rest? Why, from his own works, from the works of the flesh, yea from
the Works of the Old Covenant; from the Works that arise from his own ability,
from the works wherein he can never be Justified with the Gospel-Justification.
But does he cease from the works of Faith? does he cease from the Labor of
Love? does he cease from Obedience to any thing that God requires? Nay, then
surely he rather begins to work and labor in the Vineyard; and his labor
is not in vain in the Lord.

VII. Concerning Faith.
Several things I have experienced, both concerning the nature, virtue, and
operations of it, some whereof (as I feel them spring up livingly in my heart)
I may mention at this time.

First, This I have often experienced, that it is an hard thing truly and
rightly to believe. It is an easy matter to believe notions concerning God, and
concerning Christ: but to believe in God, to believe in Christ; to believe in
him that raised up Jesus, to believe in the Light, Life and Power, which flows
from Jesus, this indeed is hard by reason of the great Darkness and Ignorance
which man is fallen into through transgression.

Secondly I have experienced this also, that Faith is God's gift, and that it
flows from the power of his Life. There is first a quickening, first a touching
of the heart by the holy, pure Power of the Lord: and when a man is touched and
quickened, then in and by and through that virtue which flows into him, he can
believe in that which touches and quickneth him.

Thirdly, That Faith never stands in a man's own power, but always in the
virtue and power of the life of the Son. So that he that will believe aright,
must wait to feel the Life of the Son revealed in him, and Faith flowing
therefrom. For the true belief springs from the Life of the holy root; and from
the flowing up and springing up of that Life, Faith receives its nourishment
and daily virtue.

Fourthly I have observed this in my travels, that the Earthly Wisdom and
Notions there from, got into the Mind and held in the Mind out of the sense of
life, are a great let to Faith. For these strengthen and nourish that in man,
which is to be weakened and die, that Life and the birth of life may be all in
the heart. Man is to die, man is to be ceased from his understanding, his
Wisdom is to be brought to naught. But after it has had a stroke and wound
from God's holy Spirit and Power (even the very wound which tends to death) yet
it will be getting Life again (getting its deadly wound healed) and nourishing
its Life by those very notions, which came from that Life and Power; which (in
measure) slew it. And thus the Jew outward, has his Life in the outwardness of
knowledge, in the outwardness of the Law, in the letter which kills: for the
relation and outward knowledge of things kills and deadneth more and more,
unless man come into the inward Life and Virtue, and daily feel them quickened
there. If ye live in the Spirit, walk in the Spirit, said the Apostle. A man
cannot live in an outwardness of knowledge concerning the Spirit and Power of
the endless Life: but he that would truly live, must live in the spirit it
self; and he that would rightly walk on in his way, must walk in that Spirit
wherein he received life, and wherein he that abides lives before the Lord.

Fifthly, This I have also observed, that all notional Faith wherein is not the
living virtue (as concerning Christ, his sufferings, death, resurrection,
ascension, intercession; and concerning Justification by him, etc.) the enemy
will let the Soul alone with, and let him enjoy peace in: but his war is
desperately against the true Faith, against Faith in the true power, against
Faith in the light of Life. O how many sore and sharp assaults does he make
against the Faith which receives its virtue from God, and causes the Soul to
live to God! And how sore is it with the soul, when Faith is weak, and the
enemy comes on against it with the strength of his assaults and temptations.
Lord, increase our Faith, said the sensible disciples.

Sixthly, It is a precious thing to feel Faith quickened by God, and helped by
God against the enemy. For then the enemy cannot prevail against the Soul, but
the Soul through the virtue and power of life, prevails over the enemy in the
Faith. And this is the great work of a Christian, not only to wrestle and
fight, but to learn so to wrestle and so to fight, as to overcome.

Seventhly, That in the pure fear (not that which is taught by the precepts of
Men, but which God puts into the heart) Faith has its strength and exercises
its strength. O who knows the preciousness of this Fear! The power of Faith,
the power of Life, the power of Salvation and everlasting preservation is
revealed in it. Therefore, says the Lord, when he speaks of providing for
his Children in the new Covenant, that they shall abide with him for ever; and
not depart any more from him, as the Children of the old Covenant did; I will
put my Fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me. And when the
Angel preached the Everlasting Gospel, how did he preach it? Fear God and give
glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is come, etc. Rev. 14. When the pure
Fear is felt, when that which is contrary to God is judged; then the Gospel is
known and the work thereof experienced in the heart And how easy is it, when
the pure fear is felt to distrust and deny ones self, and trust in the Lord? O
how weak are the reasonings and imaginations then, and how strong is the power
which scatters them, and lifts up the head ove^ them!

Now it concerns every one deeply to consder, of what nature his Faith is, and
what virtue is in it, and what it can do in and through the Power of the Lord
for him; how it fetches in the true living nourishment every day, how it
delivers the Soul and gives it victory over that which Faith was appointed to
deliver from. For he who through the Faith overcomes that which is contrary to
God, shall inherit; and he that fights the good fight of Faith, shall overcome:
but he that overcomes not his enemies, which stand in his way, shall be sure to
be hindered by them from attaining to his journeys end.

VIII. Concerning Obedience some Experiences also.
First, True Obedience, Gospel-Obedience flows from life, flows from the living
faith. If I could obey in all things that God requires of me, yet that would
not satisfy me, unless I felt my Obedience flow from the birth of his Life in
me. My Father does all in me, says Christ, this was Christ's comfort. And to
feel Christ do. all in the Soul, is the comfort of every one that truly
believes in him.

Secondly, True Obedience, Gospel Obedience is natural to the birth which is
born of God. It is unnatural to the flesh, to man's Wisdom, to deny himself and
take up the cross; but it is natural to the birth which is born of God's
Spirit. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit; and it is natural to it to
be conversant in; and exercised about that which is Spiritual.

Thirdly, That honoring and pleasing and answering the will of the Lord, is
the proper aim of the truly Obedient. O how do they delight to do the will of
God. I have Meat, says Christ, that ye know not of. To do the will was his
Meat and drink: and it is Meat and Drink to all that are of his nature and
Spirit. If I should never have any other reward, but the pleasure of Obedience;
yet I could not but say and testify, that in answering the Law of the pure
Life; in keeping the holy statutes and commandments of Gods Spirit there is
great reward. But yet there is a crown also, and a reaping after this Life, of
every thing that is sown to the Spirt: and the crown is weighty and
everlastingly glorious.

Fourthly, Gospel Obedience is exceeding necessa^y in and to the Gospel-state.
Mark, The Lamb is the leader: and can any be saved by him, but they that follow
him? When Christ calls out of the World, must not the Soul come to him, who is
the Sheepherd? And must not the Sheep daily learn to know his voice, and follow
him: even till they come to be acquainted with every moving, drawing and
leading of his Spirit; and so come to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes?
Mark what a weight Christ lays upon doing. If ye know these things, happy are
ye if ye do them. Why then the disciples cannot come to happiness, but in the
doing, in the obeying of the will of Christ, his Lord and Maker. And he that
hears these sayings of mine and does them, I will liken him to a wise man,
that built his house upon a rock. But the believer, without doing the will, is
the foolish builder, whose building will not stand. Again says Christ. As the
Father has loved me, so have I loved you continue ye in my love. If ye keep my
commandments, ye shall abide in my love even as I have kept my Father's
Commandments: and abide in his love. The disciples whom he, most dearly loved,
must keep his commandments, if they will continue in his Love. And his Apostles
taught the same, even the working out of the Salvation and the purifying of the
heart through the Obedience of the truth. For Mark. There is a Covenant of
Life, a way of Life: and how can Life be reaped, how can the work of Life go
on, but in Subjection and Obedience thereto?

O blessed is he, who meets with the power of Life, which enables to obey, and
who is Obedient and subject to that power. For he that truly believes in
Christ, is turned by him to his Light, and to the power of his Father; and the
Peace, Growth, Joy, Blessedness etc is witnessed in subjection thereto.

VIII. Concerning the Cross of Christ.
This I have experienced concerning the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, that it
is an inward and spiritual thing, produceing inward and spiritual effects in
the Mind: and that this is it, even that which slays the enmity in the mind,
and crucifies to the World and the affections thereof. God forbid, said the
Apostle, that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. Now mark; That
which is contrary to the World, and crucifies to the World, that is the Cross.
The Cross has its power, and nothing else: and so there is nothing else to
glory in. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh: and these are contrary one to the other. Mind, here is the Cross: The
Spirit which is contrary to the flesh, which mortifies the flesh, through the
Obedience whereof the flesh is crucified. If ye through the Spirit mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. Whatsoever is of and in the Spirit, it is
contrary to the flesh. The light of the Spirit is contrary to the darkness of
the flesh. The holiness of the Spirit is contrary to the unholiness of the
corrupt heart. The Life of the Spirit is contrary to the Life (or rather death)
that is in sin. The power of the Spirit is contrary to the power that is in
Satan and his Kingdom. The Wisdom of God is contrary and a foolish thing to the
Wisdom of man. Yea the new Creature, which springs from God's Holy Spirit, is
contrary and death to the old. Now he that comes hither, out of his own Wisdom,
out of his own will, out of his own thoughts, out of his own reasonings; and
comes to a discerning of God's Spirit, and to the feeling of his begetting of
life in his heart, and his stirrings and movings in the life which he has
begotten, and waits here, and receives counsel here, he is taught to deny
himself, and to join to and take up that, by which Christ daily crosses and
subdueth in him that which is contrary to God.

And here is the fight of Faith, and the good travel under the Cross, whereby,
the holy journey is gone, and the enemies (which rise up to oppose in the way)
vanquished and overcome. For here is the power revealed: the preserving power,
the leading power, the conquering power of him, who rides on conquering and to
conquer his spiritual enemies, in the hearts of his Children, who know his
voice and are subject to him; who daily denying themselves and taking up his
Cross, follow him. Woe is to them that are at ease in Sion, under any thing that
is contrary to God: but blessings are upon them whose dwelling is under the
Cross, and who know no ease but what it allows. It will make Truth, Life,
Holiness, Righteousness, Faith, Obedience, Meekness, Patience, Love, Separation
from Sin, Communion with the Lord, and all the fruits of the Spirit, as natural
to them in the renewed state, as ever sin was in the corrupt state. And in that
state, they shall be able to say with Paul; who once complained of his
captivity, and that he did what he hated; yet after he had known the power of
the Cross, and was crucified with Christ, he could then do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth: Yea then being a conqueror, having overcome the
enemies which stood in his way, he could do all things through Christ that
strengthened him. The cause of so many complaints and bowings down the head,
and going mourning because of the prevailings of the enemy, through
temptations, sin and corruption, is because the Cross of Christ, which is the
power of God, (which is his Ordinance against the strength of the enemy) is
either not known, or not taken up. And this is the reason that many that make a
fair show for a while, yet afterward come to nothing (but are like untimely
figs, or like corn upon the House-tops, which hastily springs up, but soon
withers) because they either rightly never learn, or keep not to the Cross.
For that alone has power from God, to bring down and keep down that which is
contrary to him. So that from under the Cross of Christ, there is no witnessing
Salvation or preservation from the Lord: but out of the limits of the Cross,
the enemy has power to recover and bring back under his dominion again. And
whosoever, in his travels, leaves the Cross behind him, does draw back unto
perdition, and not travel on in the living faith and newness of Obedience,
toward the Salvation of the Soul.

X Concerning the Mystery of Life, and the Mystery of the fellowship which is
therein.
God is hid from Man, as he lies in his sinful and fallen estate: and no Man
can find or know him; but as he pleases to reveal himself by his own blessed
Spirit. And Christ, being God's image there is no knowing or confessing him, or
right calling him Lord, but in and by the same Spirit (1. Cor. 12, 3.) When he
appeared in the days of his flesh, flesh and blood could not reveal him, but
only the Father. And he is the same to day as he was yesterday. He is not to be
known now, but in the same Spirit; in his own Grace and Truth, in a measure of
his own Life. The dead cannot know him; they only know him, who are his Sheep,
who are quickened and made alive by him. And this Life is a Mystery: none can
understand it, but they that partake of it. Can a man that is naturally dead
know what the Life of nature means? No more can a man that is spiritually dead,
know what the Life of the Spirit means. The natural Man may get the words that
came from Life, and cry up them, and speak great words of the same of Wisdom
and of her Children: but the thing it self is hid from them all. O it is a
strait gate, at which the birth enters, at which none else can enter. The wise
and prudent knowers and searchers after the flesh (and of the Scriptures, as
they can put meanings upon them and comprehend them) are shut out in every age:
but there is a babe born of naked Truth (born of the pure simplicity) admitted by
God, while men disdain and despise it.

And the fellowship of the Saints is in the Life and in the Light, which is
this Mystery. The fellowship is not outward but inward. All they that meet
together in the outward place, are not in the fellowship or worship: but only
they they meet together in the inward Life and Spirit. They that worship the
Father, must worship him in Spirit and Truth. Look, there is the worship, there
are the worshippers; They that are in the Spirit, in the Truth; They that meet
in the Spirit, in the Truth, they meet together in the one spiritual place, as
I may call it. And so we own no man after the flesh, no man according to the
appearance; but in the righteous judgment of the Spirit, those only who are of
the Spirit. Indeed we are tender, where there is the least beginning of the
work of God in any heart, yea where there is but so much as a conviction of the
understanding: but Men are not presently of us, who own our Principle in words
or outward appearance, but only such as are inwardly changed thereby in heart.
It is true Persons may walk among us, and afterward go out from us, who were
never of us (as it was in the Apostles days) that were never in the fellowship
of Life with us, whom we could never own in the sight of the the Lord, as being
born of him; though we were willing to wait and watch for their good, that they
might come to witness the true birth. Now from such come the offenses, even
from the falling off of such as never were truly ingraffed, and also from the
slips of such who are not watchful to that which preserves. And woe is to the
World, because of the offenses which cannot but come. For they which are not
approved in the sight of the Lord, must not somewhat or other happen to make
them manifest? And when they are made manifest, the World's eye is offended,
and is apt to think hardly of and reproach the Truth it self, because of them.
But blessed is the eye, which sees into the Mystery, into the Life it self,
where there is no offense, but Truth is one and the same for ever.

XI. Concerning Judging according to the appearance, and Judging righteous
Judgment. Judge not according to the appearance (said Christ) but Judge righteous
Judgment, Joh. 7.24.
What is it to Judge according to the appearance? and what is it to Judge
righteous Judgment? I shall speak what I have experienced, having been deeply
exercised about this thing. Mark then.

The holy Spirit of Life breaths upon the heart: and by his breathing and
working there, he quickens and begets life, Joh. 3.8. And that which is
begotten and born of him, is begotten and born into his nature, and so is of
the same nature with him, as ver. 6 of that chap.

Now to that which is born of the Spirit, the Spirit is the leader, the
preserver, the supporter, the comforter, the daily quickner. He can do nothing
without the Spirit, without the present Life and Power of him that begat him.
So that all the judgment which the birth of Life has, is from, and of, and in
the holy Spirit of the Father.

And here is true Judgment, both concerning righteousness and against all
unrighteousness. So that keep to the Life, keep to the Spirit, keep to the
Birth, keep to the Power; then is the Wisdom and righteous judgment of God
revealed. But any that go out of this, and measure without this, they measure
in the unrighteousness: and though they search the Scriptures, and think in
themselves they measure from the Scriptures; yet they are mistaken, and measure
but from their own knowledge and apprehensions upon the Scriptures, as the
Scribes and Pharisees did, when they seemed to conclude, upon searching the
Scriptures, that Christ could not be the Messiah. Joh. 7.52. Search and Look
(said they) for out of Galilee arises no Prophet. How then can this Galilean
be he? See, by the Scriptures, if this can be the Christ.

It is said of Christ, He shall not Judge after the sight of his eyes, nor
reprove after the hearing of his Ears: but with righteousness shall he Judge
etc. Isa. 11.3, 4. Christ Judged righteous Judgment. How came he to Judge so?
Why he judged in and with the Spirit. He kept to the Spirits judgment. The
Spirit of the Lord rest^d upon him, and made him quick of understanding in the
fear of the Lord, ver. 2, 3. And no man can judge aright concerning the things
of God, but in and by the same Spirit. How shall I know whether m^ duties be
right my Prayers right, my ways right, m worsh p r ght, my faith right, my
hope of the right kind, my knowledge and understanding of the Scriptures right,
etc? Why there is no e but one can determine. He who bege^teth life, know^
whether that which is in thee be from his life: and whether that which thou
oferest to h m, be truly living or no. And when the Lord separates the living
from the dead, what will remain in many that make great pro^ssions at this day.

I would have no man mistaken about these things. I know many are deeply
mistaken, as their own hearts will one day acknowledge, when the Lord shall make
manifest to them, how they have called evil good, and g^od evil; and put
darkness for light, and l ght for darkness. Indeed it is just as it was in the
days of Christ's appearing outwardly in a body of flesh. The same Life, the
same Spirit is denied now, as was then. Then the Jews cried up hrist to come,
but they then spiritually saw him not. They saw the flesh: (or outward form,
but they saw not him who dwelt in that flesh. And though the World of
Christians now acknowledge Christ is come and did appear; Yet neither do they
know him who did appear, but deny his life, his Spirit, his virtue, his power,
which is revealed in this day of his love and goodness, to the eyes of the
Children of the true Wisdom. O let not flesh Judge. Be silent, O all flesh,
before the Lord, and cease judging: for he is arisen to Judge. He is Judge in the
midst of his people, and he will Judge the Heathen also.

And every one brings this near. Wait to feel flesh judged in thee, and brought
down in thee, that it may not Judge in thee: but Spirit and Life may be exalted
and sit upon the Throne in thy Heart. And when Life is exalted and does begin
to Judge; Oh take heed of harkening to the flesh, of letting in the Judgment of
flesh afterward, lest the Spirit be grieved and quenched! For the Wisdom of
the flesh is near, and will be striving to get in and recover its seat again:
and if the watch be not singly kept to God's Holy Spirit, somewhat else will be
judging in thee, which will Judge according to the appearance of things to thy
mind, and so thou will miss of the true and righteous judgment of God's Spirit.

XII. A Question answered about knowing God's Spirit.
Quest. How shall I know God's Spirit? How shall I know the motions thereof?
How may I know whether the Faith and Hope in my heart be from him? whether my
prayers and desires arise thence, etc.

Answ. No man of himself, or by any way he of himself can take, can know God's
Spirit. There must first be a capacity given, before any man can know the
Spirit of the Lord; His Life, his Power must first be felt; and somewhat
quickened, somewhat formed by him, somewhat begotten of him, which is spirit,
and this can know him. Now man in this may know him, but out of this can never
know him. Therefore this is the great skill, and diligence and wisdom of a
Christian, to keep to this, to wait for this, to have his eye toward the pure
spring of wisdom; that when it springs, he may discern and receive it: and when
that which is of a contrary nature springs, he may discern it under all its
deceitful appearances, and turn from it. For out of the heart are the issues
both of Life and Death. There is all manner of deceivableness or
unrighteousness in the unrigh^eous nature in the unrighteous Spirit: and ^f the
watch be not diligently kept, it is easy to be deceived at any time. But the
true Seed, the holy Seed, the Living Seed, the elect Seed, the immortal Seed is
never deceived. O blessed are they who have their eyes opened and kept open in
it, to discern the mystery of Godliness, and the mystery of Iniquity; that they
may be preserved safe in the one, out of the reach of the other.

XIII. Some Queries concerning the Seed of the Kingdom, in which the Kingdom it
self is contained (as the nature and substance of things is contained in the
Seed thereof) and out of which it springs up and arises in the heart.
Quer. 1. What is that Seed which is spoken of 1 John 3.9. which remains in
those that are born of God, and preserves out of sin, those that are led by it
and comprehended in it? is it not the Seed of the Kingdom?

Quer. 2. Do not the natural herbs and flowers, the natural plants and trees
grow from a natural Seed? Do not the spiritual plants, the spiritual trees, the
trees of righteousness grow from the Seed of righteousness?

Quer. 3. Was it not the great doctrine of Christ, to preach the Kingdom? And
how did he preach it? did he not preach it as a Seed, as a grain of
Mustard Seed? and did not be liken this Spiritual Seed to leaven, to a precious
pearl, to treasure hid in a field, to a piece of silver lost etc. O how happy
is he, who knows and enjoyes the thing it self which Christ preached! All the
prophets prophesied concerning him: and when he comes this was his doctrine,
that men should mind this, look after this, purchase this, possess this, feel
this planted and grow up in them, and themselves ingraffed into and growing up
in it.

Quer. 4. Can any man be born of God, and not born of this Seed? can any man be
born of this Seed, and not born of God?

Quer. 5. How does Grace and Truth come by Jesus Christ? Does it not grow up
from this Seed? Can it grow up any other way in any heart?

Quer. 6. Is not Salvation felt and witnessed in every heart (of those that are
in any measure redeemed) as this Seed grows up and overshadows them? Was not
this the Salvation ready to be revealed in the last time, 1 Pet. 1.10. whereof
the Apostle Pe^er himself was made a partaker? Chap. 5.10. In the law were the
shadows of good things to come: but in the gospel the substance, the Seed it
self it revealed.

Quer. 7. Is it not the right beginning in Religion, to begin in the Spirit?
and can any begin in the Spirit, but he that begins in and with the Seed of the
Kingdom?

Quer. 8. Is it not the main and chief thing in Religion, to know this Seed, to
feel this Seed, to be joined to this Seed and abide in this Seed?

Quer. 9. Is not all that flows from this Seed, true and certain? is not the
Knowledge certain here? the Faith here? the Love here? the Peace here? the Joy
here? the the Righteousness here? From this true root, can there grow or shoot
forth any thing, but that which is true? O, every breathing here is from pure
Life, and precious in the eye of the Father. Is there any certainty elsewhere?
O, when the Lord appears, will he not disown all the religion and worship,
which is not of this growth?

Quer. 10. But some may say, how may I know this Seed, and how may I be joined
to it?

Answ. In the quickening Life may thou know it, and nowhere else. Did thou
ever feel that which quickened thy heart toward the Lord? Therein and thereby,
at that time, thou may feel an eye and heart opened, which can truly see and
know somewhat of God. And (keeping thy eye to the quickening power of God, as
that stirs, moves and operates in thee and upon thee, thou may know again
and know more. Therefore eye the power which quickens, and eye the Seed which
it reveals and raises in thee, and wait to feel the power subjecting thee to
the Seed, that thou may come under it, and it may come over thee, and press
down in thee all that is contrary to its pure nature. And as thou come
hither, thou will find that which death has no power over: and as thou abidest
there, thou shall find it to have no power over thee. F r, of a truth, in the
holy Covenant of Life and Peace, death never had nor can have power: but he who
abides in him who is the Covenant, who is the sheepherd, who is the Love, who
is the Wisdom and Power of God, witnesses there a sure defense and strong
tower, where Salvation is for a Wall and Bulwark against the Enemy, There are
many sorts of talkers concerning the thing, but there are few travelers into
it: but he alone who is a true traveller into it, and takes up his rest there,
certainly knows and can truly witness what is to be found there. And this is
the reason that so many (who seem great and experienced knowers) cannot receive
our testimony, because they know neither the Seed nor its voice, concerning
which and whereby we testify. But Wisdom is Justified of her Children; and they
that know the voice of the Sheepherd, know his present appearance in this our
day, which is contrary to the Wisdom and Knowledge of all other Seeds and Births
whatsoever. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear: But he that has not the
true Ear, cannot hear the true testimony, though it should never so often be
declared unto him. But blessed is he that knows and stumbles not at the
appearances of the Seed and Power of Life in his own heart, but is turned from
the Darkness to the Light there, and from the Power of Satan to the
manifestation of God's Spirit there: for the end of words (even of Christ's own
directions in the days of his flesh) is to turn men to the holy Life and Power
from whence the words came, and thither man is to travel, and therein to
center, waiting on the Lord in the way of his Judgments and tender Mercies, to
witness a translation from Darkness to Light, and from the Kingdom of Satan
into the Kingdom of the dear Son, which Kingdom is at first but as a grain of
Mustard Seed, and must be so known and so received. And now let every serious
heart examine concerning himself. Do thou know the Kingdom? is the Seed grown
in thee? Does it overspread thee? Art thou in it as in a Kingdom? Do thou
feel it overshadowing thee? Art thou in unity with it? Does it speak Peace to
thee from the Lord? Is the Wall of partition broken down in thee? is there of
twain made one new man? Do thou feel that which is contrary to Christ subdued
in thee by his power? and his holy nature, Life, and Spirit reigning over it?
Can thou read that Scripture sensibly and experimentially, If ye through the
Spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live? Ah how miserably do men
talk of Christ, the Power of God, and miss of the effect and work of his Power
in them? Faith is a powerful thing, it gives victory, (true Faith gives
victory) it scatters that which stands between, and gives real access to God,
and lets in his pure, fresh living Virtue, upon the heart. Love is a powerful
thing, it constrains to Obedience: and the heart that is circumcised to love
the Lord God, O how does Life flow from him into it! O, away with empty
notions, and come to the ministration of the Spirit, where the Knowledge is
living, the Faith victorious, the Love pure and undefiled, the Worship truly
spiritual, even flowing from and comprehended in the Life and Virtue of the
Spirit. O that all that truly breath after the Lord, might be gathered hither,
found here and dwell here, Amen.

A POSTSCRIPT To the Experiences.
PErsons that have had some true touches of Life and true breathings after the
Lord; yet not having their eye fixed rightly upon him, nor discerning from
whence those come, may easily lose the true sense of Life, and another birth of
another nature spring up in them, instead thereof. This was it we generally
wanted, in the day of our former profession, even the discerning of that and
fixing upon that, which begat Life in us: through want whereof, many of the
most tenderhearted came to a loss; whom the Lord at length showed mercy to,
manifesting to them the Light of their eyes, and the stay of their Souls. Now
to all that have been gathered hither by the Lord, Life has been renewed, and
their former experiences (of the Lord and his goodness to them in the Lord
Jesus Christ) restored again with advantage. And here they sensibly see and
daily experience that nothing is of their own works, but all of Grace and Mercy
in and through Christ, in whom they are created unto good works, which God
before ordained that we should walk in them. And here the glory is revealed;
the glory of Life, the glory o^ Peace with the Lord, the glory of R ghteousness
in and through his Son, he glory o^ Victory over the S^^^ enemies, and of
leading captivity cap^ (...) treading upon the Necks of Kings, even of mighty
lusts, which mightily revailed over and oppressed the Soul, before the Cap^ain
of our Salvation appeared, in the power and authority of his own Spirit. But
blessed be the Lord, there is not only this Glory revealed, but there is a
defense over the Glory: For there is that revealed, which is able to defend it,
and does defend it in the hearts of many, and in the living assemblies which
have been gathered by God's Holy Power, which holy Power (which gathered) daily
quickens and overshadows, and is a rock unto, and will be so for ever, even to
all that abide with him in his Holy Covenant: but out of the limits of that
into which God gathers, and wherein and whereby he preserves, there is no
defense to any. The cursed thing, the unclean thing, the earthly Spirit, the
earthly Mind and Wisdom, the Lord has excluded, and it is to be excluded out
of his camp for evermore, that the inward Israel may be kept holy to the Lord,
and may serve and worship the Lord in the beauty of the inward holiness, as the
outward Israel was outwardly to be and to do, in that outward ministration of
the shadows of the Gospel-state.

Some Scriptures very sweet, and necessary to be experienced in the
Gospel-State.
This is Life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3. There is a knowledge of God and Christ,
which is Life eternal: and there is a knowledge of them (or at least that which
man call so) which is not Life eternal. The knowledge which is Life Eternal, is
that knowledge which God gives to his own birth, even the spiritual knowledge
which God gives to those which are born of the Spirit: which is the knowledge of
the mystery of God, and of Christ in the mystery, inwardly appearing and
working in the heart against the mystery of Sin and death. O precious is the
birth to which God gives this this knowledge, and precious is the knowledge which
he gives to it! The knowledge (or that which Men call knowledge) which is not
life eternal, is that knowledge which man can get and comprehend from without,
of himself; without the enlightnings and quicknings of God's Holy Spirit and
Power, inwardly felt and operating in the heart.

No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. It
is precious to witness that confessing and acknowledging Jesus to be the Lord,
which is by the Holy Ghost. For only they that are governed by the Holy Ghost,
can so confess him. The Devil did confess Jesus to be the holy one, the Son of
the living God, etc. and many now confess Jesus to be Lord, in the same Spirit,
being alienated from the Life of God, and having no true sense or understanding
of that. But there is a confession which cannot arise, but from God's Spirit;
and from the knowledge, sense and understanding which he gives: blessed are they
that experience that.

It is written in the prophets, and they shall be all taught of God. Every man
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me, Joh.
6.45. Ah, blessed is he that can in time understanding say, The Lord has made
good this Pr^^se to me! He is become my Teacher. I have heard his voice, as
truly and certainly, inwardly in my heart, as ever I heard the voice of Satan
here. He has revealed his Son, his pure, holy, living Child Jesus in me. He
has drawn me to his Son, he has taught me to come to his Son: and indeed so
soon as ever I heard and learned of the Father, I could not but come to the
Son, and receive the Son, and and give up my self to him: and he has received
me, and daily preserves me from death, and the sting and power thereof, and
gives unto me Eternal L fe.

He that has the Son has Life; and he that has not the Son has not Life 1 John 5.12. Ah, this is abundantly experienced, blessed be the name of the Lord!
Many who had not life, while they had not the Son, but mourned and lamented
deeply after him (the Spirit of the Lord being grieved in them, and his life
not possessed by them) the Father revealing his Son in them, and giving him to
them, and they enjoying and possessing him, feel that they are daily in the
enjoyment and possession of pure and fresh Life in him.

My flesh is Meat indeed and my ^loud is Drink indeed. He that eats my Flesh
and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and ^in him, Joh. 6.55.56. We are of his
Flesh and of his Bone, said they that did eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood.
They that eat Christ the one bread, are by that Food made partakers of his
divine nature, and become one bread (for we being many are one bread as said
the Apostle) so that now they are no longer darkness, but Light in the Lord. O
the pure flesh and blood of the immaculate Lamb! O the incorruptible food,
which gives Life to the Soul? O the living word? O the milk of this word, the
Milk of the heavenly breast, which nourishes the babes? but the bread, the
flesh, the Blood is stronger nourishment. O how brightly might this be opened,
in the demonstration of Life. to the spiritual ear and understanding! but the
carnal-minded are thick and gross, being drowned in their own apprehensions and
sense of the letter, but having no sense of the mystery what it is mystically
to Eat and Drink the Flesh and Blood of Christ (of him who is Life, and gives
Life) and to dwell together with him in the one Spirit, Light, Life and Power
eternal.

For with thee is the Fountain of Life; in thy Light shall we see Light, Psalm.
36.9. Oh, blessed are they, that can experimentally speak thus, who know the
Fountain of Life, and dwell there, where Light Shines more and more.

Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money
come ye, buy and Eat, yea come, buy Wine and Milk without money, and without
price. Wherefore do ye spend Money for that which is not bread? and your labor
for that which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and Eat ye that
which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear,
and come unto me: hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David; Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. Here Is
happiness, true happiness, full happiness. He that experiences this one portion
of Scripture, is happy. He that knows the true thirst after the true waters,
and comes to the waters which he thirsts after, and knows how to buy, and has
bought the Wine and Milk which is to be had at the waters (Oh, who knows what
this buying is! This is beyond all talk and outward profession concerning: he
thing concerning the precious pearl, this is the real, hearty trafficking of
the wise Merchant for it.) And then to hearken diligently and eat that which is
good, and to have the soul delight it self in the fatness of God's House, in
the riches and fatness of his Goodness and Mercy in Christ Jesus: and not only
to taste of Mercy, but to witness it sure in the everlasting Covenant, that God
will never be wroth with me more, never be a stranger to me more, never depart
from me more, nor suffer me to depart from him, but preserve me pure and chaste
to him, through his love shed abroad in my heart, and his holy fear, which
constrains me to abide with him, and to keep his Commandments.

But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst:
but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of Water springing
up into everlasting Life, Joh. 4.14. Is not this an universal Promise to be
made good to every one that drinks of the water of Life, of the water that
Christ gives? Did not Christ promise it should be a Well? a springing Well? The
Fountain is of a springing nature: and is not every drop of the same nature? of
a living nature, of a springing nature? He that rightly drinks, does he not
receive a Well? O the Water which Christ gives, does it not become a Well in
the true disciple, in the living disciple? out of which Well the Water is still
springing and flowing, to nourish up with Life and unto Life, even with Life of
an everlasting nature, and unto Life everlasting. O the pure glory that is
revealed in the Gospel Dispensation! why is it so hid from men's eyes, who
profess themselves to know the Lord Jesus Christ, and to be his disciples?

For the Life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show
unto you that eternal Life which was with the Father, and was manifested unto
us. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may
have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ, 1 J h. 1. v. 2, 3. This is precious, to experience the
Life inwardly manifested, and to come out of death inwardly felt, into Life
inwardly manifested, and so to come into the holy fellowship with the Father
and Son, and with the Saints in Light: for he that comes out of the darkness
into the Light, comes out of the Fellowship of the dead, into the Fellowship of
the Living.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and
ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my Yoke is easy and my Burden is
light. Mat. 11.28, 29, 30. This invitation of Christ was to be fulfilled in the
hearts of his disciples, and it is precious inwardly to witness it effectually
in the heart, as really as ever it was spoken by him. To be able to say, in the
evidence and demonstration of his Spirit; It is true, I did labor, I was
heavy-laden, none could ease or help me; till he called, till he knocked at the
door of my heart, and till I came to him, and received him in: and he has made
good his word to my soul, he has given me rest from my labors and heavy
Loads. He has laid his Yoke upon me, and I have took it and born it, and have
learned of him, to be meek and lowly in heart, like him, and I have found rest
to my Soul. And now I shall never complain more of his yoke or burden, he has
made it, and does daily make it so easy and light to me.

And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding
that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is true even in his
Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal Life, 1 John 5.20. There is
an inward, spiritual coming of the Son of God into the heart, by which Coming
(to them that receive him) he gives a new and Spiritual understanding, whereby
they know him that is true (and without it they cannot) and are ingraffed into
him, a d found in him; partaking of his Life and righteousness, to the glory of
God the Father: and so in true understanding are able to say, Lo this is the
God, this is the Savior we waited for. This is the true or very God, and
Eternal Life. What are all notions about God, and about his Son Christ Jesus,
to this inward sense and experience of them?

God who commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 4.6. O how precious is it to be able to witness this in
measure! to experience God shining upon my tabernacle (as Job speaks, Job 29.2,
3) and by his Light my walking through darkness! It is true, Christ was the
Light, he had the fullness of Light, and the Apostles a very great proportion;
but blessed be the Lord I have received some, and am changed by it, and become
light in the Lord, and walk with God and dwell with God in the light, even as
he is Light and dwells and walks in the Light. Is not this a blessed testimony?
and is not he blessed who can set his seal to it?

Which veil is done away in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.14. It was promised of old, that
in the mountain where God would make the Feast of fat things, he would destroy,
swallow up or do away the veil, or that which veils the Life and Glory of the
Lord from man, and hinders it from being revealed in him, Isa. 25.6.7. Now in
Christ there is no veil. In his Light, Life, Spirit and Power, there is no
veil. Where they are inwardly manifested and received, the veil is done away,
and the glory of the mystery revealed and beheld.

If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my disciples indeed and ye shall know
the truth and the truth shall make you free, Joh. 8.31, 32. What is this word
which the disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ are to continue in? Is it any less
than Spirit and life? And wh t is it to be a disciple indeed, but to learn the
Law of Life at his mouth, and to continue therein? And what is the truth which
makes free? Is it not the living truth (the word which lives and abides for
ever) the powerful truth, the operative truth? This cuts between a man and his
lovers, this divides between Soul and Spirit, Joints and marrow, and makes the
Soul free from that evil Spirit which had embondaged it. It Sanctifies, it
cleanses, it renews, it quickneth, it gives strength, it makes free from
the Souls enemies, from the bondage of sin and corruption, and brings into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God. And they that are made free from sin by
that which is contrary to ^n, and which subdues, overcomes and destroys sin;
they doubtless are free indeed. O precious is it to experience this, even the
truth that is free from sin, and makes free from sin all that truly know it,
and are joined to it, and live and abide in it!

For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the Law, but
under grace, Romans 6.14. What Is the Law? What Is the ministration of the Law? Is
it not the ministration of the letter? of that which is holy and righteous by
an outward or litteral Command? What Is Grace? Is it not the inward teacher,
which inwardly instructs to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
Soberly, Righteously and Godlily, etc. Is it not the ministration of the Spirit
and Power? Is it not the ministration of the new Covenant, where the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus is written in the heart, and the commandment of
Life made easy, by the power of the Lord Jesus, who manifests himself within,
to mak^ willing unto and to strengthen to obedience? Now they that are under
this Grace, under this Spirit, under this Power; does it not break the power
and dominion of sin in them, and set them free therefrom? Can sin break in upon
those, who dwell under the shadow of the Almighty? Indeed a man may be under a
literal dispensation of holy Commands against sin, and yet be under the power
of Sin: but he that is gathered under the wing of Christ, under the Grace and
Spirit of the Gospel, turned from Satan's power to God's Power, and within the
Wall and Bulwark thereof; he witnesses this true; Sin has not Dominion, Sin
cannot have Dominion, Sin shall not have Dominion over you; no device of the
enemy shall be able to hurt or destroy on Gods holy Mountain, for his Light
shines there to dispel the darkness, and his power is revealed there to scatter
and dash in pieces the strength of the enemy, whenever it appears.

Upon all the glory shall be a defense, Isa. 4.5. O the Lord God, by the Spirit
and Power of the Gospel, in the day thereof, is bringing many Sons to Glory:
into Great, Inward, Spiritual Glory; yea into exceeding Glory (For the
ministration of the Spirit exceeds in glory.) And as God has ordained this
glorious ministration for his Sons and daughters under the New Covenant: so by
the Spirit and Power of the New Covenant, when it breaks forth, he is daily
working, translating and changing them, out of the earthly nature and image,
into his own divine nature, into his own heavenly Glory. 2 Cor. 3.18. And
blessed be the Lord, the defense of his power is spread over the glory of his
holy Mountain, so that nothing can make a prey of or devour the birth of life,
or deprive of the inheritance of Life there. The Lord does not only give a
blessed lot, and lines in pleasant places: but he maintains the lot of his
Children, so that they can dwell in their Fathers House, and feed on the
Heavenly Food and rich dainties of the Kingdom, in the majesty of the name of
the Lord their God, which is such a dread unto the enemies, and such a defense
about them, as none can make afraid: but they are kept in perfect Peace, in
perfect rest, in pure Love, out of which Life springs and flows continually.

And in that day thou shall say, O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast
angry with me, thine anger is turned away and thou comfortest me. Behold, God
is my Salvation: I will trust and not be afraid; for the Lord Jehovah is my
strength and Song, he also is become my Salvation. Therefore with Joy shall ye
draw water out of the Wells of Salvation, Isa. 12.1, 2, 3. O precious; to
witness the inward Spiritual day of redemption and deliverance, wherein praises
from a living sense naturally spring up to the Lord! To witness the reproofs at
an end, the anger, indignation, trouble and sorrow at an end, and the comforter
come; ministering Peace, Joy, and Comfort to the Soul. Ah, when the Lord is
felt, the Salvation (his pesence, his Power, his Life, his Virtue the
Salvation) when Faith springs toward him, and the fear of the enemy (or
concerning the enemy) is banished; when he is experienced to be the Soul's
daily strength against him; yea and does so deliver, that instead of the former
fear, because of the fury and oppression of the enemy, the Soul can now sing;
because of that strength and heavenly authority which the Lord puts forth
and exercises in the hear against him! When the Well of Life, the Well of
Salvation, the Saviors Well is kept open, and the Philistines, the
uncircumcised Spirit, Power and nature cast out, that they can stop it no more;
but the soul can draw the water of Life, out of the Well and Fountain of Life
with Joy; Ah then the Gospel Dispensation is indeed known, and the blessed
estate thereof witnessed and experienced!

I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, that thou may be rich,
and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may
see, Rev. 3.18. What is the Gold tried in the fire, which man is to buy of
Christ, that he may be made rich therewith? What is the white raiment, which
the soul is to be clothed with, without which it is naked in God's sight, and
in the sight of the truly discerning; and there is a time, when the shame of
its nakedness will appear more generally, as it does already to the eye of the
spiritual man, who Judges all things? What is the eye salve, wherewith the eye
is to be anointed, or it cannot see? Is it not precious to purchase this Gold
and Raiment of Christ, and to have this eye salve to anoint the eye with, and
to keep it open that it may daily see its way, and walk in the Light of the
Lord? Certainly this is all inward and Spiritual, as a remnant witness it this
day; Glory to the Lord God.

But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you and ye need
not that any man teach you: But, as the same anointing teaches you of all
things and is truth, and is no lie: and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him, 1 John 2.27. The outward anointing was a shadow of the inward,
and had a glory in it, under the dispensation of the Law and the inward
anointing in the Gospel Dispensation is Spiritual and Divine, and exceeding
glorious. Christ, the anointed one, anoints all his. No being a Son, without
being begotten by the Spirit and Power of the Father: and no abiding a Son, but
by the Virtue and Power of the same Spirit, remaining in and with the Soul, so
that every Son receives of the anointing of the Father: Christ received the
Spirit, the fullness, that he might give to them a proportion. Now to experience
this anointing, and to experience it abiding, and teaching all things, and to
know this voice, the voice of the Sheepherd, the voice of the anointing, which
the Sheep still finds to be true and no lie; and to abide in the Vine, in the
Life, in the Spirit, in the Power, as this Spirit or Anointing teaches: Oh
here is the sweet state, the clear state, the blessed state! Here the Promises
and Blessings are Yea and Amen in Christ, and the Soul can say, He is Faithful
and Just who has Promised, who has opened the treasures of Life to his
Family, to his House, to his Children to his Servants; and blesses them with
all Spiritual blessings, in heavenly things in Christ.

Surely his Salvation is nigh them that fear him; that Glory may dwell in our
Land; Mercy and Truth are met: Righteousness and Peace have kissed. Truth shall
spring out of the earth: and Righteousness shall look down from heaven. Yea the
Lord shall give that which is good: and our Land shall yield her increase.
Righteousness shall go before him: and shall set us in the way of his steps,
Psalm. 85.9. to the end. Is it not precious to witness that fear of God in the
heart, to which Salvation is nigh, and the Land wherein Glory dwells? Where
Mercy and Truth meet, Righteousness and Peace kiss? Where Truth springs out of
the Earth, and Righteousness looks down from Heaven? Where God gives that which
is good, and the Land of the Living yields the increase of Life to him? Where
righteousness goes before him, and he sets his in the way of his steps? Where
the Lamb goes before; and the way is not known, but as the Lamb goes before,
and leads into it? Where God is the Sheepherd, and the Soul does not want,
because he makes it to lie down in pastures of tender grass and leads by the
waters of quietness (where it drinks of the brook in the way) and in the paths
of righteousness for his names sake? see Psalm. 23. Is there not a Kingdom of
darkness, a Land of iniquity inwardly? and do not they they that dwell here,
and sit there, dwell in darkness, and sit in the region and shadow of death?
And is there not a travel out of this Land, into the holy Land (the Land of
Light, the Land of the Living) and a translation out of this Kingdom, into the
Kingdom of the dear Son? And is not God the Sheepherd there? Christ the Bishop
of the Soul there? and does not he oversee and take care of souls there,
leading them into fresh pastures, and by the soft flowing waters? Is not
Salvation nigh there, yea round about that Land? does not Mercy and Truth meet
there? Righteousness and Peace kiss there? yea does not the glory of the most
high dwell in, and overshadow that Land? Is not the eye of the Lord upon it for
good, from one end of the year to the other? does not he watch over it night
and day, that none hurt it, and water it in the proper seasons? O, who can
utter the Goodness and Glory of the Lord which is revealed and shines here!

Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with
me. Here are several things, which in their order and seasons, the living come
to a certain and sensible experience of. As first, Christ's standing at the door
and knocking. What is the door at which he stands? and how does he knock? How
does the contrary Spirit knock? how does his Spirit knock? Secondly, What is
his Voice? and how is his Voice heard? To hear Wisdoms cry within, in the
inward streets; his call at the door, at which he would enter: Must not the
true ear in some measure be opened first? Can any one hear without an ear?
Thirdly, What it is to open the door? there is a door-keepers state to be
witnessed and the right doorkeeper knows how to open and how to shut the door,
and is exercised in opening and shutting the door. The King of glory is to be
opened to and let in: but no wolf, no stranger, no strange Spirit is to be
hearkened or opened to. Fourthly, What Christ's coming in is at the door opened
to him? When he knocks, would he not come in? Would he stand always at the
door knocking? Nay, nay; when the door is opened, at which he knocks, he who is
the Resurrection and the Life enters, the King of Righteousness, the King of
Peace enters; he who is the Wisdom and Power of God enters: and what becomes of
the Power and Goods of the enemy then? Does he not kill and destroy them? does
he not consume and devour them? Does he not empty the House of them, and
garnish the house with that which is truly pure, glorious and beautiful?
Lastly, what is it to have him sup with the soul, and what is it for the Soul
to sup with him? Is not here eating and drinking in his Fathers Kingdom? Does
he not first destroy the Devils Kingdom, and then set up his own Kingdom? and
does he not feast with the soul, and feast the Soul in the Kingdom which he
sets up there? O that all men knew how near he, who is eternal Life, is to
them: Does not God search the heart? Is not he near the heart? does not his
Light shine there, in the midst of man's darkness and corruption? does not his
Power reach thither, and assault and trouble the enemy? does not his pure Love,
wherewith he loves man, pierce thither? Does he not knock? does he not call?
Does he not touch? does he not draw? does he not give, at times, some living
tender sense to many hearts, who too much neglect and despise him, and regard
not the day of his tender visiting them and calling after them? O how is the
Love of God, the Spirit of God, the Life of God, the Wisdom of God, the Power
of God, the drawings and instructions of his Grace, day by day, resisted by the
Wisdom and Will of the flesh, in those that are born thereof and hearken
thereto; and so live after the flesh, and not after that which reproves the
flesh.

Many more Scriptures might be mentioned, and also sensibly and livingly
witnessed to: but these are enough to give a taste. The Lord open men's
understandings into the thing it self, and give them the key which opens into
the truth, even into the mystery thereof, wherein is the hidden Life and
Virtue. Amen.

A few words Concerning the true Christ, how it may be certainly and infallibly
know which is he.
This Question relates not to his outward appearance in the days of his flesh:
but to his inward and spiritual appearance, how it may be known? To which the
Answer on my heart is, Even after the same way, and by the same means is he to
be known in his inward appearance, as he was known in his outward: which was,
by the revealing of the Father. For none knows the Son, but the Father; and he
to whom the Father reveals him. And when Simon Peter confessed him to be Christ
the Son of the living God, Blessed, said he, art thou Simon Bar-Jona: for flesh
and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven,
Mat. 16. verse. 16, 17. And if none could know Christ in his appearance in
flesh, notwithstanding so many manifest and express Prophecy concerning him,
but such only to whom the Father revealed him: how shall any know his inward
and spiritual appearance; unless they be taught of the Father and hear and
learn of him so to do?

But more particularly to show how the Father revealed his Son, and how they
came to know in that day, that he was the Son of the living God, the holy one,
the anointed Savior, and that the same way, and by the same means, people than
will truly know him, must come to the knowledge of him now.

First, They came to know him, by the manifestation of the Life that was in
him, by the fullness of the Grace and Truth which dwelt in him, and put it self
forth, so as to be discerned by the inward and spiritual eye in them. For the
Life was manifested, 1 John 1.2. The Life which was in him, was manifested to
the Spiritual eye which was in them: and thus they came to know him.

Secondly, By his voice and knocks. Thus said he concerning his sheep in those
days, that they know his voice, Joh. 10.4. Oh, he has such a voice, as none
has but he. He speaks in his Father's authority (not as the Scribes, not as
earthly wise, learned men) he speaks in the evidence and demonstration of God's
Spirit. The words which he speaks, are Spirit and Life. They that hear his
voice, live. And when he stands at the door and knocks, he pierces deep. O the
beatings of his hand upon the render and sensible hearts and consciences. O,
his secret reproofs, his secret instructions, his secret quicknings and
enlightenings; how did they, and how do they eternally make him manifest in the
hearts and consciences of his!

Thirdly, By his Baptism, or by his baptizing into his own Spirit and Power.
While people were in expectation, and mused in their hearts of John, whether he
were the Christ or not: John answers the case, and tells them, how they might
discern and know the true Christ. It is not I, who baptize with water: but he
that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, and with fire: whose fan is in his hand
etc. Luke 3.15, 16.17. Was not this then, and is not this now the way to know
the true Christ? He that knows him who inwardly and spiritually baptizeth,
him who has the fan, who inwardly fanneth and purges the Floor, gathering in
the Wheat, and burning up the chaff does not he inwardly, truly and Spiritually
know Christ? He that knows the Word which is quick and powerful and sharper
than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and
Spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart: does not he know the word which was in the beginning,
which was with God, yea which was God: for he is the only searcher of the
heart, and trier of the reins.

Fourthly, By his mighty works. The works which the Father has given me to
finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent
me, Joh. 5.36. And when John sent two of his disciples to Jesus, with this
question, Art thou he that should come, or look we for another? Christ bids
them go and tell John what things they had seen and heard, how that the Blind
see, the Lame walk, the Lepers are Cleansed, the Deaf hear, the Dead are
raised, to the poor the Gospel is Preached, and blessed is he whosoever shall
not be offended in me, Luke. 7.22, 23. Why herein is a marvelous thing said the
blind man, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened my eyes,
Joh. 9.30. He who has the power, and puts forth the power inwardly, who
opens the inward eye, the inward ear, loses the inward tongue, causes the
inward feet to walk in the way of Life, and the inward hands to work the works
of God; he is the Messiah, the Savior, the word of Life, the Son of the Living
God. They that believe in him, in his Spirit, in his Power, in his inward
appearance, have the witness in themselves, the living testimony, which none
can put out or take away from them. He has opened mine eyes, he has opened my
heart, he has raised me out of the grave, he has given me eternal Life. He
has changed me inwardly, created me inwardly, by the working of his mighty
power, and I daily live, am preserved and grow by the same power. I feel his
Life, his virtue, his power, his presence day by day. He is with me, he lives
in me: and I live not of my self, but by feeling him to live in me, finding
life spring up from him into me and through me; and therein lies all my ability
and strength for evermore.

A few words, in the Bowels of tender Love and Good Will to my Native Country.
It is written, When thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the
World shall learn Righteousness. O that this might be verified concerning thee,
O England, even that thou might learn Righteousness, and that the days of
thy unrighteousness might come to an end! Have not God's judgments been upon
thee? Yea, are not God's Judgments still upon thee? And can any thing divert
them from coming more upon thee, but thy speedy returning unto the Lord in
breaking off thy sins by unfeigned Repentance? O that thou might be sensible
of the hand of the Lord, and might hear the Rod, and him who has appointed
it. The Lord has power over all Nations, and can break them in pieces as a
Potters Vessel. They are but as the drop of a Bucket, as the small dust of the
Balance: they are before him as nothing, and are counted to him less than
nothing and vanity. Read Isa. 24. See how God will plead with Nations, and
consider whether he be not dealing thus with thee? O has not that been found
in thee, and is not that found in thee, which provokes the Lord exceedingly? O
that the weighty sense of thy sins were upon thee, and that thou might truly
repent and turn from them* that thou might reap the benefit of God's
Judgments, and learn Righteousness; and his Indignation might be removed from
thee, and his tender Bowels of compassion move toward thee!

But perhaps some may say, What is the Righteousness we should learn?

Answ. O learn to know God, that is a righteous thing. Learn to fear God. Learn
to worship him aright. How is that? Why, in his own Spirit and Truth, in which
he seeks to be worshipped. Learn Humility toward God: learn Justice and Mercy
toward Men. Learn to love thy Enemies. If ye will be Christians, that is the
Law of Christ. But that which is called the Christian world, many of them have
not yet learned so much as to love their Friends, but hate and persecute such
as fear the Lord, and seek their good, and stand in the gap to keep back the
Wrath of the Lord, from breaking in upon them, and are wrestling mightily with
him, with strong cries that he would stay the sharpness thereof, that it might
not break forth to their destruction. Learn to do to others, as ye would be
done to. Do not do to any because of their Religion and tender Consciences
toward the Lord, what ye would not have done to your selves because of your
Religion. How long will it be, ere ye learn this! how many Judgments and
Distresses shall come upon you, before ye bow in Spirit under the mighty hand
of God, and yield your selves, in submission to him, to learn things of him.

Quest. But how shall we learn Righteousness?

Answ. Retire inwardly to that, and harken inwardly to that which gives the
sense of Judgments, and learn of that; and that will wean you inwardly from all
your unrighteousness, and teach you Righteousness. There is that inwardly in
the unregenerate, which hardens and misleads: there is also that inwardly which
tenders, melts, teaches and leads aright; as it is believed in and obeyed. O
that men knew the difference between these two, and how to turn from the one to
the other. For out of the heart proceeds all that is evil and vain: and out of
the heart are the issues of Life also. The well or puddle of the muddy Waters,
of the Waters of Egypt, of the Wine of Sodom, and Waters of Babylon is there:
and the Well and Cistern of the pure Waters is there also. O my native Country,
that thou might be the first Nation, in this age of the World that might
pass through the judgments of God, and be cleansed thereby and be happy? O that
thy Rulers and Governors were weaned from the spirit and wisdom of this World,
and might receive of God's holy Spirit and Wisdom, and Judge and Govern
themselves and the people thereby! When the Jew outward was chosen to be the
people of God, did not he pour out of his Spirit to govern them by? Were the
Judges, Kings and Leaders thereof, only anointed with outward Oil? were they
not also anointed with God's Spirit? And can any Christian Magistrate govern
aright any Christian Nation, without the assistance and guidance of the same
Spirit? And O that all the people were anointed also, that they might be
inwardly Kings and Priests to the Lord, and the Kingdom of Christ might be
inwardly set up in all their hearts, and every man might reign in and through
him, over the enemies of his own soul! O that the Power and Glory of the Lord
might cover thy Governors and Inhabitants, O England! O the prayers that have
been long put up, in bowels of tenderness for thee! O the besome of the Lord,
the besome of his Righteous Judgments, that it might sweep the hearts of men
inwardly, that this Nation might be prepared for the Glory of the Lord (for the
Glory which he reveals in his Heavenly birth) to break forth outwardly, to the
admiration and magnifying of the work of his Power, in the eyes of all
beholders, Amen, Amen.

THE END.
A Brief TABLE of the CONTENTS.
1. COncerning understanding the Scriptures, Page 11 2. Concerning the
illuminating and Sanctifying Spirit, Page 12 3. Concerning the Spirit of God,
and the Scriptures, Page 13 4. Concerning the perfect and converting Law of
God, Page 14 5. Concerning David's Longings, Page 15 6. Concerning the
Spiritual Sun, Page 16 7. Concerning the Words being a fire and hammer; Page 17
8. Concerning God's writing his Law in the heart, Page 18 9. Concerning the
inward Light of God's Spirit, Page 19 10. Concerning the Gospel Ministers and
Ministry, Page 20 11. Concerning trying of Spirits, etc. Page 22 12. Concerning
things necessary to Salvation, Page 23 13. Concerning the True Gospel Church,
Page 24 14. Concerning the way to Salvation, Page 25 15. Concerning Christ's
saving the Soul, Page 26 16. Concerning Regeneration, Page 27 17. Concerning
true Holiness, ibid. 18. Concerning Christ's works, Page 28 19. Concerning the
Yoke or Cross of Christ, Page 29 20. Concerning making our Calling and Election
sure, ibid 21. Concerning Prayer, Page 31 22. Concerning Repentance, Page 32
23. Concerning Faith, Page 33 24. Concerning Obedience, Page 34 25. Concerning
Justification, Page 35 26. Concerning good Works, Page 37 27. Concerning Love,
Page 38 28. Concerning Meekness and Patience, Page 39 29. Concerning the
knowledge of the new Covenant, Page 40 30. Concerning the Fear of the new
Covenant, Page 42 31. Concerning Hope, Page 43 32. Concerning Peace, Page 44 33
Concerning Joy, Page 45 34. Concerning Poverty of Spirit and Humility, Page 46
The Conclusion, Page 49
EXPERIENCES.
1. Concerning the Seed of the Kingdom, Page 57 2. Concerning the Souls food,
Page 58 3. Concerning Gods power, Page 59 4. Concerning Temptations, Page 60 5.
Concerning Prayer, Page 62 6. Concerning Justification and Sanctification, Page
63 7. Concerning Faith, Page 67 8. Concerning Obedience, Page 71 9. Concerning
the Cross of Christ, Page 74 10. Concerning the Mystery, Page 77 11. Right
judging experienced, Page 80 12. About knowing God's Spirit, Page 84 13.
Queries concerning the Seed of the Kingdom, Page 85 14. Postcript to the
experiences, Page 91 Some Scriptures very sweet, etc. Page 93 A few words
Concerning the true Christ, Page 111 A few words to my native Country, Page 115
ERRATA.
THe Stops have been much misplaced, and many left out, which the Reader is
desired by his careful observation of the matter to supply the defect herein.
Some Errors which alter or may hinder the understanding of the sense are here
taken notice of.

Page 6. lin. 6. read those. l. 14. r. grow. P. 16. l. 3. f. they, r. thy. P.
22. l. 8. r. and the life. P. 24. l. 20. r. meet together. P. 27. l. 3. Blot
out the first the. P. 54. l. 21. r. and experience. P. 55. l. 16. r. to cure
every Sickness. P. 57. l. 17. r. Warring against them. P. 61. l. 16. r. in the
patience. P. 64. l. 13. blot out the word for. P. 68. l. 14. r. from: P. 73. l.
8. Lord and Master. P. 74. l 7. r. producing. l. 17. r. has this power. P. 83.
l. 12. r. bring.

Through the misunderstanding of the Printer, the Titles over the pages
belonging to that part of the Book called Experiences, were omitted, and the
Title belonging to the following part, put in heir stead, which the Reader is
desired thus to amend.

Experiences, page 57 to p. 63. Concerning Justification and Sanctification, p.
63 to 67. Experiences concerning Faith, p. 67 to 71. Experiences concerning
Obedience, p. 71 to 74. The Cross of Christ experienced, p. 74 to 77. The
Mystery experienced. p. 77 to 80. Right Judging experienced. p. 80 to 84. How
to know God's Spirit. p. 84. Experimental Queries, p. 85 to 90. How to know the
Seed. A serious Examination. A Postscript to the Experiences, p. 91 to 93.

