A Short WARNING TO ALL Persecutors of the Innocent; BUT More particularly to
the Bailiffs and Officers of Kingston upon Thames, and the Justices and
Officers of the Towns near thereunto.

BEING An Alarm from the Lord God, to warn them, that they may repent, and turn
from the Evil of their Doings.

By Henry Penfould.

Printed in the Year, 1670.

A Short Warning to all Persecutors of the Innocent; but more particularly to
the Bailiffs, and Officers of Kingston upon Thames, and the Justices and
Officers of the Towns near thereunto, etc.
O Ye Stubborn, Hard-hearted, Rebellious, Stiff-necked, and Cruel-minded men;
Spoylers and Destroyers of God's Heritage: Why do ye harden your hearts against
the Lord God and his People? O Repent, repent, weep and howl, for the Day of
the Lord God that comes on ye suddenly, that hastes to overtake ye.

O Repent, repent, and rent your hearts; and be ye melted and broken, O ye
Rocks, before the Lord God, before he arise in the fierceness of his Wrath and
hot Displeasure, and rend ye, and tear ye to pieces, and ye be utterly
consumed, and there be none to stand in the gap, nor stop his Wrath, nor
deliver ye.

O ye Destroyers, and Wasters, and Spoilers of Gods People, that are even
seared and sealed, fast bound up together, as with one Bond and Cord of
Iniquity: Repent, repent, and turn to the Lord, or God will break your bands,
and loose your Joints suddenly.

O Awake, awake, Why will ye slumber? Why will ye sleep? Why will ye not lift
up your eyes, and behold and consider, before sudden Destruction overtake ye?
Did ever Oppression and Cruelty make any People happy? Did ever the Persecutors
of Gods innocent People, escape his Hand of Vengeance, that followed them.

Therefore I do warn ye, as by the Mouth of the Lord God, to arise, escape, and
flee from the Wrath to come, and Destruction that hasteneth on apace upon ye
that run as a Post very swiftly, and ye shall not be able to escape, except ye
arise, and meet the Lord God in his Judgments, and bow down and humble your
selves before him; else, he will tread you down under his Feet, and trample
upon ye, even as ye do now upon the Innocent, who are poor and helpless, and
have no Helper in the Earth.

O why do you harden your hearts, and band your selves together against the
Lord God Almighty. Repent, repent, O ye Spoilers, O ye Destroyers; for God will
spoil the Spoiler, and destroy the Destroyer, and utterly lay waste the
Habitation of them that spoil his Heritage.

O ye Fools, and blind and dull of understanding; When did ever any People set
themselves in battle against the Lord, and conquer? When did ever any People
make war with the Lord God of Hosts, and Prosper? but that in the midst of
their spoil and triumph God has ensnared them, and taken, and overthrown them,
Abraham rescued Lot.
even while the Prey has been in their hands, and has rescued and saved it,
and destroyed them.

O ye Foolish and Blind, Why do you not regard? Why do you not at all consider
whom ye are thus rifling, and pillaging, and spoiling, in this manner, of their
Goods and Estates? What are they your foreign Enemies? What are they such as
were born to no privilege here, among ye? or what, have they wickedly
forfitted or sold their privilege and right in the Laws of this Land, their
just, and due, and equal Birthright, even with ye and other men? No, no, But
they are your own Countrymen, your own Townsmen, your own Neighbors, that
are your Friends, that have wished ye no evil, that have as good a Birthright
unto the Laws and Rights, and Privileges of this Land, as your selves; and
have as little forfitted or sold our Birthright, to them, as your selves, by
the breach of any just or equal Law; or by any evil, or ungodly, or
unchristian, or dishonest, or disorderly practice: But why then do ye thus
proudly insult and boast over us, your Countrymen, your Neighbors, your
Friends, doing things by us contrary to Reason, contrary to common sense,
contrary to Christians, contrary to sober men, contrary to those that do as
they would be done by, in keeping us close Prisoners, upon the account of evil
Behavior; whereas it is most certainly known, and has ever been experienced
by us, That we have ever been of as harmless, blameless, civil, sober, and
honest Behavior as any of your selves; not guilty of any envyings, hatreds,
threatenings, evil-speakings, no Cursers, no Swearers, no Drunkards, no
Strikers, no Spoylers of the Goods of Honest and Harmless men, as some of ye
have been and are. But why do ye so proudly boast, and insult over us; because
that ye know we have no Helper in the Earth? But do not thus err, and be not
thus mistaken in your minds; we have our help in God, and the Lord God that
sits in the Heavens, will certainly avenge our Cause, and bring help, and
deliverance unto us, and destruction upon ye (except ye repent) before ye are
aware; and now ye boast and rejoice over us, but when destruction comes upon
ye, for your evil deeds, then he that brings Salvation and Deliverance unto
us, even our God, that sits in the Heavens (as David says) shall laugh at
ye; now is your time, and now ye make a mock and derision at God, and his
Truth, and People; but hereafter, and anon it will not be your time; but God
will deride ye, and make a mock at ye, except ye repent, and turn, and humble
your selves: But go too now, Why do ye boast your selves thus, in the spoil of
the Goods of the Innocent, as though ye were now heaping up and treasureing up
some great Store for your selves, your Wives, your Children, your Posterity
after ye? but oh ye that do endeavor to destroy the Just, that would ruin
Husbands with their Wives, and Fathers with their Children, the Harmless and
Innocent, that have neither hatched or contrived or wished, or thought of wrong
or mischief against ye. O consider these things: O Repent, O repent, and turn
from the evil of your doings, and cry, and weep, and lament, and humble your
selves before the Lord, if happily he may hear and receive you, and pardon your
transgressions, and heal you, O leave off your spoiling, leave off your
wasting, leave off your pillaging, leave off your destroying; for by this ye
shall not increase your Riches, or Wealth, or Treasure, or Store; these goods
shall never be any succor or support unto you in your decreped old age (if ever
ye live to come to it) remember what God says of the wicked. Ye shall not get
hereby any Treasure of Inheritance unto your Wives and Children, except by such
kind of deeds, ye shall treasure up to your selves in store, (which shall be a
during Inheritance to ye, and the fruits of it remain to your wives and
Children, and your Childrens Children, unless they repent) the Eternal Wrath,
and sore displeasure, and indignation and curse of the Lord God, of this you
shall be possessors all your days, in your middle and older age, with the
Displeasure, and Wrath, and Indignation, and Vengeance, and Curse of the Lord
ye shall be heavy laden to your Graves; this shall be your Store, this shall
be your Treasure, which ye shall carry with you, which ye shall leave behind
you, to your Wives and Children, and Childrens Children; even the Wrath and
Indignation, and Vengeance, and Curse of God (if ye do not repent) ye shall
certainly carry this along with you, and leave this behind unto your Children,
though you leave them nothing else; Gods Wrath, and Indignation, and Curse, and
Vengeance to be sure ye shall make them Heirs, and Inheritors, and Possessors
of, though of nothing else; this shall be as the Plague of Leprosy unto ye,
that shall creep up your Houses, and stick fast by your Walls, that shall get
up into your Beds of ease, that shall lodge with ye; that shall get into all
your pleasant and delectable and comfortable things; it shall get into your
Basket, and mix it self with all your Store; your Trades and your Callings
shall be ruined by it; it shall cleave to your Flesh, and your Skin, and stick
fast by your Bones; ye shall not wipe it off; ye shall not purge it out; ye
shall not acquit your selves, and be rid thereof, except ye repent, and rent
your hearts, and wash your hands of these things, and turn from the evil of
your doing, unto the Lord God, who is pitiful and merciful, that delights
to show Mercy, and pardon transgression and sin, and wills in no wise the
death of a Sinner, but that all may turn to him, and live: But if ye do not
mind your selves, yet even for your Wives, and tender Childrens sakes, leave
off the evil of your doings, and count it not your boasting and rejoicing to
procure the Wrath, and Indignation, and Curse, and Vengeance of the Lord God,
and make him your Enemy, even for your Wives and tender Childrens sake:

O why should they have cause to curse ye, and wish that ye had been cut off
and destroyed, that ye had been rotten in your Graves before ever ye had set
your hands to such a work as this; to persecute, and destroy, and spoil the
Innocent?

O why do ye strive to make your Name rotten and stink among sober men while ye
live, and loathsome and stinking in Generations to come, after ye be dead? Are
ye indeed ignorant, or have ye not read of such cruel, wicked, bloody minded
men of old, that persecuted, and spoiled, and destroyed Harmless Honest men,
for Serving and Worshipping God according to their Consciences, contrary to
their way, Have not their names rotted? Do they not stink? Are they not
loathsome, even the remembrance of them? Have ye not read, how the state of such
men has been miserable while they have lived, and when they have died worse?

O Repent, and turn to the Lord God, that be may pardon your transgression,
that it may not be so with you: O why will you let your own tender Children
bear the weight of your transgression? O what have they done, that they should
be punished for your iniquity? O why should your Children say, The Wrath and
Curse of God has consumed my Father, and all that he has; all is gone
besides, and that is left and descended to me: O unnatural, O cruel Father,
that had no more love, that had no more affection, that has left me only such
a Legacy, that has gotten only such a Treasure, and has laid up such a Store,
Vials full of Wrath, with many Dreggs of the Wrath and curse of God, to make me
Heir, and Inheritor, and Possessor of (especially should I follow his sinful
steps?)

See ye here, now I have laid before you Life and Death, the Blessing of the
Lord God Almighty and Cursing, that same that will bring ye to true Peace, and
that which will be a perpetual Anguish and Horror, and a never dying Worm,
gnawing upon ye continually; So why should ye now be angry with me? Why should
ye gnash your Teeth upon me? What because I have told ye the truth; I have
sought to do ye no wrong hereby, but it is in love unto ye, and your Posterity
also; and by a necessity from God, to warn ye to flee from the wrath to come,
that so I may be clear of your blood, and if ye perish by the Hand of the Lord,
by your evil doings (as certainly ye shall, if ye do not repent) then your
blood shall be on your own heads, and I shall be clear: So now I have told ye
before hand, and indeed I only tell ye, or rather desire ye which to choose,
but the choice is in your selves altogether, (as for me) for ye may choose
whether ye will, Life or Death, Blessing or Cursing, the unchangeable Love and
Peace of God or the Wrath and Curse of God; of which when ye would acquit your
selves ye shall not be able, unless ye turn and repent in time, which is the
true desire of my soul, that all may repent and turn and live, and none of ye
may perish, no, not one; who am howsoever accounted your Friend,

Hen. Penfould.
From the Stock-House in Kingston, where I am under close Confinement with
three more, Honest and Harmless, and Quiet, and Peaceable men, until we give
security for our good Behavior. Written the 26th of the 4th Month, 1670.
Christ says, Love Enemies, and love one another: And is it your Priests and
Bishops, that teach you to persecute one another.



THE END.

