ENGLAND's Present Interest DISCOVERED With HONOR to the PRINCE, AND SAFETY to
the PEOPLE. In Answer to this One Question; What is most Fit, Easy and Safe at
this Juncture of Affairs to be done, for Composing, at least Quieting of
Differences; Allaying the Heat of Contrary Interests, and making them
Subservient to the Interest of the Government, and Consistent with the
Prosperity of the Kingdom? Presented and Submitted to the Consideration of
SUPERIORS.

And Abraham said to Lot, Let there be no Strife between me and thee; for we
are Brethren, Genesis 13. 8. As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to
them likewise, Luke 6. 31. Lex est Ratio sine appetitu.

Printed in the Year 1675.

THE CONTENTS.
The Introduction to the Question, page 1. The Question stated, page 5. The
Answer to the Question, page 5. I. Of English Rights, in the British, Saxon
and Norman Times, page 6, 7. Particularly of Liberty and Property, p. 7, 8, 9,
10. Of Legislation, page 11, 12, 13. Of Juries, page 14, 15, 16. That they are
Fundamental to the Government, and but repeated and confirmed by the Great
Charter, page 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. The Reverence paid them by Kings
and Parliaments, and their Care to preserve them, page 25. The Curse and
Punishment that attended the Violators, page 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. More General
Considerations of Property, etc. The Uncertainty and Ruin of Interests that
follow, especially where it is not maintained; Presidents: That it is the
Prince's Interest to preserve it Inviolably from the fingering of the Church;
that it is not Justly Forfeitable for Nonconformity to her; and that where she
has the keeping of Property, the Government is changed from Civil to
Ecclesiastical, King to Bishop, Parliament House to the Vestary; for so the
Clergy have the Keys as well of Civil as Church-Society, page 31, 32, 33, 34,
35, 36, 37. II. Of a Balance, respecting Religious Differences, page 38, 39,
40. Eight Prudential Reasons why the Civil Magistrate should embrace it, page
40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. Three Objections Answered, p. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50
51. A Comprehension considered, but a Toleration preferred, upon Reasons and
Examples, page 51, 52. 53, 54. III. Of General and Practical Religion, page 55.
That the Promotion of it only is the Way to take in, and stop the Mouth of all
Persuasions, being the Center to which all Parties verbally tend, and therefore
the fittest Station for a prudent Magistrate to meet every Interest: the
Neglect of it pernicious; Instances: That it is the Unum Necessarium to
Felicity here and hereafter, p. 56, 57, 58, 59. An Exhortation to Superiors,
page 60. A Corollary, page 61, 62.
THE INTRODUCTION.
THere is no LAW under Heaven, which has its Rise from Nature or Grace, that
forbids Men to Deal Honestly and Plainly with the greatest Personages in
Matters of highest Importance to their Present and Future Good; On the
Contrary, the Dictates of both enjoin every Man that Office to his Neighbor,
and from Charity among private Persons, it becomes a Duty indispensible to the
Public: Nor do Worthy Minds think ever the less kindly of Honest and Humble
Monitors; and God, he knows, that oft-times Princes are Deceived, and Kingdoms
Languish for Want of them. How far the Posture of our Affairs will instifie
this Address, I shall submit to your Judgment, and the Observation of every
intelligent Reader.

Certain it is, that there are few Kingdoms in the World more Divided within
themselves, and whose Religious Interests lie more seemingly cross to all
Accommodation, then that we live in, which renders the Magistrate's Task hard,
and gives him a Difficulty, some think insurmountable.

Your Endeavors for a Uniformity have been many; Your Acts not a few to
Enforce it; but the Consequence, whether you intended it or no, through the
Barbarous Practices of those that have had their Execution, has been the
Spoiling of several Thousands of the Free Inhabitants of this Kingdom of their
Unforfeited Rights. Persons have been flung into Goals, Gates and Trunks broak
open, Goods distrained, till a Stool has not been left to sit down on; Flocks
of Cattle driven, whole Barns full of Corn seized, Parents left without their
Children, Children without their Parents, both without Subsistence: But that
which aggravates the Cruelty, is, the Widdow's Mite has not escaped their
Hands; they have made her Cow the Forieit of her Consoience, not leaving her a
Bed to lie on, nor a Blanket to cover her: and which is yet more Barbarous, and
helps to make up this Tragedy, the poor Helpless Orphans Milk boiling over the
Fire, was flung away, and the Skillet made part of their Prize; that, had not
Nature in Neighbors been stronger then Cruelty in such Informers and Officers,
to open her Bowels for their Relief and Subsistence, they must have utterly
perished. Nor can these in human Instruments plead Conscience or Duty to those
Laws that have been made against Dissenters, since their Actions have
abundantly transcended the severest Clause in them; for to see the Imprisoned
has been Suspicion enough for a Goal; and to visit the Sick, to make a
Conventicle: Fining and Straining for Preaching and being at a Meeting, where
there has been neither; and Forty Pound for Twenty, at pick and choose too,
is a Moderate Advance with some of them. Others thinking this a Way too Dull
and Troublesome, alter the Question, and turn, Have you met? which the Act
intends, to, Will you Swear? which it intends not: so that in some Places it
has been sufficient to a Primunire, that men have had Estates to loose; I
mean, such men, who through Tenderness refuse the Oath, but by Principle love
the Allegiance not less then their Adversaries.

Finding then by Sad Experience, and a long Tract of Time, That the very
Remedies applied to cure Dissension increase it; and that the more Vigorously
an Uniformity is coercively prosecuted, the Wider Breaches grow, the more
Inflamed Persons are, and fixed in their Resolutions to stand by their
Principles; which, besides all other Inconveniences to those that give them
Trouble, their very Sufferings beget that Compassion in the Multitude, which
rarely miss of many Friends, and makes a Preparation for not a few Proselytes;
so much more Reverend is Suffering, then making men to suffer for Religion,
even of those that cannot suffer for their Religion, if yet they have any
Religion to suffer for. Histories are full of Examples; The Persecution of the
Christian. Religion made it more Illustrious then its Doctrine. Perhaps it will
be denied to English Dissenters, that they rely upon so good a Cause, and
therefore a Vanity in them to expect that Success. Arrianism it self, reputed
the foulest Heresy by the Church, was by no Artifice of its Party so
disseminated, as the severe Opposition of the Homousians.

Contests naturally draw Company; and the Vulgar are justified in their
Curiosity, if not Pity, when they see so many Wiser Men busy themselves to
suppress a People, by whom they see no other ill then that for Nonconformity
in Matters of Religion they bear Indignities patiently.

To be short; If all the Interruptions, Informations, Fines, Imprisonments,
Exiles and Blood, the great Enemy of Nature, as well as Grace, has excited man
in all Ages to about Matters of Worship from Cain and Abel's time to ours,
could furnish us with sufficient Presidents, that the Design proposed by the
Inflictors of so much Severity, was ever answered; that they have smothered
Opinions, and not Inflamed, but Extinguished Contest, it might perhaps at least
prudentially give Check to our Expectations, and allay my just Confidence in
this Address; But since such Attempts have ever been found Improsperous, as
well as that they are too Costly, and that they have procured the Judgments of
God, the Hatred of Men; to the Sufferers, Misery; to their Countries, Decay of
People and Trade; and to their own Consciences an infinite Guilt; I fall to the
Question, and then the Solution of it; in which, as I declare, I intend nothing
that should in the least abate of that Love, Honor and Service that are due to
you; so I beseech you, do me that Justice as to make the fairest Interpretation
of my Expressions; for the whole of my Plain and Honest Design is, to offer my
Mite for the Increase of your True Honor and my dear Country's Felicity.

The QUESTION. WHat is most Fit, Easy and Safe at this Juncture of Affairs to
be done, for Composing, at least Quieting Differences; for Allaying the Heat of
Contrary Interests, and making them Subservient to the Interest of the
Government, and Consistent with the Prosperity of the Kingdom?
The ANSWER.
I. An Inviolable and Impartial Maintenance of English Rights.

II. Our Superiors governing themselves upon a Balance, as near as may be,
toward the several Religious Interests.

III. A sincere Promotion of General and Practical Religion.


I shall briefly discourse upon these Three Things, and endeavor to prove them
a sufficient, if not the only best Answer that can be given to the Question
propounded.

Of ENGLISH-RIGHT.
THere is no Government in the World but it musteither stand upon Will and
Power, or Condition and Contract: The one rules by Men; the other by Laws. And
above all Kingdoms under Heaven it is England's Felicity to have her
Constitution so impartially Just and Free, as there cannot well be any thing
more remote from Arbitrariness, and jealous of preserving her Laws, by which
all Right is maintained.

These Laws are either Fundamental, and so immutable; or more Superficial and
Temporary, and consequently alterable.

By Superficial Laws we understand such Acts, Laws or Statutes, as are suited
to present Occurrences, and Emergencies of State; and which may as well be
abrogated, as they were first made for the Good of the Kingdom: For Instance;
Those Statutes that relate to Victuals, Clothes, Times and Places of Trade,
etc. which have ever stood whilst the Reason of them was in Force; but when
that Benefit, which once redounded, fell by fresh Accidents, they ended
according to that old Maxim, Cessante ratione legis, cessat l^x.

By Fundamental Laws I do not only understand such as immediately spring from
Synteresis, that Eternal Principle of Truth and Sapience, more orless
disseminated through Mankind, which are as the Corner Stones of Humane
Structure, the Basis of reasonable Societies, without which all would run into
Heaps, and Confusion: namely, Honest vivers, alterum non loedere, jus suum
cuique tribuere; that is, To live Honestly, not to Hurt another, and to give
every one their Right (Excellent Principles, and common to all Nations: Though
that it self were sufficient to our present purpose) But those Rights and
Privileges, which I call English, and which are the proper Birth right of
English men, may be reduced to these Three:

First, An Ownership, and Undisturbed Possession: That what they have, is
rightly theirs, and no Body's else.

2dly, A Voting of every Law, that is made, whereby that Ownership or Propriety
may be maintained.

3dly, An Influence upon, and a real Share in that Judicatory Power that must
apply every such Law; which is the Ancient, Necessary and Landable Use of
Juries, if not found among the Britains, to be sure practiced by the Saxons,
and continued through the Normans to this very day.

That these have been the Ancient and Undoubted Rights of English men, as three
great Roots, under whose spacious Branches the English People have been wont to
shelter themselves against the Storms of Arbitrary Government, I shall
endeavor to prove.

1. An Ownership and Undisturbed Possession.
This relates both to Title and Security of Estate, and Liberty of Person, from
the Violence of Arbitrary Power.

It Is true, the Foot. Steps of the British Government are very much overgrown
by Time: There is scarcely any thing remarkable left us, but what we are
beholden to Strangers for; either their own Unskilfulness in Letters, or their
Depopulations and Conquests by Invaders, have deprived the World of a
particular Story of their Laws Caesar. Com. Tacit. in vit. Agric. Dion. l. 6.
Beda. M. West. an. 4 16. l. 1. c. 17
and Customs in Peace or War: However, Caesar, Tacitus, and especially Dion,
say enough to prove their Nature and their Government to be as far from
Slavish, as their Breeding and Manners were remote from the Education and
greater Skill of the Romans. Beda and M. West minster say as much.

The Law of Property they observed, and made those Laws that concerned the
Preservation of it.

The Saxons brought no Alteration to these two Fundamentals of our English
Government; for they were a Free People, governed by Laws; of which they
themselves were the Makers; that is, There was no Law made without the Consent
of the People (de majoribus omnes) as Tacitus observes of the Germans in
general. They lost nothing by transporting of themselves hither; Hist. Germ.
and doubtless found a greater Consistency between their Laws, then their
Ambition: For the Learned Collector of the British Councils tells us, That
Ethelston, the Saxon Council. Brit. p. 397.
King, pleading with the People, told them, Seeing I, according to your Law,
allow what is yours, do ye so with me. Whence Three Things are observable, 1st,
That something was theirs, that no Body else could dispose of. 2dly, That they
have Property by their own Law; therefore they had a Share in making their own
Laws. 3dly, That the Law was Umpier between King and People; neither of them
ought to infringe; the Law limited them. This Ina, the Great Saxon King,
confirms; There is Ll. In^ Lam.
no Great Man, says he, nor any other in the whole Kingdom, that may abolish
written Laws. It was also a great part of the Saxon Oath, administered to the
Kings at their Entrance upon the Government, to Maintain and Miror. c. 1.. 2.
Rule according to the Laws of the Nation. Their Parliament they called
Micklemote, or Wittangemote; it consisted of King, Lords and People, before the
Clergy interwove themselves with the Civil Government. And Andrew Horn in his
Miror of Justice, tells us, That Miror. Just. c. 1.. 3.. 2. c. 4.. 11.
the Grand Assembly of the Kingdom in the Saxon time, was to confer of the
Government of God's People, how they might be kept from Sin in quiet, and have
Right done them according to the Customs and Laws.

Nor did this Law end with the Saxon Race: William the Conqueror, as he is
usually called, quitting all claim by Conquest, gladly stoopt to the Laws
observed by the Saxon Kings, and so became a King by Leave, valuing a Title by
Election before that which is founded in Hoven. Eadmur. Histor. l. 1. p. 13. M.
Paris, in vit. Gulielm.
Power only: He therefore at his Coronation made a solemn Covenant to maintain
the good, approved, and ancient Laws of the Kingdom, and to inhibit all Spoil
and unjust Judgment.

And this, Henry the first, his third Son, amongst others his Titles mentioned
in his Charter, to make Ely a Bishopric, calls himself Son of William the
Great, who Spicileg.
by Hereditary Right succeeded King Edward (called the Confessor) in this
Kingdom. An ancient Chronicle of Leichfield speaks of a Council of Lords that
advised Chro. Leichf.
William of Normandy, To call together all the Nobles and Wise Men throughout
their Counties of England, that they might set down their own Laws and Customs;
which was about the fourth year of his Reign: Which implies, that they had
Fundamental Laws, and that he intended their Confirmation, as follows. And
one of the first Laws made by this King, which, as a notable Author says, may
be called the first Magna Charta in the Norman Times, by which he reserved to
himself nothing of the Freemen of this Kingdom, but their Free Service; in the
Conclusion of it, says, that The Lands of the Inhabitants Ll. Gulielm. c. 55.
of this Kingdom were granted to them in Inheritance of the King, and by the
Common Council of the whole Kingdom; which Law does also provide, That they
shall hold their Lands and Tenements well or quietly, and in Peace, from all
unjust Tax and Tillage; which is further expounded in the Laws of Henry the
first, chapter 4. That no Tribute or Tax should be taken, but what was due in
Edward the Confessor's Time. So that the Norman Kings claim no other Right in
the Lands and Possessions of any of their Subjects, then according to English
Law and Right. And so tender were they of Property in those times, that when
Justice it self became importunate in a Case, no Distress could issue without
public Warrant obtained; nor that neither, but upon Three Complaints first
made: Nay, when Rape and Plunder was rife, and men seemed to have no more Right
to their own, then they had Power to maintain, even then was this law
sufficient Sanctuary to all Oppressed, by being publicly pleaded Ll. Gulielm.
cap. 42, 45. Gloss. 227.
at the Bar against all Usurpations, though it were under the Pretense of their
Conqueror's Right it self, as Camb. Brit. Norf.
by the Case of Edwin of Sharnbourn appears.

The like Obligation to maintain this Fundamental Law of Property, with the
appendent Rights of the People, was taken by Rufus, Henry the 1st, Stephen,
Henry the 2d, Richard the 1st, John, and Henry the 3d; which brings me to that
Famous Law, called, Magna Charta, or The Great Charter of England, of which
more anon; it being my Design to show, That nothing of the Essential Rights of
English men was thereby de novo granted, as in Civility to King Henry the third
it is termed; but that they are therein only repeated and confirmed: Wherefore
I shall return to antecedent Times tofetch down the remaining Rights.

The second part of this first Fundamental is, Liberty of Person. The Saxons
were so tender in the point of Imprisonment, that there was little or no use
made of it; nor would they so punish their Bondmen, vinculis coercere rarum
est: In case of Debt or Damage, the Recovery thereof was either by a Delivery
of the just Value in Goods, or upon the Sheriffs Sale of the Goods, in Money;
and if that satisfied not, the Land was extended; Ll. Edw.
and when all was gone, they were accustomed to make their last Seizure upon
the Party's Arms, and then he was reputed an Undone Man, and cast upon the
Charity of his Friends for Subsistence, but his Person never imprisoned for the
D^bt, no, not in the King's Case: And to the Honor of King Alfred be it
spoaken, He imprisoned Ll. Alfr. c. 1. and 31.
one of his Judges for Imprisoning a Man in that Case. And we find among his
Laws this Passage, Qui immerentem Paganum vin^ul^s (...) stri^xer^t, dec^m
solidis noxam sarcito: That if a Man should imprison a Pagan, or Heathen
unjustly, his Purgation of that Offense should be no less then the Payment of
Ten Shillings; a Sum very considerable in those days. Nor did the Revolution
from Saxon to Norman drop this Privilege; for besides the general Confirmation
of former Rights by William, surnamed the Conqueror, his Son Henry the Ll.
Gulielm, c. 42, 45, 55 Ll. Henr. 1. cap. 5.
first, particularly took such Care of continuing this part of Property
inviolable, that in his Time no Person was to be imprisoned for committing of
Mortal Crime it self, unless he were first attainted by the Verdict of Twelve
Men.

Thus much for-the first of my Three Fundamentals, Right of Estate, and Liberty
of Person; that is to say, I am no man's Bondman, and what I possess is
inviolably mine own.

2. A Voting of every Law that is made, whereby that Ownership or Propriety may
be maintained.
That the second Fundamental of our English Government was no Incroachment upon
the Kings of more modern Ages, but extant long before the great Charter made in
the Reign of Hen. 3. even as early as the Britains themselves; and that it
continued to the time of Hen. 3. I shall prove by several Instances.

Caesar in his Commentaries tells us, That it was the Caes. Comm. l 5, 6. Dion.
in vit. Sever.
Custom of the British Cities to Elect their General; and if in War, why not in
Peace? Dion assures us in the Life of Severus the Emperor, That in Britain the
People held a Share in Power and Government; which is the modestest
Construction his words will bear. And Tacit. in vit. Agric. c. 12.
Tacitus says, They had a Common Council; and that one great Reason of their
Overthrow by the Romans was, their not Consulting with, and Relying upon their
Common Council. Again, Both ad and Mat Westminster tell us, That the Britains
summoned a Synod, chose their Moderator, and expelled the Pelagian Creed: All
which supposes popular assemblies, with Power to order National Affairs. And
indeed, the learned Author of the British Councils gives some Hints to this
Purpose, That they had a Common Council, and called it, KYFR-Y-THEN.

The Saxons were not inferior to the Britains in this Point, and Story
furnishes us with more and plainer Proofs. They brought this Liberty along
with them, and it was not likely they should loose it, by transporting
themselves into a Country where they also found it. Tacitus reports it to have
been generally the German. Liberty, like unto the Concie of the Athenians and
Tacit. Hist. Germ. Plat. in vit. Sol. and Lyr.
Lacedaemonians. They call their Freemen Frilingi, and these had Votes in the
Making and Executing the general Laws of the Kingdom. In Ethelbert's time,
after Austin's Insinuations had made his Followers a Part of the Government,
the Commune Concilium was tam Cleri quam Populi. In Ina's time, Suasu and
instituto Episcoporum, Council. Brit. 162. Ll. Sax Lam. Cant ab. f. 1. Ibid. f.
22.
omnium Senatorum and natu majorum sapientum populi. Alfred after him reformed
the former Laws consulto sapientum. Likewise Matters of public and general
Charge, in case of War, etc. we have granted in the Assembly, Regi, Baronibus
and Populo. And though the Saxon Word properly imports the Meeting of Wise Men,
Ll. Ed. Lam. Cant. f. 139.
yet all that would come might be present, and interpose their Like or Dislike
of the present Proposition, as that of Ina, in magna servorum Dei frequentia.
Again, Commune Concilium seniorum and populorum totius regni, the Common
Council of the Elders and People of the whole Kingdom. The Council of Winton,
Ann. 855. is said to be in the Presence of the Great Men, aliorumque fidelium
Ll. Sax. Lam p. 1. Council. Brit. 19. Ingulph.
infinita multitudine; and an infinite multitude of other faithful People,
which was nigh Four Hundred Years before the Great Charter was made.

My last Instance of the Saxon Ages shall be out of the Glossery of the learned
English Knight, H. Spelman: Spelm. Gloss. Tit. Gemote, f. 261.
The Saxon Wittangemote or Parliament (says he) is a Convention of the
Princes, as well Bishops as Magistrates, and the free People of the Kingdom;
and that the said Wittangemote consulted of the common Safety in Peace and War,
and for the Promotion of the common Good. William of Normandy chose rather to
rely upon the Peoples Consent, then his own Power to obtain the Kingdom. He
swore to them to maintain their old Laws and Privileges; they to him Obedience
for his so governing of them: for, as a certain Author has it, He bound
himself to be Just, that he might be Great; Ll. Gulielm. c. 55.
and the People to submit to Justice, that they might be Free In his Laws, c.
55. We, by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom, have granted the Peoples
Lands to them in Inheritance, according to their ANCIENT Laws. Matters of
general Charge upon the whole Body of the People, were settled by this grand
Council, by the Commune Concilium, especially in the Charge of Arms imposed
upon the Subject. Ll. Guliel. c. 58. Spicileg. W. Malmbs, Hist. p. 101. Cart.
mother. foeder. magn. sigil. ann. 1. Joh. ex vet. Reg in Arch. Cantuar.
Archiepiscop. Rot. Cart. ann. 5. Joh. Memb. 5 n. 29. Rot. Par. 24. Edw. I. n.
22.
The Law says it to have been done by the common Council of the Kingdom. So W.
Rufus and Henry the First, were received by the common Consent of the People.
And Stephen's Words were, Ego Stephanus, Dei gratia, Assensu Cleri and Populi
in Regno Angliae electus, etc. I Stephen, by the Grace of God, and Consent of
the Clergy and People, chosen King of England, etc. So King John was chosen tam
Cleri quam Populi unanimo consensu and favore, by the Favor and unanimous
Consent of the Clergy and People: And his Queen is said to have been crowned de
communi consensu and concordi voluntate Archiepiscoporum, Comitum, Baronum,
Cleri and Populi totius Regni, i. e. by the common Assent and unanimous
Good Will of the Archbishops, Bishops, Counts, Barons, Clergy and People of
the whole Kingdom. King Ed. 1 also desired Money of the commune Concilium or
Parliament, as they have given in my time, and that of my Progenitors, Kings.

All which shows, that it was Antecedent to the Great Charter, not the Rights
therein repeated and confirmed, but the Act it self.

And King John's Resignation of the Crown to the Pope, being questiond upon
some Occasion in Edward the 3d's Rot. Par. 40. Ed. 3. n. 78;
Time, it was agreed upon, that he had no Power to do it without the Consent of
the Dukes, Prelates, Barrons and Commons.

And as paradoxal as any may please to think it, it is the great Interest of a
Prince, that the People should have a share in the making of their own Laws;
where it is otherwise, they are no Kings of Freemen, but Slaves, and those
their Enemies for making them so. Leges nulla alia causa nos tenent, quam quod
judicio populi recepta sunt; The Laws (says Ulpian) do therefore obliege the
People, because they are allowed of by their Judgment. And Gratian, in Dec.
distinct. 4. Tum demum humanae leges habent vim suam, cum fuerint non modo
institutae, sed etiam firmatae Approbatione Communitatis: It is then (says he)
that human Laws have their due Force, when they shall not only be devised, but
confirmed by the Approbation of the People. 1. It makes Men diligent, and
increases Trade, which advances the Revenue; for where Men are not free, they
will never seek to improve, because they are not sure of what they have. 2. It
frees the Prince from the Jealousy and Hate of his People; and consequently,
the Troubles and Danger that follow; and makes his Province easy and safe. 3.
If any Inconveniency attends the Execution of any Law, the Prince is not to be
blamed; it is their own Fault that made, at least consented to it.

I shall now proceed to the third Fundamental, and by plain Evidence prove it
to have been a material part of the Government before the Great Charter was
enacted.

3. The People have an Influence upon, and a great Share in that Judicatory
Power. etc.
That it was a British Custom, I will not affirm, but have some Reason to
suppose; for if the Saxons had brought it with them, they would also have lest
it behind them, and in all likelihood there would have been some Footsteps in
Saxony of such a Law or Custom which we find not. I will not enter the Lists
with any about it; This shall suffice, that we find it early among the Saxons
in this Country; and if they, a free People in their own Country, settling
themselves here as a new planted Colony, did supply what was defective in their
own Government, or add some new Freedom to themselves, as all Planters are wont
to do; which are as those first and Corner Stones, their Posterity with all
Care and Skill are to build upon, that will serve my turn, to prove it a
Fundamental; that is, such a first Principle in our English Government, by the
Agreement of the People diffusively, that it ought not to be violated: I would
not be understood of the Number, but of the Way of Trial; that is to say, that
Men were not to be condemned but by the Votes of the Freemen. N. Bacon thinks
that in ruder times the multitude tried all among themselves; and fancyes it
came from Graecians, that determined Controversies by the Suffrage of 34 or the
major part of them. Be it as it will, Juries the Saxons had; for in the Laws of
King Aetheldred, about 300 Years before the Entrance of the Norman Duke, we Ll.
Sax. Lam ann. 675.
find enacted, in singulis Centuriis, etc. thus Englisht, In every Hundred let
there be a Court, and let twelve Ancient Freemen, together with the Lord of
the Hundred be sworn, that they will not condemn the Innocent, or acquit the
Guilty: And so strict were they of those Ages in observing this fundamental Way
of Judicature, that Alfred put one of his Judges to Death for passing Sentence
upon a Verdict corruptly obtained, upon the Votes of the Jurors, three of
twelve being in the Negative: If the Number was so sacred, what was the
Constitution it self? The very same King executed another of his Judges for
passing Sentence of Death upon an Ignoramus returned by the Jury; and a third
for condemning a Man upon an Inquest taken ex officio, when as the Delinquent
had not put himself upon their Trial. More of his Justice might be mentioned
even in this very Case.

There was also a Law made in the time of Aetheldred, Ll. Etheld c. 3. Lamb.
when the Britains and Saxons began to grow tame to each other, and
intercommon amicably, that says, Let there be Twelve men of Understanding,
etc. six English and six Welsh, and let them deal Justice, both to English and
Welsh.

Also in those simpler times, If a Crime extended but to Ll. Inae. Ll. Canut.
some shameful Pennace, as Pillary or Whipping (the last whereof as usual as it
may be with us, was inflicted only upon their Bondmen) then might the Penance
be reduced to a Ransom, according to the Nature of the Fault; but it must be so
assest in the Presence of the Judge, and by the Twelve, that is the Jury of
Friling^, or Freemen.

Hitherto Stories tell us of Trials by Juries, and those to have consisted in
general Terms of Freemen, but PER PARES came after, occasioned by the
considerable Saxons, neglecting that Service, and leaving it to the inferior
People (who lost the Bench, their ancient Right, because they were not thought
Company for a Judge or Sherif) And from the growing Pride of the Danes, who
slighted such a Rural Judicature, and despised the Fellowship of the mean Saxon
Freemen in public Service; for the wise Saxon King perceiving the Dangerous
Consequence of submitting the Lives and Liberties of the Inferior (but not
less useful People) to the Dictates of any such superb Humor; and on the other
hand, of subjecting the Nobler Sort to the Suffrage of the Inferior Rank, with
the Advice of his Wittagenmote provides a third Way, most Equal and Grateful,
and by Agreement with Gunthurne the Dane, settled the Law of Peers, or Equals;
which is the Envy of Nations, but the famous Privilege of our English People,
one of those three Pillars the Fabric of this ancient and Free Government
stands upon.

This Benefit gets Strength by Time, and is received by the Norman-Duke and his
Successors; and not only confirmed in the lump of other Privileges, but in one
notable Case for all, that might be brought to prove, that the fundamental
Privileges mentioned in the Great Charter, 9. Hen. 3. were before it. The
Story is more at large delivered by our Learned Seldom; But thus; The Norman
Duke having Spicil. 197.
given his half Brother Odo, a large Territory in Kent, with the Earldom; and
he taking Advantage at the King's being S^igand.
displeased with the Archbishop of Canterbury, to posses himself of some of
the Lands of that See: Landfrank that succeeded the Archbishop, informed
hereof, petitioned the King for Justice secundum legem terrae, according to the
Law of the Land; upon which the King summoned a County Court, the Debate lasted
three Days before the Freemen of Kent in the Presence of Lords and Bishops,
and others skilful in the Law, and the Judgment passed for the Archbishop UPON
THE VOTES OF THE FREEMEN.

By all which it is (I hope) sufficiently and inoffensively manifested, that
these three Principles:

1. English men have individually the alone Right of Possession and Disposition
of what they have.

2. That they are Parties to the Laws of their Country, for the Maintenance of
that great and just Law.

3. That they have an Influence upon, and a real Share in the Judicatory Power,
that shall apply those Laws made, have been the ancient Rights of the Kingdom,
and common Basis of the Government; that which Kings under the several
Revolutions have sworn to maintain, and History affords us so many Presidents
to confirm; So that the Great Charter made in the 9th of Henry the 3d, was not
the Nativity, but Restoration of ancient Privileges from Captivity; No Grant
of New Rights, but a New Grant, or Confirmation rather of Ancient Laws and
Liberties, violated by King John, and gained by his Successor, at the Expense
of a long and bloody War, which showed them as resolute to keep, as their
Ancestors had been careful to enact those excellent Laws.

And so I am come to the Great Charter, which is comprehensive and repetitious
of what I have already been discoursing, and which I shall briefly touch upon
with those successive Statutes that have been made in Honor and Preservation
of it.

I shall rehearse so much of it as falls within the Consideration of the
foregoing Matter, which is a great deal in a little; with something of the
Formality of Grant and Curse, that this Age may see, with what Reverence and
Circumspection our Ancestors governed themselves in Confirming and Preserving
it.

Henry, by the Grace of God King of England, etc. 9th. Hen. 3.

To all Archbishops, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, Provoses, Officers, unto all
Bailifs, and our faithful Subjects, who shall see this present Charter,
Greeting.
Know ye, that we, unto the Honor of Almighty God, and for the Salvation of
the Souls of our Progenitors, and our Successors, Kings of England, to the
Advancement of Holy Church, and Amendment of our Realm, of our mere and free
Will have given and granted to all Archbishops, etc. and to all Freemen of
this our Realm, these Liberties underwritten, to be holden and kept in this our
Realm of England for evermore.

Though in Honor to the King, it is said to be out of his mere and free Will,
yet the Qualification of the Persons, he is said to grant the ensuing Liberties
to, show, that they are Terms of Formality, viz. To all Freemen of this Realm;
for they must be free, because of these Laws and Liberties, since 'twas
impossible they could be any Thing but Slaves without them; Consequently, this
was not an Infranchising, but confirming to Freemen their just Privileges.
The Words of the Charter are these:

Chapter 14.
A Freeman shall not be amerced for a small Fault, but after the Quantity of
the Fault; and for a great Fault, after the Manner thereof, saving to him his
Contenements or Freehold: And a Merchant likewise shall be amerced, saving to
him his Merchandise; and none of the said Amercements shall be assessed, but by
the Oath of good and honest Men of the Vicinage.

Chapter 29.
No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, nor be disseized of his free hold or
Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or any other ways
destroyed; nor we shall not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by Lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; we shall sell to no Man, we
shall deny, or defer to no Man either Justice or Right.

I stand amazed, how any Man can have the Confidence to say, These Privileges
were extorted by the Barons Wars, when the King declares, that what he did
herein, was freely or that they were New Privileges, when the very Tenor of
the Words prove the contrary; for Freehold, Liberties, or Free Customs are by
the Charter it self supposed to be in the Possession of the Freemen at the
making and publishing thereof. No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned; then
he is free; this Liberty is his Right. Again, No Freeman shall be disseized of
his Freehold, Liberties, or free Customs; then certainly he was in Possession
of them. And that great Father in the Laws of England, Chief Justice Cook in
his Proaem to the 2d Part of his Institutes, tells us, Cook, Proaem. Instit.
part. 2.
that th^se Laws and Liberties were gathered and observed amongst others in an
entire Volumn by King Edward the Confessor, confirmed by William, surnamed the
Conqueror; which were afterward ratified by Henry the first; enlarged by Henry
the second, in his Constitutions at Clarendon, and after much Contest and Blood
split between King John and the Barons concerning them, were solemnly
established at running-Mead near Stanes; and lastly, brought to their former
Station, and published by this King Henry the third, in the 9th Year of his
Reign; And though Evil Counselors would have provoakt him to void his Father's
Act and his own, as if the first had been the Effect of Force, the other of
Nonage; yet it so pleased Almighty God, who has ever been propitious to this
Ungrateful Island, that in the 20th Year of his Reign, he did confirm and
complete this Charter, for a perpetual Establishment of Liberty to all
freeborn English Men and their Heirs forever, ordaining, Quod contravenientes
per Dominum Regem cum convicti fuerint, graviter puniantur. i. e. but whosoever
should act any Thing contrary to these Laws, upon Conviction should be
grievously punished by our Lord the King. And in the 22 Year of his Reign, it
was confirmed by the Statute of Marleb. c. 5. and so venerable an Esteem have
our Ancestors had for this great Charter and indispensibly necessary have 52.
Hen. 3. Stat. Marleb.
they thought it to their own and Posterities Felicity, that it has been above
30 Times ratified, and commanded under great Penalties, to be put in Execution.

Here are the 3 Fundamentals comprehended and expressed, to have been the Rights
and Privileges of English Men.

1. Ownershp, consisting of Liberty and Property, in that it supposes English
Men to be Free, there is Liberty; next, that they have Freeholds; there is
Property.

2. That they have the Voting of their own Law; for that was an ancient free
Custom, as I have already proved; and all such Costoms are expressly confirmed
by this great Charter; Besides, the People helped to make it.

3. An Influence upon, and a real Share in the Judicatory Power, in the
Execution and Application of Law.

This is a substantial Part, thrice provided for in those sixteen Lines of the
great Charter by us rehearsed: 1. That no Amercement shall be assessed, but by
the Oath of good and honest Men of the Vicinage. 2. Nor we shall not pass upon
him, nor condemn him, but by Lawful Judgment of his Peers. 3. Or by the Law of
the Land, which is Synonymous, or a Saying of equal Signification with Lawful
Judgment of Peers; for Law of the Land, and Lawful Judgment of Peers, are the
Proprium quarto modo, or essential Qualities of these Chapters of our great
Charter, being communicable, Omni soli and semper, to all and every Clause
thereof alike. Chief Justice Cook well observes, that per legem Cook on c. 4.
of 52. E. 3. Inst. 2. p. 50.
terrae, or by the Law of the Land, imports no more then a Trial by Process, and
Writ original at common Law, which cannot be without the Lawful Judgment of
Equals, or a common Jury; therefore per legale Judicium parium, by the Lawful
Judgment of Peers, and per legem terrae, by the Law of the Land, plainly
signify the same Privilege to the People: So that it is the Judgment of the
Freemen of England, which gives the Cast, and turns the Scale of English
Justice.

These Things being so evidently proved by long Use and several Laws, to have
been the first Principles or Fundamentals to the English free Government; I
take leave to propose this Question; May the free People of England be justly
disseized of all or any of these fundamental Principles, without their
Individual Consent?

Answ. With Submission to better Skill, I conceive, Not; for which I shall
produce first my Reasons; then Authorities.

1. Through the British, Saxon and Norman Times, the People of this Island
have been reputed and called Freemen by Kings, Parliaments, Records and
Histories; and as a Son supposes a Father, so Freemen suppose Freedom. This
Qualification imports a supreme Right, such a Right as beyond which there is
none on Earth to disfree them, or deprive them of it; therefore an unalterable
fundamental Part of the Government.

2. It can never be thought, that they entrusted any Legislators with this
Capital Privilege further then to use their best Skill to secure and maintain
it, that is, so far as they were a Part of the English Government; they never
delegated or empowered any Men, that de jure they could deprive them of that
Qualification? and a Facto ad Jus non valet Argumentum, for the Question is
not, What May be done? but what Ought to be done? Overseers and Stewards are
empowered, not to alienate, but preserve and improve other Men's Inheritances.
No Owners deliver their Ship and Goods into any Man's Hands to give away, or
run upon a Rock; neither do they consign their Affairs to Agents or Factors
without Limitation. All Trusts suppose such a Fundamental Right in them for
whom the Trusts are, as is altogether indissolvable by the Trustees: The Trust
is the Liberty and Property of the People; the Limitation is, that it should
not be invaded, but inviolably preserved according to the Law of the Land.

3. If Salus Populi be suprema lex; the Safety of the People the highest Law,
as say several of our ancient famous Lawyers and Law Books; then since the
aforesaid Rights are as the Sinnews of this free Body politic, or that
sovereign Cordial without which this free People must needs consume and pine
away into utter Bondage; it follows, they are the highest Law, and therefore
ought to be a Rule and Limit to all subsequent Legislation.

4. The Estate goes before the Steward, the Foundation before the House, People
before their Representatives, and the Creator before the Creature. The Steward
lives by preserving the Estate; the House stands by Reason of its Foundation;
the Representative depends upon the People, and the Creature subsists by the
Power of its Creator. Every Representative in the World, is as the Creature of
the People; for the People make them, and to them they owe their Being: Here is
no Transessentiating or Transubstantiating of Being from People to
Representative, no more then there is an absolute transferring of a Title in a
Letter of Atorney; The very Term Representative is enough to the contrary:
Wherefore as the House cannot stand without its Foundation, nor the Creature
subsist without its Creator; so can there be No Representative without a
People, nor that People free, which all along is intended (as inherent to, and
inseparable from the English People) without Freedom; nor can there be any
Freedom without something be Fundamental. In short, I would fain know of any
Man, how the Branches can cut up the Root of the Tree that bears them? How any
Representative that is not only a mere Trust to preserve Fundamentals, the
Peoples Inheritance; but, that is a Representative, that makes Laws, by Virtue
of this Fundamental Law, that the People has a Power in Legislation (the 2d
Principle proved by me) can have Power to remove or destroy that Fundamental?
The Fundamental makes the People free, this free People make a Representative;
Can this Creature unqualifie its Creator? What Spring ever rose higher then its
Head? The Representative is at best but a true Copy, an Exemplification; the
free People are the Original, not cancellable by a Transcript: And if that
Fundamental that gives to the People a Power of Legislation, be not annullable
by that Representative, because it makes it what it is; much less can that
Representative disseize Men of their Liberty and Property, the first Great
Fundamental, that is the Parent of this other, which intitles to a Share in
making Laws for the Preservation of the first inviolably. Nor is the third
other then the necessary Production of the two first, to intercept Arbitrary
Designs, and make Power legal; for where the People have not a Share in
Judgment, that is, in the Application, as well as making of the Law; the other
two are imperfect, open to daily Invasion, should it be our Infelicity to have
a violent Prince: for as Property is every day exposed, where those that have
it are destitute of Power to hedge it about by Law-making; so those that have
both, if they have not the Application of the Law, but the Creatures of another
Part of the Government, how easily is that Hedge broken down? And indeed, as it
is a most just and necessary, as well as ancient and honorable Custom, so it
is the Princes Interest; for still the People are concerned in the
Inconveniences with him, and he is freed from the Temptation of doing
arbitrary Things, and their Importunities, that might else have some Pretense
for such Adresses, as well as from the Mischiefs that might 5. Ed. 3. c. ^. 25.
Ed. 3. c. 4. 17. R. c. 6. Rot. Parl. 42. Ed. 3. c. 3. Cook, 2. Inst. 43. Stamf.
pl. cor. p. 150.
ensue such Actions. It might be enough to say, that here are above 50 Statutes
now in Print, beside its venerable Antiquity, that warrant and confirm this
Legale judicium parium suorum, or the Trial of English Men by their Equals.

But I shall hint at a few Instances: The first is, The Earl of Lancaster in
the 14th of Edw. 2. adjudged to dye without Lawful Trial of his Peers, and
afterward Henry Earl of Lancaster his Brother, was restored: the Reasons given
were two; 1. Because the said Thomas was not arraigned and put to Answer; 2.
That he was put to Death without Answer, or Lawful Judgment of his Peers. The
like Proceedings were in the Case of John of Gaunt, p. 39. coram Rege. And in
the Earl of Arundel's Case, Rot. Parl. 4 Edw. 3. n. 13. And in Sr. John Alce's
Case, 4 Edw. 3. n. 2. Such was the Destruction committed on the ^d. Hastings in
the Tower of London by Richard the 3d. But above all, that Attainder of Thomas
Cromwell, Earl of Essex, who was attainted of high Treason, as appears Rot.
Parl, 32. Hen. 8. of which says Chief Justice Cook, as I remember, Let
Oblivion take away the Memory of so foul a Fact, if it can; if not, however,
let Silence cover it. It Is true, there was a Statute obtained in the 11th of
Henry the 7th, in Defiance of the Great Charter, which authorized several
Exactions contrary to the free Customs of this Realm; particularly in the Case
of Juries, both sessing and punishing by Justices of Assize and of the Peace,
without the fining and Presentment of 12 Freemen; Empson and Dudley were the
great Actors of those Oppressions, but they were hanged for their Pains, and
that illegal Statute repealed in the 1st of Henry the 8th c. 6. The Consequence
is plain; That Fundamentals give Rule to Acts of Parliament, else why was the
Statute of the 8th Edw. 4. c. 2. of Liveries and Information by the Discretion
of the Judges to stand as an Original; and this of the 11th of Henry the 7th
repealed as illegal? for, therefore any Thing is unlawful, because it
transgresses a Law: But what Law can an Act of Parliament transgress, but that
which is Fundamental? Therefore Trial by Juries or Lawful Judgment of Equals,
is by Acts of Parliament confessed to be a Fundamental Part of our Government:
And because Chief Justice Cook is generally esteemed a great Oracle of Law, I
shall in its proper Place present you with his Judgment upon the whole Matter.

5. These Fundamentals are unalterable by a Representative, which were the
Result and Agreement of English Freemen individually, the ancienter Times not
being acquainted with Representatives; for then the Freemen met in their own
Persons: In all the Saxons Story we find no Mention of any such Thing; for it
was the King, Lords and Freemen, the Elders and People; and at the Counsel of
Winton, in 855. is reported to have been present the Great Men of the Kingdom,
and an INFINITE MULTITUDE ^^. Sax. Lam. Council. Brit. 219. Ingulph.
of other faithful People. Also that of King Ina, the common Council of the
Elders and PEOPLE of the WHOLE Kingdom. It is not to be doubted but this
continued after the Norman Times; and that at Running Mead by Sta^^s the
Freemen of England were personally present at the Confirmation of that great
Charter, in the Reign of King John. But as the Ages grew more human, with
respect to Villains and Retainers, and the Number of Freemen increased, there
was a Necessity for a Representative, especially, since Fundamentals were long
ago agreed upon, and those Capital Privileges put out of the Reach and Power
of any little Number of Men to endanger: And so careful were their
Representatives in the time of Edward the Third, of Rot. Parl. 13. Ed 3. n. 8.
Cook, 4. Inst. fol. 14. n. 34.
suffering their Liberties and free Customs to be infringed, that in Matters of
extraordinary Weight they would not determine, till they had first returned and
conferred with their several Counties or Buroughs that delegated them.

Several Authorities in Confirmation of the Reasons.
So indubitably are these Fundamentals the Peoples Right, and so necessary to
be preserved, that Kings have successively known no other safe or legal Passage
to their Crown and Dignity, then their solemn Obligation inviolably to maintain
Praeambl. 9.
them. So sacred were they reputed in the Days of Henry the 3d, that not to
continue or confirm them, were Henr. 3.
to affront God, and damn the Souls of his Progenitors and Successors; to
Depress the Church, and Deprave the 25. Ed. 1. c. 1.
Realm: That the Great Charter comprehensive of them should be allowed as the
common Law of the Land, by all 42. Ed. 3. c. 1. Rot. Parl. 15. Edw. 3. n. 10,
37.
Officers of Justice; that is the lawful Inheritance of all Commoners: That all
Statute-Laws or Judgments whatsoever, made in Opposition thereunto, should be
null and void: That all the Ministers of State and Officers of the Realm,
should constantly be sworn to the Observation thereof: and so deeply did
after-Parliaments reverence it, and so care Cook, 1. Inst. f. 81. Cook, 2.
Inst. f. 525 526. 25. Edw. 1. c. 3. 28 Edw. 1. c. 1. 25. Edw. 1. c. 4.
full were they to preserve it, that they both confirmed it by 32. several Acts,
and enacted Copies to be taken and lodged in each Cathedral of the Realm, to be
read four times a Year publicly before the People; as if they would have them
more obliged to their Ancestors for redeeming and transmitting those
Privileges, then for begetting them: And that Twice every Year the Bishops,
apparel'd in their Pontificials, with Tapers burning, and other Solemnities,
should pronounce the greater Excommunication against the Infringers of the
Great Charter, though it were but in Word or Counsel; for so says the Statute.
I shall for further Satisfaction repeat the Excommunication or Curse pronounced
both in the Days of Henry the Third, and Edward the First.

The Sentence of the Curse given by the Bishops, with the King's Consent,
against the Breakers of the Great Charter.
IN the year of our Lord 1253. the third day of May, in the great Hall of the
King at Westminster, in the Presence, and by the Consent of the Lord Henry, by
the Grace of God King of England, and the Lord Richard, Earl of Cornwall, his
Brother; Roger Bigot, Earl of Norfolk, Marshal of England; Humphry, Earl of
Hereford; Henry, Earl of Oxford; John, Earl Warren; and other Estates of the
Realm of England; We Boniface, by the Mercy of God, Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of England, F. of London, H. of Ely, S. of Worcester, E. of Lincoln, W.
of Norwich, P. of Hereford, W. of Salisbury, W. of Durham, R. of Excester, M.
of Carlisle, W. of Bath, E. of Rochester, T. of St. David's, Bishop, apparelled
in Pontificials, with Tapers burning, against the Breakers of the Churches
Liberties, and of the Liberties and other Customs of this Realm of England,
and namely these which are contained in the Charter of the Common Liberties of
England, and Charter of the Forest, have denounced Sentence of Excommunication
in this Form, By the Authority of Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, etc. of the blessed Apostle Peter and Paul, and of all Apostles,
and of all Martyrs, of blessed Edw. King of England, and of all the Saints of
Heaven, We Excommunicate and Accurse, and from the Benefit of our Holy Mother,
the Church, we sequester all those that hereafter willingly and maliciously
deprive or spoil the Church of her Right; and all those that by any Craft or
Willingness, do violate, break, diminish, or change the Churches Liberties, and
free Customs contained in the Charters of the Common Liberties, and of the
Forest, granted by our Lord the King, to Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Prelates of England, and likewise to the Earls, Barons, Knights and other
Freeholders of the Realm; and all that secretly and openly, by Deed, Word or
Counsel do make Statutes, or observe them being made, and that bring in
Customs, to keep them, when they be brought in, against the said Liberties, or
any of them, and all those that shall presume to judge against them; and all
and every such Person beforementioned, that wittingly shall commit any Thing
of the Premises, let them well know that they incur the aforesaid Sentence,
ipso facto.

The Sentence of the Clergy against the Breakers of the Articles
abovementioned.
IN the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen: Whereas our
Sovereign Lord the King, to the Honor of God, and of holy Church, and for the
common Profit of the Realm, has granted for him, and his Heirs for ever these
Articles above-xwriten, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England, admonished all his Province once, twice and thrice, because that
Shortness will not suffer so much delay, as to give knowledge to all the People
of England, of these Presents in writing: We therefore enjoin all Persons, of
what Estate soever they be, that they, and every of them, as much as in them
is, shall uphold and maintain these Articles granted by our Sovereign Lord the
King, in all Points: And all those that in any Point do resist or break, or in
any manner hereafter Procure, Counsel, or in any wise Assent to, Testify or
Break those Ordinances, or go about it, by Word or Deed, openly or privily, by
any manner of Pretense or Color; we, the aforesaid Archbishop, by our
Authority in this Writing expressed, do Excommunicate and Accurse, and from the
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the Company of Heaven, and from all
the Sacraments of Holy Church do sequester and exclude.

We may here see, that in the obscurest Time of Popery they were not left
without a Sense of Justice; and the Papists, whom many think no Friends to
Liberty and Property, under dreadful Penalties enjoin an inviolable Observance
of this great Charter, by which they are confirmed. And though I am no Roman
Catholic, and as little value their other Curses pronounced upon Religious
Dissents, yet I declare ingenuously, I would not for the World incur this
Curse, as every Man deservedly does, that offers Violence to the Fundamental
Freedoms thereby repeated and confirmed: And that any Church or Church Officers
in our Age, should have so little Reverence to Law, Excommunication or Curse,
as to be the Men that either vote or countenance such Severities, as bid
Defiance to the Curse, and rend this memorable Charter in pieces, by disseizing
Freemen of England of their Freeholds, Lib^^ties and Properties, merely for
the Inoffensive Exercise of their Conscience to God in Matters of Worship, is a
Civil sort of Sacrilege.

I know it is usually objected, That a great Part of the Charter is spent on
the Behalf of the Roman Church, and other Things now abolisht; and if one Part
of the great Charter may be repealed or invalidated, why not the other?

To which I answer; This renders nothing that is Fundamental in the Charter the
less valuable; for they do not stand upon the Legs of that Act, though it was
made in Honor of them, but the Ancient and primitive Institution of the
Kingdom. If the Petition of Right were repealed, the great Charter were never
the less in Force, it being not the Original Establishment, but a Declaration
and Confirmation of that Establishment. But those Things that are abrogable or
abrogated in the great Charter, were never a Part of Fundamentals, but hedged
in then for present Emergency or Convenience. Besides, that which I have
hitherto maintained to be the Common and Fundamental Law of the Land, is so
reputed, and further ratified by the Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1. which was
long since the Church of Rome lost her Share in the Great Charter. Nor did it
relate to Matters of Faith and Worship, but-Temporalities only; the Civil
Interest or Propriety of the Church But with what Pretense to Mercy or Justice,
can the Protestant Church null the Romish, that she may retain the English Part
without conforming to Rome, and yet now cancel the English Part it self to
every freeborn English Man that will not conform to Her? But no more of this
at this Time; only give me leave to remind a Sort of active Men in our Times,
that the cruel Infringers of the Peoples Liberties, and Violaters of these
Noble Laws, did not escape with bare Excommunications and Gurses; for such was
the venerable Esteem our Ancestors had for these great Privileges, and deep
Solicitude to preserve them from the Defacings of Time, or Usurpation of
Power, that King Alfred executed 40 Judges for warping from the ancient Laws of
the Realm. Hubert de Burgo, Chief Justice of England in the Time of Edw. 1. was
sentenced by his Peers in open Parliament for advising the King against the
Great Charter. Thus Spencers, both Father and Son for their Arbitrary Rule and
Evil Counsel to Edw. 2. were exiled the Realm. No better Success had the
Actions of Tresilian and Belknap: And as for Empson and Dudley, though Persons
of some Quality in the Time of King Henry the 7th, the most ignominious Death
of our Country, such as belongs to Theft and Murder, was scarce Satisfaction
enough to the Kingdom for their Illegal Courses. I shall choose to deliver it in
the Words of Chief Justice Cook, a Man, whose Learning in Law has not without
Reason obtained a venerable Character of our English Nation.

There was (says he) an Act of Parliament, made in the 11th Year of King Hen.
7. which had a fair flattering Preamble, pretending to avoid diverse Mischiefs,
which were (1st) To the high Dispicasurs of Almighty God. (2dly) The great Let
of the Common Law. And (3dly) The great Let of the Wealth of this Land. And the
Purven of that Act, tended in the Execution contrary, EX DIAMETRO, viz. To the
high Displeasure of Almighty God, and the great Let, nay, the utter Subversion
of the Common Law, and the great Let of the Wealth of this Land; -- as
hereafter shall appear, the Substance of which Act follows in these Words.

THat from thenceforth, as well Justices of Assizs, as Justices of the Peace,
in every County, upon Information for the King, before them made, without any
Finding or Presentment by Twelve Men, shall have full Power and Authority, by
their Discretion; and to hear and determine all Offenses, as Riots, unlawful
Assemblies, etc. committed and done against any Act or Statute made, and not
repealed, etc.

By Pretext of this Law, Empson and Dudley did commit upon the Subjects
insufferable Pressure and Oppressions; and therefore this Statute was justly,
soon after the Decease of Hen. 7. repealed at the next Parliament, by the
Statute of 1 Hen. the 8. chap. 6.

A good Caveat to Parliaments to leave all Causes to be measured by the Golden
and strait Metwand of the Law, and not to the uncertain and crooked Cord of
Discretion.

It is almost incredible to foresee, when any Maxim, or Fundamental Law of this
Realm is altered (as elsewhere has been observed) what dangerous
Inconveniences do follow; which most expressly appears by this MOST UNJUST and
strange Act of the 11th of Hen. 7. For hereby not only Empson and Dudley
themselves, but such Justices of Peace (corrupt Men) as they caused to be
authorized, committed most grievous and heavy Oppressions and Exactions,
grinding the Faces of the poor Subjects by penal Laws (be they never so
obsolete, or unfit for the Time) by Information only, without any Presentment
or Trial by Jery, being the ANCIENT BIRTH RIGHT of the Subject; but to hear and
determine the same, by their Discretions, inflicting such Penalty as the
Statute not repealed, imposed. These, and other like Oppressions and Exactions
by the Means of Empson and Dudley, and their Instruments, brought infinite
Treasure to the King's Coffers, whereof the King himself, at the End, with
GREAT GRIEF and COMPUNCTION REPENTED, as in another Place we have observed.

This Statute of the 11th of Hen. 7. we have recited, and showed the just
Inconveniences thereof, to the End that the like should NEVER hereafter be
attempted in any Court of Parliament; and that others might avoid the FEARFUL
END of those two Time-Servers, Empson and Dudley, Qui eorum v^^^igiis
insistant, exitus perhorrescant.

I am sure, there is nothing I have offered in Defense of English-Law.
Doctrine, that rises higher then the Judgment and Language of this great Man,
the Preservation and Publication of whose Endeavors became the Care of a great
Parliament. And it is said of no inconsiderable Lawyer, that he should thus
express himself in our Occasion, viz. The Laws of England were never the
Dictates of any Conqueror's Sword; or the Placita of any King of this Nation;
or (says he) to speak impartially and freely, the Results of any Parliament
that ever sat in this Land.

Thus much of the Nature of English Rights, and the Reason and Justice of their
inviolable Maintenance. I shall now offer some more general Considerations for
the Preservation of Property, and hint at some of those Mischiefs that follow
spoiling it for Conscience sake, both to Prince and People.

1. The Reason of the alteration of any Law, ought to be the Discommodity of
Continuing it; but there can never be so much as the least Inconveniency in
continuing of Liberty and Property; therefore there can be no just Ground for
infringing, much less abrogating the Law that gives and secures them.

2. No Man in these Parts is born Slave to another; neither has one Right to
inherit the Sweat of the others Brow, or reap the Benefit of the others Labor,
but by Consent; therefore no Man should be deprived of Property, unless he
injure another Man's.

3. But certainly, nothing is more unreasonable then to sacrifice the Liberty
and Property of any Man (being his Natural and Civil Rights) for Religion,
where he is not found breaking any Law relating to Natural and Civil Things.
Religion, under any Modification is no Part of the old English Government;
Honest vivere, alterum non ladere, jus suum cuique tribeure, are enough to
entitle every Native to English Privileges: A Man may be a very good English
Man, and yet a very indifferent Churchman. Nigh 300 Years before Austine set
his Foot on English Ground, had the Inhabitants of this Island a free
Government. It is Want of distinguishing between It and the Modes of Religion,
which fills every Clamorous Mouth with such impertinent Cries as this; Why do
not you submit to the Government? as if the English Civil Government came in
with Luther, or were to go out with Calvin: What Prejudice is it for a Popish
Landlord to have a Protestant Tennant; or a Presbyterian Tennant to have a
Protestant Landlord? Certainly, the Civil Affairs of all Governments in the
World may be peaceably transacted under the different Trims of Religion, where
Civil Rights are inviolably observed. Nor is there any Interest so inconsistent
with Peace and Unity, as that which dare not solely rely upon the Power of
Persuasion, but affects Superiority, and impatiently seeks after an Earthly
Crown: This is not to act the Christian, but the Caesar; not to promote
Property, but Party, and make a Nation Drudges to a Sect. Be it known to such
Narrow Spirits, we are a Free People by the Creation of God, the Redemption of
Christ and careful Provision of our (never to be forgotten) honorable
Ancestors: So that our Claim to these English Privileges rising higher then
the Date of Protestancy, can never justly be invalidated for any Nonconformity
to it. This were to loose by the Reformation, which God forbid; I am sure
'twas-to enjoy Property with Conscience that promoted it: Nor is there any
better Definition of Protestancy, then protesting against Spoiling Property for
Conscience. I must therefore take Leave to say, that I know not how to
reconcile what a Great Man lately delivered in his Eloquent Harangue to the
House of Lords: His Words are these,

For when we consider Religion in Parliament, we are supposed to consider it as
a Parliament should do, and as Parliaments in all Ages have done, that is, as
it is a Part of our Laws, a Part, and a necessary Part of our Government: For
as it works upon the Conscience, as it is an INWARD PRINCIPLE of the DIVINE
LIFE, by which good Men do govern all their Actions, the State has nothing to
do with it, it is a Thing which belongs to another kind of Commission, then
that by which we sit here.

I acquiesce in the latter Part of this Distinction, taking it to be a
venerable Truth, and would to God Mankind would believe it, and live it; but
how to agree it with the former, I profess Ignorance; for if the Government
has nothing to do with the Principle it self, what more can she pretend over
the Actions of those Men that live that good Life? Certainly, if Religion be
this Principle of Divine Life, exerting it self by Holy Living, and that as
such, it belongs not to the Commission of our Superiors, I do with Submission
conceive, that there is very little else of Religion lest for them to have to
do with; the rest merits not the Name of Religion, and less does such a
Formality deserve Persecution: I hope such Circumstances are no necessary Part
of English Government, that cannot reasonably be reputed a necessary part of
Religion; and I dare believe, that he is too great a Lawyer, upon second
Thoughts, to repute that a Part of our Laws, a Part and a necessary Part of our
Government, that is such a Part of Religion as is neither the Divine Principle,
nor yet the Actions immediately flowing from it, since the Government was most
complete and prosperous many Ages without it, and has never known more
perplexed Contests and troublesome Interruptions, then since it has been
received and valued as a Part of the English Government; and God, I hope, will
forbid it in the Hearts of our Superiors, that English Men should be deprived
of their Civil Inheritance for their Nonconformity to Church-Formality: For no
Property out of the Church; the plain English of public Severity, is a Maxim
that belongs not to the holy Law of God, nor Common Law of the Land.

4. If Liberty and Property must be the Forfeit of Conscience for Non
conformity to the Princes Religion, the Prince and his Religion shall only be
loved as the next best Accession to other Men's Estates, and the Prince
perpetually provoakt to expose many of his Inoffensive People to Beggary.

5. It is our Superiors Interest, that Property be preserved, because it is
their own Case: None have more Property then themselves; But if Property be
exposed for Religion, the Civil Magistrate exposes both his Conscience and his
Property to the Church, and disarms himself of all Defense upon any Alteration
of Judgment. This is for the Prince to fall down at the Prelate's F^^t, and the
State to suffer it self to be rid by the Church.

6. It obstructs all Improvement of Land and Trade; for who will labor that
has no Propriety, or has it exposed to an unreasonable Sort of Men for the
bare Exercise of his Conscience to God, and a poor Country can never make a
Rich and Powerful Prince. Heaven is therefore Heaven to Good and Wise Men,
because they have an Eternal Propriety therein.

7thly, This Sort of Procedure hitherto oppugn'd to the behalf of Property,
puts the whole Nation upon miserable Uncertainties that are followed with great
Disquiets and Distractions, which certainly it is the Interest of all
Governments to prevent: The Reigns of Henry 8. Edw. 6. Q. Mary and Q. Eliz.
both with relation to the Marriages of the first, and the Religious Revolutions
of the rest, are a plain Proof in the Case.

King Henry voids the Pope's Supremacy, and assumes it himself. Q. Mary his
Daughter by his first Wife Katharine, repeals all those Acts made since the
12th of Henry 8. in Disfavour of the Pope; Oaths taken on both sides to
maintain those Laws. Edw. 6. enacts Protestancy with an Oath to maintain it. 1
Q. Mary, c. 1. This is abrogated; Popery solemnly restored, and an Oath
enforced to defend it. Comes Q. Elizabeth and repeals that Law, calls back
Protestancy, ordains a new Oath to un-Oa^h Q. Mary's Oath. and all this under
the Penalty of loosing Estate, Liberty, and sometimes Life it self; which
Thousands to avoid, lamentably perjured themselves four or five times over
within the space of 20. Years: in which Sin the Clergy transcended, not an
Hundred for every Thousand but left their Principles for their Par^sh^s. Thus
has Conscience been debaucht by Force, and Property tossed up and down by the
impetuous Blasts of ignorant Zeal, or sinister Design.

8. Where Liberty and Property are violated, there must always be a State of
Force: And (though I pray God that we never need those Cruel Remedies, whose
Calamitous Effects we have too lately felt) yet certainly, SELF-Preservation is
of all Things dearest to Men, insomuch, that being conscious to themselves of
not having done an ill thing to defend their unforfeited Privileges, they
cheerfully hazard all they have in this World; so strangely vindictive are the
Sons of Men in Maintenance of their Rights: And such are the Cares, Fears,
Doubts and Insecurities of that Administration, as render Empire a Slavery, and
Dominion the worst Sort of Bondage: on the contrary, nothing can give greater
Cheerfulness, Confidence, Security and Honor to any Prince, then ruling by
Law; for it is both a Conjunction of Title with Power, and attracts Love, as
well as it requires Duty.

Give me Leave without any Offense, for I have God's Evidence in my own
Conscience, I intend nothing but a respectful Caution to my Superiors, to
confirm this Reason with the Judgment and Example of other Times. The
Governors of the Eleans held a strict Hand over the People, they being in
Despair, called in the Spartans for Relief, and by their Help freed all their
Cities from the sharp Bondage of their Natural Lords.

The State of Sparta was grown Powerful, and oppressed the Thebans, they, though
but a weak People, yet whetted the Despair, and the Prospect of greater
Miseries, by the Athenians delivered themselves from the Spartan Yoke.

Nor is there any other considerable Reason given for the Ruin of the
Carthagenian State, then Avarice and Severity. More of this is to be found in
W. Raileigh's History of the World, lib. 3. who has this witty Expression in
the same Story, l. 5. of a severe Conduct, When a forced Government, says he,
shall decay in Strength, it will suffer, as did the old Lion, for the
Oppression done in his Youth, being pintcht by the Wolf, goar'd by the Bull,
and kicked also by the Ass.

This lost Caesar Borgia, his New and Great Conquests in Italy: No better
Success attended the severe Hand held over the People of Naples by Alphonso and
Ferdinand. 'Twas the undue Severity of the Sicilian Governors, that made the
Syracusans, Leontines and Messenians so easy a Conquest to the Romans. An
harsh Answer to a petitioning People lost Rehoboam Ten Tribes. On the contrary,
in Livy, Dec. 1 l. 3. we find that Petilia, a City of the Brutians in Italy,
chose rather to endure all Extremity of War from Hannibal, then upon any
Condition to desert the Romans, who had governed them moderately, and by that
gentle Conduct procured their Love, even then, when the Romans sent them Word,
they were not able to relieve them, and wished them to provide for their own
Safety.

N. Machiavel, in his Discourses upon Livy, p. 542. tells us, that one Act of
Humanity was of more Force with the Conquered Falisci, then many violent Acts
of Hostility; which makes good that Saying of Seneca, Mitius imperanti melius
paretur, They are best obeyed, that govern most mildly.

9. And lastly, If these ancient Fundamental Laws so agreeable with Nature, so
suited to the Disposition of our Nation, so often defended with Blood and
Treasure, so carefully and frequently ratified, shall not be to our great
Pilots, as Stars or Compass for them to steer the Vessel of this Kingdom by, or
Limits to their Legislation, no Man can tell how long he shall be secure of his
Coat, enjoy his House, have Bread to give his Children, Liberty to work for
Bread, and Life to eat it: Truly, this is to justify what we condemn in
Roman-Catholiks. It is one of our main Objections, that their Church assumes a
Power of assuring People what is Religion, thereby denying Men the Liberty of
walking by the Rules of their own Reason, or Precepts of Holy Writ. To which we
oppose both: We say, the Church is tied to act nothing contrary to Reason; and
that Holy Writ is the declared fundamental Law of Heaven, to maintain, and not
to usurp upon which, Power is given to the true Church. Now let us apply this
Argument to our Civil Affairs, and it will certainly end in a reasonable
Limitation of our Legislators, that they should not impose that upon our
Understandings, which is inconsistent with them to embrace; nor offer any the
least Violation upon the Fundamental Law of the Land, from whence they derive
their Power, to prosper such Attempts: Do the Romanists say, Believe as the
Church Believes; Do not the Protestants, and which is harder, Legislators say
so too,? Do we say to the Romanists, at this rate, Your Obedience is blind, and
your Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion; Is it not also true of our selves? Do
we object to them; This makes your Religion sluid as the Rivers, one Thing to
Day, and another to morrow, any Thing the Church says or does? Does not our
own Case submit us to the like Variation in Civils? Have we not long told them,
that under Pretense of obeying the Church, and not controling her Power, she
has raised a Superstructure inconsistent with that Foundation she pretends to
build upon? And are not we the Men in Civils, that make our grand Privileges
to depend upon Men, not Laws, as she does upon Councils, not Scripture? If this
be not Popery in Temporals, what is?

It is humbly beseecht of those Superiors, that it would please them to
consider what Reflection such severity justly brings upon their Proceedings;
and remember, that in their ancient Delegations, it was not to define, resolve
and impose Matters of Religion, and sacrifice Civil Privileges for it; but, to
maintain the Peoples Properties, according to the ancient Fundamental Laws of
the Land, and to super-add such Statutes only, as were consistent with, and
preservative of those Fundamental Laws.

To conclude this Head; My plain and honest Drift has all along been neither
more nor less then this, to show that Church Government is no real Part of the
old English Government; and to disintangle Property from Opinion, the untoward
Knot the Clergy for several Ages have tied; the which, it is not only the
Peoples Right, but our Superiors Interest to undo: for it gauls both People
and Prince. For, where Property is subjected to Opinion, the Church interposes,
and makes something else requisite to enjoy Property, then belongs to the
Nature of Property; and the Reason of our Possession is not our Right by and
Obedience to the common Law, but Conformity to Church-Law; a thing dangerous to
Civil Government; for it is an Alteration of old English Tenure, a suffering the
Church to trip up and supplant the State, and a making People to owe their
Protection not to the Civil, but Ecclesiastical Authority.: For let the Church
be my Friend, and all is well; make her my Foc, and I am made her Prey; Let
Magna Charta say what she will for me, my Horses, Cows, Sheep, Corn, Goods go
first, my Person to Goal next; and here is some Church Trophys made at the
Conquest of a peaceable Dissenter: This is that anxious Thing; May our
Superiors please to weigh it in the equal Scale of Doing as they would be done
by. Let those Common Laws that fix and preserve Property be the Rule and
Standard. Make English Men's Rights as inviolable as English Church Rights:
Disintangle and distinguish them; And let not Men sustain Civil Punishments for
Ecclesiastical Faults, but for Sins against the ancient established Civil
Government only, that the Natures of Acts and Rewards may not be confounded; so
shall the Civil Magistrate preserve Law, secure his Civil Dignity and Empire,
and make himself Beloved of English Men, whose Cry is, and the Cry of whose
Laws has ever been, Property more sacred then Opinion, Civil Right not
concerned with Ecclesiastical Discipline, nor forfeitable for Religious
Nonconformity.

But though an inviolable Preservation of English Rights of all things best
secureth to our Superiors the Love and Allegiance of the People; yet there is
something further, that with Submission I offer to their serious Consideration,
which in the second place concerns their Interest, and the Peoples Felicity;
and that is their Discord about Religion, notwithstanding their unanimous Cry
for Property, a prudent Mannagement of which may return to the great Quiet,
Honor and Profit of the Kingdom.

II. Our SUPERIORS governing themselves upon a BALANCE, as near as may be,
toward the several Religious INTERESTS.
TO perform my part in this Point, I shall not at this time make it my Business
to manifest the Inconsistency that there is between the Christian Religion, and
a forced Uniformity; not only because it has been so often and excellently
done by Men of Wit, Learning and Conscience, and that I have elsewhere largely
delivered my Sense about it; but because Every free and impartial Temper has
of a long time observed, that such Barbarous Attempts were so far from being
indulged, that they were most severely prohibited by Christ himself, who
instructed his Disciples, to love their Enemies, not to persecute their Friends
for every Difference in Opinion; That the Tares should grow with the Wheat;
That his Kingdom is not of this World; That Faith is the Gift of God, That the
Will and Understanding of Man are Faculties not to be workt upon by Corporal
Penalties; That TRUTH is all-sufficient to her own Relief; That ERROR and ANGER
go together; That base Coin only stands in need of Imposition to make it
current, but that True Metal passes for its own intrinsic Value; with a great
deal more of that Nature: I shall therefore choose to oppose my self at this
time to any such Severity upon mere Prudence; that such as have No Religion,
and certainly They that persecute for Religion, have as little as need to be,
may be induced to Tolerate THEM that have.

First, However advisable it may be in the Judgment of some wise Men, to
prevent, even by Force, the arising of any New Opinions, where a Kingdom is
universally of another Mind; especially if it be odious to the People, and
inconsistent with the Interest of the Government; it cannot be so, where a
Kingdom is of many Minds, unless some One Party have the Wisdom, Wealth,
Number, Sober Life, Industry and Resolution of its side, which I am sure is not
to be found in England; so that the Wind has plainly shifted its Corner, and
consequently oblieges to another Course; I mean, England's Circumstances are
greatly changed, and they require new Expedients and other sorts of
Applications. Physicians vary their Medicines according to the Revolution and
Commixture of Distempers. They that seek to tie the Government to obsolete and
inadequate Methods (supposing them once apt, which Cruelty in this Case never
was) are not Friends to its Interest, whatever they may be to their own. If our
Superiors should make it their Business so to prefer One Party, as to depress
the rest, they insecure themselves by making them Friends to be their Enemies,
who before were one another. To be sure it creates Hatred between the Party
advanced, and those deprest; Jacob's preferring Joseph, put his Brethren upon
that Conspiracy against him. I will allow that they may have a more particular
Favor for the National Religion (if they can think she deserves it) then for
any other Persuasion, but not more then for all other Parties in England: that
would break the Balance, the keeping up of which will be, to make every Party
to owe its Tranquillity to their Prudence and Goodness, which will never fail
of Returns of Love and Loyalty; for since we see each Interest looks jealously
upon the other, it is reasonable to believe, they had rather the Dominion should
lodge where it is, while universally impartial in their Judgment, then to trust
it with any one sort of themselves. Many inquisitive Men into humane Affairs,
have thought, that the Concord of Discords has not been the infirmest Basis
Government can rise or stand upon: It has been observed, that less Sedition
and Disturbance attended Hannibal's Army, that consisted of many Nations, then
the Roman Legions, that were of one People; It is Marvelous, how the Wisdom of
that General secured them to his Designs: Livy says, that his Army for
Thirteen Years, that they roaved up and down the Roman Empire, made up of many
Countries, diverse Languages, Laws, Customs, Religions, under all their
Successes of War and Peace, never Mutined: Malvetzy as well as Livy asscribes
it to that Variety, well managed by the General. By the like Prudence Jovianus
and Theodosius Magnus brought Tranquillity to their Empire, after much Rage and
Blood for Religion. In Nature we also see, all Heat consumes, all Cold kills;
that three Degrees of Cold, to two of Heat, allay the Heat; but introduce the
Contrary Quality, and over-cool by a Degree; but two Degrees of Cold to two of
Heat, make a Poyz in Elements, and a Balance in Nature. The like in Families:
It is not probable, that a Master should have his Work so well done, at least
with that Love and Respect, who continually smiles upon one Servant, and
severely frowns upon all the rest; on the contrary, it is apt to raise Feud
amongst Servants, and turn Duty into Revenge, at least Contempt. In fine: It is
to make our Superiors Dominion less then God made it; and to blind their Eyes,
stop their Ears and shut-up their Breasts from beholding the Miseries, hearing
the Cries and redressing the Grievances of a vast number of People, under their
Charge, vexed in this World for their Belief and inoffensive Practice about the
next.

Secondly, It is the Interest of Governors to be put upon no Thankless
Offices, that is, to blow noCoales in their own Country (especially when it is
to consume their People, and it may be, themselves too) not to be the Cat's
Foot, not to make Work for themselves, or fill their own Hands with Trouble, or
the Kingdom with Complaints: It is to forbid them the Use of Clemency, wherein
they ought most of all to imitate God Almighty, whose Mercy is above all his
Works; and renders them a sort of Extortioners to the People, the most remote
from the End and Goodness of their Office. In short; It is the best Receipt
that their Enemies can give, to make them uneasy to the Country.

Thirdly, It not only makes them Enemies, but there is no such Excitement to
Revenge, as a raped Conscience: He that has been forced to break his Peace, to
gratify the Humor of another, must have a great share of Mercy and Self-denial
to forgive that Injury, and forbid himself the Pleasure of Retribution upon the
Authors of it: For Revenge, in other Cases condemnable of all, is here looked
upon by too many to be the next way to their Expiation. To be sure, whether the
Grounds of their Dissent be rational in themselves, such Severity is
unjustifiable with them; for this is a Maxim with Sufferers, Whoever is in the
Wrong, the Persecutor is never in the Right. Men, not conscious to themselves
of Evil, and harshly treated, not only resent it unkindly, but are bold to show
it.

Fourthly, Suppose the Prince, by his Severity, conquers any into a Compliance,
he can upon no prudent Ground assure himself of their Fidelity, whom he has
taught to be Treacherous to their own Convictions. Wise Men rarely confide in
those whom they have debaucht from Trust, to serve themselves: At best it
resembles but forced Marriages, that seldom prove happy to the Parties. In
short: Force makes Hypocrites; it is Persuasion only that makes Converts.

Fifthly, This Partiality, of sacrificing the Liberty and Property of all
Dissenters, to the Promotion of a single Party, as it is the lively
Representation of J. Calvin's Horrendum Decretum of Predestination; so the
Consequences of the one belong unto the other, it being but that Ill-natured
Principle, practiced; Men are put upon the same desperate Courses, either to
have no Conscience at all, or to be Hanged for having a Conscience not
fashionable; for, let them be Virtuous, let them be Vicious, if they fall not
in with that Mode of Religion, they must be reprobated to all Civil and
Ecclesiastical Intents and Purposes. Strange! that men must either Deny their
Faith and Reason, or be destroyed for acting according to them, be they
otherwise never so Peaceable. What Power is this? But that men are to be
protected upon Favor, not Right or Merit; and that no Merit out of the English
Church-Dress should find Acceptance, is severe. That Father we justly blame,
that narrows his Paternal Love to some one of his Children, though the rest be
not one jot less Virtuous then the Favouriter: Such Injustice can never flow
from a Soul acted by Reason; but a Mind governed by Fancy, and enslaved to
Passions.

Sixthly, consider Peace, Plenty and Safety, the three grand Inducements to any
Country to honor the Prince, and love the Government, and the best Allurements
to Foreigners to trade with it, and transport themselves to it, are utterly
lost by such Intestine Jars; for instead of Peace, Love and good Neighborhood,
behold Animosity and Contest! One Neighbor watches another, and makes him an
Offender for his Conscience; this divides them, their Families and
Acquaintance: Perhaps with them, the Towns and Villages where they live, most
commonly the Sufferer has the Pity, and the Persecutor the Odium of the
Multitude; and when People see Cruelty practiced upon their Inoffensive
Neighbors by a Troublesome Sort of Men, and those countenanced by a Law, it
breeds Ill Blood against the Government. Certainly, haling People to Goals,
breaking open their Houses, seizing of their Estates, and that without all
Proportion, leaving Wives without their Husbands, and Children without their
Fathers, their Families, Relations, Friends and Neighbors under Amaze and
Trouble, is almost as far from the Peace of a well-governed Kingdom, as it is
from the Meekness of Christianity.

Plenty will be hereby exchanged for Poverty, by the Destruction of many
Thousand Families within this Realm, who are greatly Instrumental for the
carrying on of the most Substantial Commerce therein, Men of Virtue, good
Contrivance, great Industry, whose Labors not only keep the Parishes from the
Trouble and Charge of maintaining them and theirs, but help to maintain the
Poor, and are great Contributors to the Kings Revenue by their Traffic: I his
very Severity will make more Bankrupts in the Kingdom of England in 7 Years
then have been in it upon all other Accounts in 7 Ages; which Consequence, how
far it may consist with the Credit and Interest of the Government, I leave to
better Judgments.

This Sort of great Severity that has been lately, and still is used amongst
us, is like to prove a great Check to that Readiness, which otherwise we find
in Foreigners to trade with the Inhabitants of this Kingdom; for if Men cannot
call any Thing their own under a different Exercise of Conscience from the
National Way of Religion, may their Correspondents prudently say, We will not
further concern our selves with Men that stand upon such tickling Terms; what
know we but such Persons are ruined in their Estates by Reason of their
Nonconformity, before such Time as we are reimburst for Money paid, or Goods
delivered: Nay, we know not how soon those who are Conformists may be
Non-Conformists, or what Revolution of Councils may happen, since the
Fundamental Laws, so jealous of the Peoples Property, are so little set by with
some of their own Magistrates; for though we are told of very worthy and
excellent Laws for the Security of the Peoples Rights, yet we are also told,
that they all hang at the Churches Ear; and no Church-Conformity, no Property,
which is, no Churchman, no Englishman; so that in Effect the Rights of their
Country depend upon the Rights of their Church; and those Churches are so
numerous, and have taken their Turns so often, that a Body knows not how to
manage one's self securely to one's own Affairs in a Correspondence with any
of them: For in King Henry the eight's Days Popery was the only Orthodox
Religion, and Luther, Melanchton, Oecolampadius, Calvin, etc. were great
Heretics: In Edward the sixth's Time, they were Saints, and Popery Idolatry: A
few Years after Q Mary makes the Papists Holy Church, and Protestancy Heresy:
About six Years complcats her Time, and Q. Elizabeth enters her Reign, in which
Protestants are good Christians, and the Church of Rome the Whore of Babylon:
In her Reign, and King James' s, and Charles the first's, sprung the Puritans,
who divided themselves into Presbyterians and Independents; the Bishops
exclaimed against them for Schismatics, and they against the Bishops for
Papistical and Anti christian: In the long Parliament's Time the Presbyterian
drives out the Bishop; O. Cromwell defeating them, and sending the Presbyterian
to keep Company with the Bishop, confers it mostly upon the Independent and
Anabaptist, who kept it through the other Fractions of Government, till the
Presbyter and Bishop got it from them; and the Bishop now from the Presbyter;
but how long it will rest there, who knows.

Nor is my Supposition idle or improbable, unless Moderation take Place of
Severity, and Property the room of Punishment of Opinion; for that must be the
lasting Security, as well as that it is the Fundamental Right of English People.

There is also a further Consideration, and that is, the rendering just and
very good Debts desperate, both at home and abroad, by giving Opportunity to
the Debtors of Dissenters to detain their Dues: Indeed it seems a natural
Consequence with all but Men of Mercy and Integrity, What should we pay them
for, may they say, that are not in a Capacity to demand or receive it; at least
to compel us? Nay, they may plead a sort of Kindness to their Creditors, and
say, We had as good keep it; for if we pay it them, they will soon loose it;
it is better to remain with us, then that they should be pillaged of it by
Informers; though Beggary and Want should in the mean time overtake the right
Owners and their Families. Nor is it unworthy of the most deliberate Thoughts
of our Superiors, that the Land already swarms with Beggars, and that there is
no so ready Course to increase their Number, as the severe Prosecution of
Dissenters; so that though they immediately Suffer, the Kingdom in the End must
be the Looser: For besides a Decay of Trade, etc. this driving away of Flocks
of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle, seizing of Barns full of Corn, breaking open of
Doors and Chists, taking away the best Goods those Instruments of Cruelty can
find, sometimes All, even, to a Bed, a Blanket, wearing Apparel, and the very
Tools of Trade, by which People honestly labor to get their Bread, till they
leave Men, Women and Children destitute of Subsistence, will necessitate an
extreme Advance of the Poors Rate in every Parish of England, or they must be
Starved. Oh that it would please them that are in Authority to put a Stop to
this Inhuman Usage, lest the Vengeance of the Just God break forth further
against this poor Land.

Safety, another Requisite to an happy Government, must needs be at an End,
where the Course oppugn'd is followed: And it is but some prudent Foreigners
proclaiming Liberty of Conscience within their Territories, and a Door is
opened for a Million of People to pass out of their Native Soil, which is not
so extremely improved, that it should not want two or three hundred thousand
Families more then it has, to advance it, especially at this Time of Day, when
our Foreign Islands yearly take off so many necessary Inhabitants from us: And
as of Contraries there is the same Reason; so let the Government of England but
give that prudent Invitation to Foreigners, and she makes her self Mistress
of the Arts and Manufactures of Europe: Nothing else has hindered Holland from
truckling under the Spanish Monarchy, and being ruined above therescore Years
ago, and given her that Rise to Wealth and Glory.

Seaventhly, Nor is this Severity only Injurious to the Affairs of England, but
the whole Protestant World: For besides that it calls the Sincerity of their
Procedings against the Papists into Question, it furnishes them with this sort
of unanswerable Interrogatory: The Protestants exclame against us for
Persecutors, and are they now the very men themselves? Was Severity an Instance
of Weakness in our Religion, and is it become a valid Argument in theirs? Are
not our Actions (once void of all Excuse with them) now defended by their own
Practice? But if men must be restrained upon prudential Considerations from the
Exercise of their Consciences in England, why not the same in France and
Germany, where matters of State may equally be pleaded? Certainly whatever
Shifts Protestants may use to palliate these Procedings, they are thus far
condemnable upon the Foot of Prudence.

Eighthly, Such Procedure is a great Reflection upon the Justice of the
Government, in that it enacts Penalties inadequate to the Fault committed, viz.
That I should loose my Liberty and Property, Natural Endowments, and confirmed
Civil Privileges, for some Error in Judgment about Matters of Religion; as if
I must not be a Man, because I am not such a sort of religious Man as the
Government would have me, but must loose my Claim to all Natural Benefits,
though I harmonize with them in Civil Affairs, because I fall not in with the
Judgment of the Government in some Points of a supernatural Import; though no
real Part of the ancient Government. Perhaps instead of going to the Left Hand,
I go to the Right: and whereas I am commanded to hear A. B. I rather choose to
hear C. D. my Reason for it, being the more Religious Influence the latter has
over me, then the former; and that I find by Experience, I am better affected,
and more Religiously edified to Good Living. What Blemish is this to the
Government? What Insecurity to the Civil Magistrate? Why-may not this Man Sell,
Buy, Plow, pay his Rent, be as good a Subject, and as true an Englishman, as
any Conformist in the Kingdom? Howbeit, Fines and Goals are very ill Arguments
to convince sober Men's Understandings, and dissuade them from the Continuance
of so harmless a Practice.

Lastly, But there is yet another Inconveniency that will attend this Sort of
Severity, that so naturally follows upon our Superiors making Conformity to the
Doctrine and Worship of the Church of England, the sine qua non, or Inlet to
all Property, and Ground of Claim to all English Civil Privileges, to wit,
that they make a Rod, for ought they know, to whip their own Posterity with;
since it is Impossible for them to secure their Children to the English Church;
and if it happen that any of them are never so conscientiously of another
Persuasion, they are liable to all the Miseries that may attend the Execution
of those Laws: Such a King must not be King; such Lords and Commons must not
sit in Parliament; nay, they must not administer any Office, be it never so
inferior, within the Realm, and they never so virtuous and capable; their very
Patrimony becomes a Prey to a Pack of lewd Informers, and their Persons exposed
to the Abuse of Men, Poor or Malicious.

But there are three Objections that some make against what I have urged, not
unfit to be considered. The first is this: If the Liberty desired be granted,
what know we but Dissenters may employ their Meetings to insinuate against the
Government, inslame People into a Dislike of their Superiors, and thereby
prepare them for Mischief.

Answ. This Objection may have some Force, so long as our Superiors continue
Severity; because it does not only sharpen and excite Dissenters, but it runs
many of them into such Holes and Corners, that if they were disposed to any
such Conspiracies, they have the securest Places and Opportunities to effect
their Design. But what Dissenter can be so destitute of Reason and Love to
common Safety, as to expose himself and Family, by plotting against a
Government that is kind to him, and gives him the Liberty he desires, and could
only be supposed in common sense to plot for. To be sure, Liberty to Worship
God, according to their several Professions, will be, as the Peoples
Satisfaction, so the Governments greatest Security; For if men enjoy their
Property and their Conscience, which is the noblest part of it, without
Molestation, what should they object against and plot for? Mad Men only burn
their own Houses, kill their own Children, and murder themselves. Does Kindness
or Cruelty most take with men that are but themselves? H. Grotius with
Campanella, well observed, that a fierce and rugged Hand was very improper for
Northern Countries. English men are gained with Mildness, but inflamed by
Severity: And many that do not suffer, are as apt to compassionate them that
do. And if it will please our Superiors to make Trial of such an Indulgence,
doubtless they will find Peace and Plenty to ensue. The Practice of other
Nations, and the Trade, Tranquillity, Power and Opulency that have attended it,
is a Demonstration in the Case, and ought not to be slighted by them that aim
at as high and honorable things for their Country: And if we had no other
Instance then our own Intervals of Connivance, they were enough to satisfy
reasonable men, how much more Moderation contributes to public Good, then the
Prosecution of People for their Religious Dissent; since the one has ever
produced Trade and Tranquillity; the other, greater Poverty and Dissension.

The second Objection, and by far the more weighty, runs thus:

Obj. The King and Parliament are sworn to maintain and protect the Church of
England, as established, etc. therefore to tolerate other Opinions, is against
their Oath.

Answ. Were the Consequence true, as it is extremely false, it were highly
unreasonable to expect Impossibilities at their Hands. Kings and Parliaments
can no more make Brick without Straw, then Captives: They have not sworn to do
things beyond their Ability. Had it been in His and their Time and Choice, when
the Church of England had been first disturbed with dissenting Opinions, it
might have reflected more colourably a kind of Neglect upon them: But since the
Church of England was no sooner a Church, then she found some sort of
Dissenters; and that the utmost Policy and Severity of Q. Elizabeth, King
James, and King Charles the 1st, were not successful toward an absolute
Uniformity; Why should it reflect upon them, that the Church of England has
not yet rid her self of Dissenting Parties? Besides, it is Notorious, that the
late Wars gave that Opportunity to Differing Persuasions to spread, that it was
utterly impossible for them to hinder, much less during the several Years of
the King's Exile, at what time the present Parliament was no Parliament, nor
the generality of the Members of it scarce of any Authority. Let it be
considered, that 'twas the Study of the Age to make People Anti-Papistical and
Anti-Episcopal, and that Power and Preferment went on that side: Their
Circumstances therefore and their Ancestors are not the same; They find the
Kingdom Divided into several Interests, and it seems a Difficulty
insurmountable to reduce them to any one Persuasion; wherefore to render
themselves Masters of their Affections, they must necessarily govern themselves
toward them on a Balance, as before expressed; otherwise, they are put upon the
greatest Hazards, and extremest Difficulties to themselves and the Kingdom,
and all to perform the Uncharitable Office of suppressing many Thousands of
Inoffensive Inhabitants for the different Exercise of their Conscience to God:
This is not to make them resemble Almighty God, the Goodness of whose Nature
extends it self universally, thus to narrow his Bowels, and confine his
Clemency to one single Party of Men: It ought to be remembered, that Optimus
went before Maximus of old, and that Power without Goodness is a frightful Sort
of a Thing.

But Secondly, I deny the Consequence, viz. That the King is therefore obliged
to persecute Dissenters, because he or the Parliament has taken an Oath to
maintain the Church of England: For it cannot be supposed or intended, that by
maintaining Her, they are to destroy the Rest of the Inhabitants: Is it
impossible to protect her without knocking all the rest on the Head? Do they
allow any to Supplant her Officers, Invade her Livings, Possess her Emoluments,
Exercise her Authority? What would she have? Is she not Church of England
still, in the same Regency, invested with the same Power, bearing the same
Character? What Grandeur or Interest has she lost by them? Are they not
manifestly her Protector? Is she not National Church still? And are not the
greatest Offices, Civil, Military and Maritin conferred upon her Sons? And can
any of her Children be so insensible as either to challenge her Superiors with
Want of Integrity, because they had not performed Impossibilities? or to excite
them to that Harshness, which is not only destructive of many Thousands of
Inhabitants, but altogether injurious to their own Interest, and dishonorable
to a Protestant Church? Suppose Dissenters not to be of the visible Church, are
they therefore unfit to live? Did the Jews treat Strangers so severely that had
so much more to say then her self? Is not the King Lord of Wastes and Commons
as well as Enclosures? Suppose God has elected some to Salvation, does it
therefore follow he has reprobated all the rest? And because he was God of the
Jews, was he not therefore God of the Gentiles? or were not the Gentiles his
People, because the Jews were his peculiar People? To be brief; They have
answered their Obligation, consented to severe Laws, and commanded their
Execution, in that they have still preferred her above Every Interest in
England, to render her more Powerful and Universal, till they have good Reason
to be tired with the Lamentable Consequences of those Endeavors, and to
conclude, that the Uniformity thereby intended, is a thing Impracticable.

And I wonder that these men should so easily forget that great Saying of King
CHARLES the 1st (whom they pretended so often and with so much Honor to
remember) in his Advice to the present King: where he says,

Beware, of Exasperating any Factions, by the Crossness and Asperity of some
Men's Passions, Humors, or Private Opinions, employed by You, grounded only
upon their Differences in Lesser Matters, which are but the Skirts and Suburbs
of Religion, wherein a Charitable Connivance and Christain Toleration often
Dissipates their Strength, whom Rougher Opposition Fortifieth, and puts the
Despised and Oppressed Party into such Combinations as may most Enable them to
get a Full Revenge upon Those they count their Persecutors; who are commonly
Assisted with that Vulgar Commiseration, which attends all that are said to
Suffer under the Common Notion of Religion.

So that we have not only the King's Circumstances, but his Father's Counsel,
who saw not the End of one half of them defending a Charitable Connivance, and
Christian Toleration of Dissenters.

Obj. 3. But it may be further alleged, This makes way for Popery or
Presbytery to undermine the Church of England, and mount the Chair of Power and
Preferment, which is more then a Prudential Indulgence of Different Opinions.

And yet there is not any so probable an expedient to vanish those Fears, and
prevent any such Design, as keeping all Interests upon the Balance; for so the
Protestant makes at least six Parties against Popery, and the Church of England
at least five against Presbytery; and how either of them should be able to turn
the Scale against five or six, as free and thriving Interests as either of them
can pretend to be, I confess I cannot understand: But if one only Interest must
be tolerated, which implies a Resolution to suppress the Rest, plain it is,
that the Church of England ventures her single Party against six growing
Interest, and thereby gives Preshytery and Popery by far an easier Access to
Supremacy, especially the latter, for that it is the Religion of those Parts of
Europ, which neither want Inclination, nor Ability to prosper it. So that
besides the Consistency of such an Indulgence with the Nature of a
Christian-Church, there can be nothing more in Prudence advisable for the
Church of England, then to allow of the Balance propounded; in that first, no
Person of any real Worth will ever the sooner decline her; on the contrary, it
will give her a greater Reputation in a Country so hating Severity: and next,
it gives her Opportunity to turn the Scale against any one Party that may
aspire after her Power and Indowments: And she never need to fear the Agreement
of all of them to any such Design, Episcopacy not being more intolerable then
Presbytery in Power, even to an Independency it self; and yet between them lies
the narrowest Difference that is among the Dissenting Interests in this Kingdom.

But this seems too large, and yielding; and therefore to find a Medium,
something that may compass the happy End of good Correspondence and
Tranquillity, at least so to fortify the Church of England, as that she may
securely give Law to all other Religious Interests, a Comprehension is pitched
upon, and diligently pursued by both Episcopalians and Presbyterians, at least
some of each Party.

But if it becomes wise men to Look before they Leap, it will not be
unadvisable for them to weigh the Consequences of such an Endeavor: For, in
the first place, there is no one People I know in England, that stands at a
greater Distance from her Doctrine as it is maintained by her present Sons,
then the Presbyterians, particularly about absolute Reprobation, the Person of
Christ, Satisfaction and Justification; and he must be a Stranger in the
Religious Contests of our times that knows not this.

In the next place, None have governed themselves with a plainer Denial and
more peremptory Contempt of Episcopacy, and the whole Discipline and Worship of
the Church of England, then the Presbyterians have ever done; let them put me
to prove it, if they please, even of their most reverend Fathers.

3dly, Who knows not that their reciprocal Heats about these very things, went
a great way toward our late lamentable Troubles? Now if the same Principles
remain with each Party, and that they are so far from repenting of their
Tenaciousness, that on the contrary they justify their Opposition to one
another in these matters, how can either Party have Faith enough to rely upon
each other's Kindness, or so much as attempt a Comprehension? What must become
of the Labors of Bp. Witgift, R. Hooker, Bp. Banckroft, Bp. Lawd, etc. in
Rebuke of the Presbyterian Separation; and the Names of those leading
Dissenters, as Cartwright, Dode, Bradshow, Rutterford, Galaspee, etc. so famous
among the present Presbyterians, and that for their Opposition to the Church?
This considered, what Reason can any render, why the Episcopalians should so
singularly Provide for, and Confide in an Interest that has already been so
Destructive to theirs? On the other hand, With what Prudence may the
Presbyterians embrace the others Offer that intended it not in Kindness to
them, and who they must needs think, cannot but ow Revenge, and retain deep
Grudges for old Stories?

But 4thly, The very Reason given for a Comprehension is the greatest that can
be urged against it; namely, The Suppression of other dissenting Persuasions. I
will suppose a Comprehension and the Consequences of it, to be an Eradication
of ALL Interests; the Thing desired: But if the two remaining Parties shall
fall out, as it is not likely that they will long agree, what can the
Presbyterian have to Balance himself against the Ruling Power of Episcopacy?
or the Episcopalian to secure himself against the Aspirings of Presbytery? They
must either all become Episcopalians, or Presbyterians, else they will commix
as Iron and Clay, which made ill Legs for the Image in Daniel; Nor, is it to
be thought, that their Legs should stand any better.

But some are ready to say, that Their Difference is very minute. Grant it; Are
they ever the more tolerable for that? Certainly, Forbearance should carry some
Proportion with the Greatness of the Difference, by how much it is easier to
comply in smaler matters: He that dissents fundamentally, is more excusable
then those that sacrifice the Peace and Concord of a Society about little
Circumstances; for there cannot be the same Inducement to suspect men of
Obstinacy in an Essential as Circumstantial Non- Conformity.

Besides, How far can this Accommodation extend with Security to the Church of
England? Or, on what better Terms will the Presbyterians conform to her
Discipline and formal Acts of Devotion, then those upon which Peter du Moulin
offered to preach the Gospel at Rome? viz. That if the Pope would give him
Leave to preach at Rome, he would be contented to preach in a Fool's Coat. I
question if the Presbyterian can go so far, I am sure he could not; and as
sure, that Peter du Moulin hoped by preaching there in a Fool's Coat, to
inculcate that Doctrine which should un-Mitre the Pope, and alter his Church,
the very Thing the Church of England ought to fear: For Peter du Moulin
intended to preach in a Fool's Coat no longer, but till he had preached the
People Wise enough to throw it off again. So the Presbyterians, they may
conform to certain Ceremonies (once as sinful to them, as a Fool's Coat could
be ridiculous to Peter du Moulin) that they may the better introduce their
Alterations both in Doctrine and Discipline.

But that which ought to go a great Way with our Superiors in their Judgment
of this Matter, is not only the Benefit of a Balance against the Presumtion of
any one Party, and the Probability, if not Certainty of their never being
overdriven by any one Persuasion whilst they have others to more then poiz
against the growing Power of it; but the Conceit it self, if not altogether
impracticable, is at least very difficult to the Promotors, and an Office as
thankless from the Parties concerned. This appears in the Endeavors used for a
Comprehension of Arrians and Homousians under one Orthodoxy, related not only
in our common Ecclefiastical History, but more amply in the Writings of Hilary,
an Enemy to the Arrians, and Mariana's Spanish History. These public Tests, or
comprehensive Creeds were many, Nice, Ariminum, Sirminium, etc. in order to
agree both Parties, that neither might stigmatize the other with the odious
Crime of Heresy; but the Consequence of all this Convocation and prolix Debate
was, that neither Party could be satisfied, each continuing their former
Sentiments, and so grew up into stronger Fractions, to the Division,
Distraction, and almost Destruction of the whole Empire; recovered a little by
the prudent Moderation of Jovianus, and much improved, not by a Comprehension,
but Restoration of a Seasonable Liberty of Conscience by Theodosius Magnus.

Also in Germany about the Time of the Reformation, nothing seemed more sincere
then the Design of Union between the Lutherans and Zuinglians: For Luther and
Zuinglius themselves by the earnest Endeavors of the Landgrave of Hessen; came
together; but the Success was so small, notwithstanding the Grave's Mediation,
that they parted scarcely Civil; To be sure, as far from Unity as Controversy
is. Luther and Cardinal Cajeten met for a Composure of the Breach betwixt the
Protestants and the Pope; but they were too wide for those Conferences to
reconcile, no Comprehension could do the Business. A second Essay to the same
Purpose was by Melanchton, Cassander and others; the Consequence of it was,
that the Parties were displeased, and the Heads suspected, if not hated of
their Followers: Nor had Bucer's Meeting with Julius Pflugg any better Success.
And how fruitless their Contrivances have been, that with greatest Art and
Industry have of a long Time endeavored a Reconciliation of Lutherans and
Calvinists, is well known to those that are acquainted with the Affairs of
Germany; and such as are not, may furnish themselves from those public
Relations given by those that are employed about that Accommodation; where
besides a dull and heavy Progress, the Reader may be a Witness of their
Complaint, not only that both Parties are too tenacious, but that they suffer
Detraction for their good Endeavors, each Side grudging every Tittle they
yield, and murmuring as if they were too hardly born upon. And if Persons so
disinterested, and worthy in their Attempts have had no better Issue, I cannot
see how those who seem compelled by Worldly Interest more then Conscience to
seek and propagate a Comprehension, especially, when it determins in the
Persecution of the rejected Persuasions, can with any Reason expect from God or
Good Men any better Success to their Design.

Lastly, there is nothing any Man touched with Justice and Mercy, can allege
for a Comprehension, that may not be much better urged to procure a Toleration;
they are Men as well as those of other Persuasions, their Faith is as
Christian, they believe as sincerely, live as conscientiously, are as useful in
the Kingdom, and manage their Dissent with as much Modesty and Prudence, the
Church of England her self being in a great Measure Judge, as those on whose
Account a Comprehension may be intended: To be sure they are English Men, and
have an Equal Claim to the Civil Rights of their Native Country, with any that
live in it, whom to persecute, whilst others, and those no better Men, are
tolerated, is, as I have already said, The Unreasonable and Unmerciful Doctrine
of absolute Election and Reprobation put in Practice.

III. A SINCERE PROMOTION of General and Practical RELIGION.
I am now come to the last, which to be sure, is not the least Part of my
Answer to the Question propounded, viz. The Sincere Promotion of general and
practical Religion, by which I mean the Ten Commandments, or moral Law, and
Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, with other Heavenly Sayings, excellently
improved, and earnestly recommended by several Passages in the Writings of his
Disciples, which forbid Evil, not only in Deed, but Thought; and enjoin Purity
and Holiness, as without which no Man, be his Pretenses what they will, shall
ever see God. In short, General, True and Requisite Religion in the Apostle
James's Definition is, To visit the Widow and the Fatherless, and to keep our
selves, through the Universal Grace, unspotted of the World: This is, as the
most sacred, so the most easy and probable Way to fetch in all Men professing
God and Religion; for that every Persuasion acknowledges this in Words, be
their Lives never so incongruous with their Confession; And this being the Unum
necessarium, that One Thing only requisite to make Men happy here and
hereafter, why should Men sacrifice their Accord in this great Point for an
Unity in minute or circumstantial Things, that perhaps inobtainable, and if it
were not, would signify little or nothing, either to the Good of Human
Society, or the particular Comfort of any individual in that World which is to
come? No one Thing is more senseless and condemnable among Men, then their
Uncharitable and Mutinous Clamours and Contests about Religion, indeed about
Words and Phrases, whilst they all verbany meet in the most, if not only
necessary Part of Christian Religion: For nothing is more certain, then if Men
would but live up to one half of what they know in their own Consciences they
ought to practice, their Edge would be taken off, their Blood would be sweetened
by Mercy and Truth, and this unnatural Sharpness qualified; they would quickly
find Work enough at home; each Man's Hands would be full by the Unruliness of
his own Passions, and in Subjection of his own Will; and instead of devouring
one another's Good Name, Liberty, or Estate, Compassion would rise, and mutual
Desires to be assistent to one another in a better Sort of Living. Oh how
decent, how delightful would it be, to see Mankind (the Creation of one God,
that has upheld them to this Day) of one Accord, at least in the weighty
Things of God's practical Law! It Is Want of Practice, and too much Prate, that
has made Way for all the Incharity and Ill living that is in the World. No
Matter what Men say, if the Devil keep the House: Let the Grace of God, the
Principle of Divine Life (as a great Man lately called it in his Speech) but be
heartily and reverently entertained of men, that teaches to deny Ungodliness,
and converse Soberly, Righteously and Godlily in this present evil World; and
it is not to be doubted but Tranquillity, and a very amicable Correspondence
will follow. Men are not to be reputed Good by their Opinion; nor is that, nor
ought it to be offensive to the Government; but Practice is what must save or
damn, temporally or eternally. Christ in his Representation of the Great Day,
does not tell us that it shall be Well SAID, or Well TALKED, but Well DONE good
and faithful Servant: neither is the Depart from me YOU, directed to any but
the Workers of Iniquiry. Error now is brought from the Signification of an Evil
Life to an unsound Proposition, as Philosophy is from Mortification, and well
living to an Unintelligible Way of Wrangling. And a man is more bitterly
harrac'd for an Erroneous Proposition, though the Party holding it thinks not
so, and the Party charging it denies all Infallible Judgment in this World (so
that it may as well be true as false for all him) then for the most dissolute
Life. And truly it is high Time, that Men should give better Testimony of their
Christianity; for Cruelty has no Share in Christ's Religion, and Coertion upon
Conscience is utterly inconsistent with the very Nature of his Kingdom: He
rebuked that Zeal, which would have Fire from Heaven to devour Dissenters,
though it came from his own Disciples; and forbad them to pluck up the Tares,
though none had a more gentle or infallible Hand to do it by: He preferred
Mercy before Sacrifice, and therefore we may well believe, that the Unmerciful
Sacrifices some Men now offer, I mean, Imprisoning Persons, spoiling of Goods,
and leaving whole Families destitute of common Subsistence, are far from being
grateful to him, who therefore came into the World, and preached that Heavenly
Doctrine of Forbearing, and Loving of Enemies, and laid down his most Innocent
Life for us, whilst we were Rebels, that by such peaceable Precepts and so
patient an Example the World might be prevailed upon to leave those Barbarous
Courses: And doubtless, very lamentable will their Condition be, who at the
Coming of the great Lord shall be found Beaters of their Fellow Servants. In
vain do Men go to Church, pray, preach, and style themselves Believers,
Christians, Children of God, etc. whilst such Acts of Severity are practiced,
and any Disposition to molest harmless Neighbors for their Conscience, so much
as countenanced. A Course quite repugnant to Christ's Doctrine and Example

In short; the promoting of this General Religion by a severe Reprehension and
Punishment of Vice, and Encouragement of Virtue, is the Interest of our
Superiors several Ways.

1. In that it meets with, and takes in all the Religious Persuasions of the
Kingdom; Penal Laws for Religion is a Church with a Sting in her Tail; take
that out, and there is no Fear of the Peoples Love and Duty: And what better
Obligation or Security can the Civil Magistrate desire? Every Man owns the
Text; it is the Comment that is disputed: Let it but please him to make the Text
only sacred and necessary, and so leave Men to keep Company with their own
Meanings and Consequences, and he not only prudently takes in all, but
suppresseth nice Searches, fixes Unity upon Materials, quiets present
Differences about Things of lesser Moment, retrives Humanity and Christian
Clemency, and fills the Kingdom with Love and Respect to their Governors.

2. Next, A Promotion of general Religion, it being in it self practical,
brings back again ancient Virtue: Good Living will thrive in this Soil; Men
will grow Honest, Trusty and Temperate; we may expect good Neighborhood and
Cordial Friendship; one may depend more upon a Word then now upon an Oath. How
lamentable is it to see People afraid of one onother; Men made and provided for
of one God, and that must be judged by that one Eternal God, yet full of
Diffidence in what each other says, and most commonly interpret as People read
Hebrew, all Things that are spoaken backward.

3. The third Benefit is, that Men will be more industrious; more diligent in
their lawful Callings, which will increase our Manufacture, set the Idle and
Poor to work for their Livelihood, and enable the several Countries with more
Ease and Decency to maintain the Aged and Impotent among them. Nor will this
only make the Lazy conscientiously industrious, but the Industrious and
Conscientious Man Cheerful at his Labor, when he is assured to keep what he
Works for, and that the Sweat of his Brows shall not be made a Forfeit for his
Conscience.

4. It will render the Magistrates Province more facil, and Government a safe
as well as easy Thing; for as Tacitus says of Agricola's instructing the
Britains in Arts and Sciences, and using them with more Humanity then other
Governors had done, that it made them fitter for Government: So if that
practical Religion, and the Laws made to maintain it, were duly regarded, the
very Natures of Men now wild and froward by Cross and Jealous Interests, would
learn Moderation, and see it to be by far their greatest Interest to pursue
sober and amicable Conversation, which would rid the Magistrate of much of his
present Trouble: And the Truth is, it is a Piece of Slavery to have the Regiment
of Ignorants and Ruffains; but there is true Glory and Royalty in having the
Government of Men instructed in the Justice and Prudence of their own Laws and
Country.

Lastly, Heaven will prosper so natural, so noble, and so Christian an Essay,
which ought not to be the least Consideration with a good Magistrate; and the
rather, because the Neglect of this practical Religion has been the Ruin of
Kingdoms and Common Wealths among Heathens, Jews and Christians. This laid
Tarquin low, and his Race never rose more. How puissant was Lacedaemon and
Athens in Greece, till Luxury had eaten out their Severity, and a pomp^ ^ing,
contrary to their Excellent Laws, rendered their Execution intolerable? And was
not Hannibal's Army a Prey to their own Idleness and Pleasure, which by
esseminating their Natures conquered them, when the whole Power of Rome could
not do it? What else betrayed Rome to Caesar's Ambition; and madeway for the
after Rents and Divisions of the Empire? The Conquest and Inheritance of a well
governed People for several Ages, as long as their Manners lasted. The Jews in
like Manner were prosperous while they keept the Statutes and Judgments of
their God; but when they became rebellious and dissolute, the Almighty either
visited them from Heaven, or exposed them to the Fury of their Neighbors.
Nothing else sent Zedekiah to Babylon, and gave him and the people a Prey to
Nebuchadnezar and his Army.

Neglect of Laws and dissolute Living, Andrew Horn (that lived in the Time of
Edw. the ^st. as before cited) tells us, was the Cause of their miserable
Thraldom and Desolation the Britains sustained by Invaders and Conquerers. And
pray, what else has been the English of our sweeping Pestilence and dreadful
Fires of late Years? Hundreds of Examples might be brought in this Case; but
their Frequency shall excuse me.

Thus have I honestly and plainly cleared my Conscience for my Country, and
answered, I hope, modestly, and though briefly, yet fully the Import of the
Question propounded, with Honor to the Magistrate, and Safety to the People by
an happy Conjunction of their Interests. I shall co^^lude,

That as greater Honor and Wisdom cannot well be attributed to any Sort of
Men, then for our Superiors, under their Circumstances, to be sought to by all
Persuasions, consided in by all Persuasions, and obeyed by all Peswasions; and
to make those Persuasions know, that it is their Interest so to do, as well as
that it is the Interest of our Superiors, they should, which the Expedients
proposed naturally tend to; So, for a further Inducement to embrace them, let
it be constantly remembered, that the Interest of our English Governors is like
to stand longer upon the Legs of the English People, then of the English
Church; since the one takes in the Strength of all Interests, the other leaves
out all but her own; and it may happen that the English Church may fail, or go
travail again, but it is not probable that English People should do either,
while Property is preserved, a Balance kept, General Religion propagated, and
the World continues.

May all this prevail with our Superiors to make the best Use of their little
Time, remembering in the midst of all their Power and Grandeur that they carry
Mortality about them, and are equally liable to the Scrutiny and Judgment of
the last Day with the poorest Peasant, and that they have a great Stewardship
to account for; that Moderation and Virtue being their Course, they for the
future shall steer, after having faithfully discharged that Grand Trust reposed
in them by God and this Free-People, they may with Comfort to their Souls, and
Honor to their Names and Actions, safely anchor in the Haven of Eternal
Blessedness: So prays with much Sincerity,

An English-Christian-Man, William Penn.

A Corollary.
THat the People are under a great Dissatisfaction.

That the Way to quiet Differences, and render contrary Interests subservient
to the Interest of the Government, is,

First, To maintain inviolably the Rights of it, viz. Liberty and Property,
Legislation and Juries, without Neglect. That slighting and Infringing them
has been the Injury of Prince and People, and early or late the Ruin of the
Contrivers of so ill Designs; and when all has been done, the only Expedient
has been, to come back again to English Law: This takes in all, pleases all,
because it secures and profits all; sacrificing Privileges for the sake of
Conformity, makes a Breach upon the Civil Government, alienates the Peoples
Affections from their Prince, lodges Property in the Church, so as none can
come at it, but through Obedience to her Rites; for she at this Rate has the
keeping of it, a Thing Unknown, as well as Unsafe to the Ancient English
Government.

2dly, That the Prince govern himself upon a Balance toward all Religious
Interests; that this best poizes Parties to his Security, renders him Master of
an universal Affection, and makes him truly and safely Prince of all his
Country; but the contrary Course narrows his Justice and Mercy, makes the
Government to shine but upon one Patch of the Kingdom; to be Just but to one
Party, and disinherit the rest from their Birthright; that this Course ends in
great Disadvantage to the Peace, Plenty and Safety of Prince and People.

3dly, And lastly, Instead of being Uncharitable, Severe and Cruel for
Modifications, let them sleep, and General and Practical Religion be promoted,
that which receives an Amen in every Man's Conscience, from the Principle of
Divine Life (as the Lord Keeper well called it, in every Breast: That all agree
in the most weighty Doctrines; and that nothing will sooner sweeten Men's Blood,
and mollify their Natures, then employing that Time and Pains they bestow on
fruitless Contests, in Living up to what they both Know, Believe and Accord in;
that this leaves Men to keep Company with their own Comments, and makes the
Text only Sacred, and Holy Living necessary, not only to Heavenly, but Earthly
Places, I mean, Preferments, whence Virtue becomes the Door to Favor, and
Conscience (now smothered in the Crowd of Sinister Interests) the Noble Rule of
Living.

God Almighty, if it please him, beget Noble Resolutions in the Hearts of our
Superiors to use these plain and safe Expedients, that Charity may supplant
Cruelty, Contest yield to Good Life, and present Distances meet in a Just and
Kind Neighborhood.

Great and Honorable is that Prince, Free and Happy that People, where these
Things take Place.

W. P.

ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 30. read and may. p. 12. r. Rege. Marg. r. Plut. f. 162. r. 126. f.
19. r. 350. p. 14. l. 13 r. above. l. 14. r. 100. Marg. r. 975. p. 218. p. 17.
l. 21. f gained. r restored. p. 21. l. 20. r. never so. p. 23. l. 20. r. there.
p. 35. l. 16 r. Rites. page 44. l. 30. r. Sirmium. l. 35. r. Factions. p. 47. l.
29. r. perhaps is. p. 51. l. 15. r. of the.


