A brief Account of the Province of Pennsylvania, Lately Granted by the KING,
Under the GREAT Seal of England, TO WILLIAM PENN AND HIS Heirs and Assigns.
SInce (by the good Providence of God, and the Favor of the King) a Country in
America is fallen to my Lot, I thought it not less my Duty, then my Honest
Interest, to give some public notice of it to the World, that those of our own
or other Nations, that are inclined to Transport Themselves or Families beyond
the Seas, may find another Country added to their Choice; that if they shall
happen to like the Place, Conditions, and Government, (so far as the present
Infancy of things will allow us any prospect) they may, if they please, fix
with me in the Province, hereafter described.

I. The KING'S Title to this Country before he granted it.
It is the Jus Gentium, or Law of Nations, that what ever Waste, or unculted
Country, is the Discovery of any Prince, it is the right of that Prince that
was at the Charge of the Discovery: Now this Province is a Member of that part
of America, which the King of Englands Ancestors have been at the Charge of
Discovering, and which they and he have taken great care to preserve and
Improve.

A Map of Some of the South and east bounds of PENNSYLVANIA in America being
par^ly Inhabited. Sold by John Thornton at the Sign of England Scotland and
Ireland in the Minories, and by John Setler at his Shop in Popes head Alley in
Cornhill LONDON.



II. William Penn's Title from the KING.
An Abstract of the Patent GRANTED BY THE KING, To William Penn. etc.
The Fourth of March, 1681.
I. WE do Give and Grant (upon diverse considerations) to William Penn his)
Heirs and Assigns for ever all that Tract of Land in America with all Islands
thereunto belonging That is to say from the beginning of the fortieth degree of
North Latitude unto the forty third Degree (of North Latitude whose Eastern
bounds from Twelve English Miles above New Castle (alias Delaware Town) runs
all along upon the side of Delaware River.

II. Free and undisturbed use and passage into and out of all Harbors Bays
Waters Rivers Isles and Inlets belonging to or leading to the same Together
with the Soil Fields Woods Underwoods Mountains Hills Fenns Isles Lake and
Rivers Waters Rivulets Bays and Inlets Situate in or belonging unto the Limits
and Bounds aforesaid Together with all sorts of Fish Mines Mettles, etc. To
have and to hold to the only behoof of the said William Penn his Heirs and
Assigns for ever To be holden of us as of our Castle of Windsor in free and
common soccage paying only two Beaver skins yearly.

III. And of our further Grace we have thought it fit to erect and we do hereby
erect the aforesaid Country and Islands into a Province and Seigniory and do
call it Pennsilvania and so from henceforth we will have it called.

IV. That reposing special confidence in the wisdom and justice of the said
William Penn we do grant to him and his Heirs and their Deputies for the good
and happy Government thereof to ordain and enact and under his and their seals
to publish any Laws whatever for the public uses of the said Province by and
with the Advice and Approbation of the Freeholders of the said Country or
their delegates so as they be not repugnant to the Law of this Realm and to the
Faith and Allegiance due unto us by the legal Government thereof.

V. Full power to the said William Penn, etc. to appoint Judges Leiutenants
Justices Magistrates and Officers for what causes soever and with what Power
and in such Form as to him seems convenient also to be able to Pardon and
Abolish Crimes and Offenses and to do all and every other thing that to the
complete Establishment of Justice unto Courts and Tribunals forms of Judicature
and manner of proceedings do belong and our pleasure is and so we enjoin and
require that such Laws and Proceedings shall be most absolute and available in
Law and that all the Liege People of us our Heirs and Successors inviolably
keep the same in those parts saving to us small appeals.

VI. That the Laws for regulating Property as well for the descent of Lands as
enjoyment of Goods and Chattels and likewise as to Felonies shall be the same
there as here in England until they shall be altered by the said William Penn
his Heirs or Assigns and by the Freemen of the said Province or their Delegates
or Deputies or the greater part of them.

VII. Furthermore that this new Colony may the more happily increase by the
multitude of People resorting thither therefore we for us our Heirs and
Successors do hereby grant License to all the Liege People present and future
of us, etc. (excepting such as shall be specially forbidden) to Transport
themselves and Families into the said Country there to Inhabit and Plant for
the public and their private Good.

VIII. Liberty to Transport what Goods or Commodities are not forbidden paying
here the Legal Customs due to us, etc.

IX. Power to divide the Countey into Counties Hundreds and Towns to
Incorporate Towns into Buroughs and Buroughs into Cities to make Fairs and
Markets with convenient Privileges according to the merit of the Inhabitants
or the fitness of the place And to do all other thing or things touching the
premises which to the said William Penn his Heirs or Assigns shall seem meet
and requisite albeit they be such as of their own nature might otherwise
require a more special commandment and warrant then in those presents is
expressed.

X. Liberty to Import the Growth or Manufactures of that Province into England
paying here the Legal duty.

XI. Power to erect Ports Harbors Creeks Havens Keys and other places for
Merchandises with such Jurisdiction and Privileges as to the said William
Penn, etc. shall seem expedient.

XII. Not to break the Acts of Navigation neither Governor nor Inhabitants
upon the penaltys contained in the said Acts.

XIII. Not to be in League with any Prince or Country that is in War against us
our Heirs and Successors.

XIV. Power of safety and defense in such way and manner as to the said William
Penn, etc. seems meet.

XV. Full power to Assign Alien Grant Demise or Enfeoff of the premises so many
and such parts and parcels to those that are willing to purchase the same as
the said William Penn thinks fit to have and to hold to them the said Persons
their Heirs or Successors in fee Simple or fee Tail or for term of Life or
Lives or years to be held of the said William Penn, etc. as of the said
Seigniory of Windsor by such Services Customs and Rents as shall seem fit to
the said William Penn his Heirs and Assigns and not immediately of us our Heirs
or Successors and that the said Persons may take the premises or any Parcel
thereof of the said William Penn, etc. and the same hold to themselves their
Heirs and Assigns the Statute Quia emptores Terrarum in any wise
notwithstanding.

XVI. We give and grant License to any of those Persons to whom the said
William Penn, etc. has granted any Estate of Inheritance as aforesaid with the
consent of the said William Penn to erect any parcel of Lands within the said
Province into Manors to hold Courts Barron and view of Francke-pledge, etc. by
Themselves or Stewards.

XVII. Power to those Persons to Grant to others the same Tenures in fee simple
or otherwise to be held of the said Manors respectively and upon all further
Alienations the Land to be held of the Manor that it held of before the
Alienation.

XVIII. We do Covenant and Grant to and with the said William Penn his Heirs
and Assigns that we will not set or make any Custom or other Taxation upon the
Inhabitants of the said Province upon Lands Houses Goods Chattels or
Merchandises except with the consent of the Inhabitants and Governor.

XIX. A charge that no Officers nor Ministers of us our Heirs and Successors do
presume at any time to attempt any thing to the contrary of the premises or in
any sort withstand the same but that they be at all times aiding to the said
William Penn and his Heirs and to the Inhabitants and Merchants their Factors
and Assigns in the full use and benefit of this our Charter.

XX. And if any doubts or questions shall hereafter arise about the true sense
or meaning of any Word Clause or Sentence contained in this our Charter We will
Ordain and Command that at all times and in all things such Interpretation be
made thereof and allowed in any of our Courts whatsoever as shall be adjudged
most advantageous and favorable unto the said William Penn his Heirs and
Assigns so as it be not against the Faith and Allegiance due to us our Heirs
and Successors.

In Witness whereof we have caused our Letters to be made Patents. Witness our
self at Westminster, etc.
The KING's Declaration TO The Inhabitants and Planters of the Province of
PENNSYLVANIA.
CHARLES R.

Whereas His Majesty in consideration of the great merit and faithful services
of Sir William Penn deceased, and for diverse other good Causes Him thereunto
moving, has been Graciously pleased by Letters Patents bearing Date the Fourth
day of March last past, to Give and Grant unto William Penn Esquire, Son and
Heir of the said Sir William Penn, all that Tract of Land in America, called by
the Name of Pennsylvania, as the same is Bounded on the East by Delaware River,
from Twelve miles distance Northwards of New Castle Town, unto the three and
fourtieth Degree of Northern Latitude, if the said River does extend so far
Northwards, and if the said River shall not extend so far Northward, then by
the said River so far as it does extend: And from the Head of the said River,
the Eastern Bounds to be determined by a Meridian Line to be drawn from the
Head of the said River, unto the said Three and fourtieth Degree, the said
Province to extend Westward Five Degrees in Longitude, to be Computed from the
said Eastern Bounds, and to be Bounded on the North, by the Beginning of the
Three and fourtieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and on the South, by a Circle
Drawn at Twelve Miles distance from New Castle Northwards, and Westwards unto
the Beginning of the Fourtieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and then by a
straight Line Westwards to the limit of Longitude above mentioned, together
with all Powers, Preheminencies, and Jurisdictions necessary for the Government
of the said Province, as by the said Letters Patents, Reference being thereunto
had, does more at large appear.

His Majesty does therefore hereby Publish and Declare his Royal Will and
Pleasure, That all persons Settled or Inhabiting within the Limits of the said
Province, do yield all Due Obedience to the said William Penn, His Heirs and
Assigns, as absolute Proprietaries and Governors thereof, as also to the
Deputy or Deputies, Agents or Lieutenants, Lawfully Commissionated by him or
them, according to the Powers and Authorities Granted by the said Letters
Patents; Wherewith His Majesty Expects and Requires a ready Compliance from all
Persons whom it may concern as they tender his Majesty's Displeasure.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the Second day of April, 1681. In the Three
and thirtieth year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, CONWAY.

III. The Reason of the Grant.
The reason and ground of this Grant from the King, to Him and his Heirs, etc.
Was his Petition to the King, in which he set forth. His Fathers Services, his
own Sufferings and Losses, in relation to his Fathers Estate; And lastly. His
long and costly Attendance without success: In right, and consideration of
which, the King was graciously pleased to make the aforesaid Grant; to which
Title, the said William Penn adds that of the Natives by purchase from them.

IV. Of the Country, and its Produce.
It lies 600. Miles South of the Latitude of England; and as it is of the same
side of the Line, so it is about the same degree with Mompellier in France, or
Naples in Italy: The Air is generally clear and sweet, the Summer is longer and
Hotter, and Winter shorter, and sometimes Colder than in England: The Soil is
said to be as good as any in those parts. It commonly produces Oak, Cedar,
Mulbery, Chestnut, Walnut, Firr, Cyprus, Ash, Beech, Popaler, Saxafras, Medaler,
Plumbs, Grapes, Peaches, Strawberries, Huckleberries, Cranberries, Hopps, etc.
English Fruit takes kindly, and produces suddenly and plentifully: The Woods
are furnished with Store of Wild Fowl, as Turkeys, Pheasants, Heath-Cocks,
Patridges, Pigeons, etc. The Earth well Watered with Springs and Rivers, and
the Rivers stored with Fish, as Sturgion, Sheepsheads, Drums, Cat-fish, Shads,
Ecles, and abundance more: With Fowl, as Swans, Gray and White Geese, Duck,
Mallard, etc. The Corn of the Country used by the Indians, produces four
hundred sold, is Good and Hearty, both in Milk, and made into Bread; the price
two Shillings six pence the Bushel: There is also good English Corn, as Wheat,
Barley, Rye, and Oats; Wheat under four Shillings the Bushel, Barley and Rye,
under three Shillings the Bushel, Oats about two Shillings the Bushel: There
are also very good Pease, and Beans of several sorts. The Beef is good, but
Pork is very Sweet: The Beef at three pence, the Pork at two pence halfpenny
the pound; Batter at six pence a pound, Peaches to Eat, or make Drink of, at
eight pence the Bushel; a Cow and Calf about the Spring of the Year, at five
pounds, a pair of Oxen at ten pounds, a good Breeding Sow at thirty Shillings,
a Young good Breeding Mare, at eight pounds.
But it is to be Noted, that these foregoing prises and sums, are to be paid
with one half of the Value in English Goods, at the Rates they are bought at in
England; for example, four pounds English paies for the Breeding Mare, that is
Rated at eight pounds, the like with the rest.

The Country also abounds with several sorts of Wild Creatures, as Elkes, Deer,
Beavers, Racoons, Mincks, Martins, Wild Catts, Otters, etc. some of which are
good Food, and Cheap, as a Fat Buck at two Shillings, English Goods, others of
them considerable for their Furs: The way of Traffic, is to send to the
Southren Plantations, Corn, Beef, Pork, Fish, Sider, and Pipestaves; the Skins
and Furs for England. The Convenience that belongs to the Province in point of
Navigation, is two fold; the one through Chesapeak Bay, and the other Delaware
Bay, by which Ships of great Burden may come and Trade to the said Province.

V. Of the present Inhabitants.
That part of the Country which is at all Inhabited, is at the head of
Chesapeak Bay, and on the West side of Delaware River, they are by Nation,
Sweeds, Dutch, English, who are capable of giving Entertainment to New Comers,
till they can provide for themselves.

VI. What the Country is believed capable of.
It is thought by several knowing Persons, that have Traveled those parts of
America, and have been well acquainted with places in Europe of the same
degree, that there may be Silk, and Wine, if not Oil; and for Flax, Hemp,
Woad, Madder, Liquorish, Potashes, and Iron, there needs to be no question.

VII. Of the Government.
1st. The Governor and Freeholders, have the power of making Laws, so that no
Law can be made; nor Money raised, But by the Peoples consent.

2ly. That the Rights of the People of England are in force there.

3ly. That making no Law against Allegiance, they may make all Laws requisite
for the Prosperity, and Security of the said Province.

VIII. Of the Conditions.
The Province is cast at a penny an Acre; But he sets apart several parcels,
which he calls Shares; these he sells; saving a Quit-rent, necessary for to
secure the Title and Tenure: That is, whereas 5000. Acres (which makes a Share)
comes (at a penny an Acre) to 20. l. 16. s. 8. d. yearly, for 100* l. down, he
sells off the yearly Rent of 18. l. 6. s. 8. d. and reserves but 50. s. which
may be reduced as the purchaser pleases, but something must be reserved for the
Security of the Title: To which, the Royalties proper to Manors in England, as
Hunting, Fowling, Fishing, with all common Mines, Minerals, and a Proportion of
Royal Mines also (if sound within any ones propriety) is affixed by the general
Concessions.

And that such as are not able to purchase, yet willing to go, and capable to
pay their Passage, and their Servants, may not be excluded. It is hereby
Declared, that every such Person, for himself, and Wife, and every Child, Male
or Female, if sixteen Years of Age, shall have right to take up at 1. d. per
Acre, Fifty Acres by the Head, to him and his Heirs for ever, in lieu of
Purchasing, which shall be by the Surveyor of the Country set out so soon as
the said person comes to take it up: And to encourage such Children and
Servants to serve their Parents, Masters, or Mistresses, the full time for
which they are Engaged, Diligently and Faithfully; Every such Child or Servant,
shall have Right to take up 50. Acres at but two Shillings Quit-Rent for ever,
which makes him a Freeholder of the Country.

IX. Persons fittest for Plantations.
Those persons that Providence seems to have fitted for Plantations, are
Industrious Husbandmen, Laborious Handicrafts: As Carpenters, Ship-wrights,
Ropemakers, Smiths, Brick-makers, Weavers, Tailors, Tanners, Coopers,
Mill-wrights, Joyners, Shooe-makers, Turners, Potters, such as dress Flax,
Hemp, and Wool; With many others.

It seems also a fit place for Younger Brothers, and Men of small Estates, who
with the Industry of a few Servants, may in two or three years time, be
plentifully accommodated; Also all Ingenious Men, that are lovers of Planting,
Gardening, and the like quiet, and useful Employments.

A Plantation seems a fit place for those Ingenious Spirits, that being Low in
the World, are much clogged and oppressed about a Livelihood; for the means of
Subsisting being easy there, they may have time, and opportunity to Gratify
their Inclinations; and thereby improve Science, and help Nurseries of People.

There are an other sort of Persons, not only fit for, but necessary in
Plantations; and that is, Men of Universal Spirits, that have an Eye to the
good of Posterity; and that both understand, and delight to promote good
Discipline, and Just Government among a Plain and Well intending People: Such
Persons may find room in Colonies, for their good Counsil and Contrivance, who
are shut out from being of much use or service to great Nations, under settled
Customs.

But they that go, must wisely count the Cost, For they must either work
themselves, or be able to employ others. A Winter goes before a Summer, and the
first work will be Country Labor, to clear Ground, and raise Provision; other
things by degrees.

X. What is fit for the Journey, and first to be done there.
1st. The Passage for Men and Women is Five Pounds a head, for Children under
Ten Years, Fifty Shillings, Sucking Children Nothing, for Freight of Goods.
Forty Shilling per Tun; but one Chest to every Passenger Free.

2ly. The Goods fit to take with them for use or sale; are all Utensils for
Husbandary and Building, and House-hold-stuff; Also all sorts of things for
Apparel, as Cloth, Stuffes, Linen, etc. Wherein all that desire, may be more
particularly Informed, by Philip Ford, at the Hood and Scarf in Bow-lane in
London.

Lastly, Being by the Mercy of God safely Arrived; be it in October, Two Men
may clear as much Ground for Corn, as usually brings by the following Harvest
about Twenty-Quarters; In the mean time they must buy Corn, which they may have
as aforesaid; and if they buy them two Cows, and two Breeding Sows; with what
the Indians for a small matter will bring in, of Fowl, Fish, and Venison (which
is incredibly Cheap, as a Eat Buck for Two Shillings) that, and their industry
will supply them. It is Apprehended, that Fifteen Pounds stock for each Man
(who is first well in Clothes, and provided with fit working Tools for himself)
will (by the Blessing of God) carry him thither, and keep him, till his own
Plantation will Accommodate him. But all are most seriously cautioned, how they
proceed in the disposal of themselves; It Is true, The Earth is the Lords, and
the Fullness thereof; and it seems to many, to be the time wherein those
desolate Western parts of the World are to be Planted, and have their Day, as
Asia, Africa, and Europe have had (of which the^ are diverse Prophesies extant)
yet let all have a Reverend regard ^o God's Providence in their Removal, and be
serious in it, rather seeking the Comforts of retirement, and a sufficiency for
Life (like the Blessed Patriarch of Old) the Ease, Fullness, and Wealth.

And it is further Advised, that all such as go, would at least get the
Permission, if not the good Likeing of their near Relations; for that is both
Natural, and a Duty incumbent upon all: And by this means will natural
Affection be Preserved, and a Friendly and Profitable Correspondence maintained
between them. In all which, God Almighty (who is the Salvation of the Ends of
the Earth) Direct us, that His Blessings may attend our Honest Endeavors; and
then the Consequence of all our Undertakings, will be to the Glory of His Great
Name, and the true Happiness of Us, and our Posterity. Amen.

William Penn.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHoever are desirous to be concerned in this Province, they may be treated
with, and further Satisfied, at Philip Fords in Bow-lane in Cheap Side, and at
Thomas Rudyards, or Benjamin Clarks in George-yard in Lombard Street, London.

There is likewise Printed a Map of Pennsylvania, together with a Description
at the End of it; and some Proposals.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-yard in Lom-bard-street. 1681.


