NO Cross, no Crown: Or several Sober REASONS Against Hat-Honour,
Titular-Respects, You to a single Person, with the Apparel and Recreations of
the Times: Being inconsistant with Scripture, Reason, and the Practice, as well
of the best Heathens, as the holy Men and Women of all Generations; and
consequently fantastic, impertinent and sinful.

With Sixty Eight Testimonies of the most famous Persons, of both former and
latter Ages for further confirmation.

In Defense of the poor despised Quakers, against the Practice and Objections
of their Adversaries.

By W. Penn j. An humble Disciple, and patient Bearer of the Cross of Jesus.

But Mordecai bowed not,

Esth. 3. 2. Adam where art thou?

Genesis 3. 9. In like manner the women adorn themselves in modest Apparal, not
with brodered hair, etc.

1 Timothy 2. 9. Thy Law is my Meditation all the day,

Psalm. 119. 97. Printed in the Year, 1669.

To my Ancient Friends F.S. E.B. H.S. J.C. I.N. A.L. M.L. T.C.
MY Friends,
As you were particularly in my thoughts upon the writing of these sheets; so
is it not less my desire to make you particular in their publication.

Many have been the Objections with which you frequently have beset me on this
account; but not with that success I hope their Answers will have with you. My
matter, style and method speak not the least premeditation or singularity, but
that simplicity and truth which plainly show the affectionate sincerity of my
heart, and best wishes for your true happiness; that from Defendants of vain,
foolish, proud and wanton Customs, which exercise the minds of men and women
below the excellencies of Immortality (the highest end of their Creation) you
may become Disciples of that self-denying Jesus, who first brought that great
felicity to light, and gladly Sacrifice your all, as but your reasonable
service, in order to so glorious a Reward.

By whatsoever is dear, I would beseech you to relinquish that very vanity of
vanities; I mean, those Fashions, Pleasures, and that whole variety of
Conversation which make up the Life and satisfaction of the Age, and are those
earthy impediments that clog your Souls flight to more sublime and Heavenly
contemplations: they were of old summed into three heads; the lust of the eye,
the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life, which are the offspring of the
World, and not of the Father.

Reflect upon the incertainty of your lives, the Immortality of your Souls, and
that Eternal state they must be sentenced to; but above all, be you entreated
to eye that Divine Principle engrafted on your minds, in all its holy, meek,
and self-denying instructions; that being mostly exercised thereby, you may be
weaned from all the glittering Follies of the World (which only weak and fordid
spirits please themselves withal) and sensibly experiment the inexpressible
delights and ravishments of Soul, which are the inseparable companions of such
retirements. By which you may be lead into that temperance, piety and
self-denial, that will render you so many noble Witnesses, against the folly,
lust, and gross intemperance of the Age, and unquestionably entitle you to
Honor, Glory, Immortality and Eternal Life, then which, as there can be nothing
more truly excellent; so, not any thing more earnestly desired on your account
by

Your true Friend, W. P.

The Preface.
THe Business of this Preface, is to request of the Reader two things for his
own sake, which I have so much the less reason to doubt of being granted, as it
would show him very destitute of charity, who wilfully would be so injurious to
himself: The first is, That he would be very Serious, remembering, that he who
despises what he does not know, bespeaks himself a fool; as well as that he is
enjoined to try all things, though only obliged to believe what is good The
Subject is serious, for, it is the blessed Cross of Christ; the work it is
designed for is serious, for it is the Crucifixion of the vain, wanton and
fleshly appetites of worldly men; and if the Reader be so too, I question not
but the Just Principle (to which I make my appeal) will justify me, and it
become instrumental to his convincement; but if he shall demean himself with
crittical and frothy jests, I can only say the greater shall be his
condemnation yet let him remember, that it is the purpose of this Discourse to
prove what Jesus Christ has said; namely that for every idle word he speaks,
he shall render an account in the day of Judgment.

The next thing I have to ask, is, that he would be Impartial; for he that
reads, and makes his prejudiced constructions mine; or seems to slight the
Subject, Book, or Matter, because he disrespects the Author or his Opinions in
other points, may give sufficient evidence of his own weakness, but not
discover mine, since there is not any thing less becomes an equal Christian
temper, then to ^nterpret ill, of that which means not so, and to love or h^te
things by names, and for their Authors sake; a practice not more wretched then
common: Nay, it is the Doctrine, Use and Application of too many to learn people
to hate others Principles in order to detest their persons, and so from an
Opinion-difference bring it into a personal one, from whence flows all the
malice and bitterness that reign amongst those who are called Christians; but
if this Reader be such a one, he is either an ill Teacher, or very ill taught;
I only have to tell him, that as such pre-opinion prevents all clear and
certain examination of things, (by which he is at a loss about his own faith
and other men's) so if he would be benefited by this Discourse; if he would read
the character and condemnation of a wicked world; and if he would be truly
informed of that Life and Conversation which are according to godliness, and
give entrance after time shall end, into the endless Joys of an Eternal
Glorious Rest and Habitation in the Heavens, let him be Serious, let him be
Impartial: And may that Almighty Power, which raised Jesus from the Dead,
quicken his mind, and raise his affections to the knowledge and possession of
Immortality; which as it is the whole requital I desire for my exceeding love
and earnest desires for the reformation of an intemperate and voluptuous World,
to the Self-denying Life, and Innocence of Holy Jesus; so shall it be a matter
of rejoicing to all the Faithful.

That the Errors of the Press are not the Authors, is to be supposed; and
therefore he reasonably is to be excepted from the charge of them.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. SIxteen Reasons against Hat-Honour, and Titular-respects. That they
are inconsistant with the nature of Honor. Honor is in the mind, and expressed
by real service to God or Men. The Hat no expression of Honor; Titles, the
Scriptures condemn them. The Effects of Pride and Vanity. No advantage to men
and women. Contrary to the best Times, the best Men, and several Authors. CHAP.
II. TWelve Reasons against You to a Single Person. That its contrary to the
ground of all Speech. Mere nonsense. Condemned of all Languages. Brought in by
some proud Popes and Kings. Contrary to their Prayers. Testimonies from Learned
Authors of ancient and modern times. CHAP. III. THirteen Reasons against the
Vanity of Apparel, and common Recreations, Pleasures and Conversation of these
times. That they are destrustive of their Institution. Sin brought clothing;
and loss of true Divine Pleasure, false pleasure. That they are contrary to the
Example of the holy Generations: That they are positively forbid: That they are
inconsistant with the Nature of Christ's Gospel and Religion. The Effects of
Pride and Wontonness, destructive of Labor, Industry, Health, Body and Soul;
they ensnare the affections, divert the Soul from Heavenly and Eternal
Delights; they are the more pernicious, because they seem more innocent then
grosser evils; they occasion Debts, Poverty, Worldly-mindedness, and all Folly;
that if such Vanity and Expense were hindered, Debts could be paid, the Poor
and Fatherless provided for, and the Nation enriched; otherwise nothing but
Wrath and Vengeance come from God on such doings. Objections answered. The true
Christian Life vindicated from such wanton Inventions, and lustful Vanities.
Several weighty Testimonies of the most famous Persons for Piety, Power, and
Learning, as well living as dying, both Heathens and Christians of Ancient and
Modern times, as an entire confirmation of this Discourse, to the Conviction
(if possible) of others, as well as Vindication of the Innocent Quakers. With a
Call, to whomsoever it shall come.
Several Testimonies.
Of Hat Honor.
1 Luther, 2 Calvin, 3 Marlorat, 4 Jerome, 5 Paulinus, 6 Sulpicius, 7 Causabon.
Of You to a single Person.
8 Luther, 9 Erasmus, 10 Spanish Customs, 11 Lipsius, 12 Howel.
Of Apparel.
13 Solon, 14 Hippias, 15 Gymnosophistae, 16 Bamburacii, 17 Gynaecosmi and
Gynaeconomi, 18 Cornelia, 19 Ancient Heathens, 20 Gregory, 21 Jerome, 22
Memorancy.
Of Recreations.
23 Chilon, 24 Bias and Stilpo, 25 Anaxagoras, 26 Themistocles, 27 Socrates, 28
Plato, 29 Antisthenes, 30 Aristotle, 31 Clitomachus and Epaminondas, 32
Phocion, 33 Mandanius, 34 Hipparchia, 35 Quintillian, 36 Tertullian,
Chrysostom, Theophilact, Gregory Naz. 37 Ambrose, 38 Augustine, 39 Polybius,
Cicero, Livius, Tacitus, 40 Machiavel, 41 Cardon, 42 Bellonius, 43 Ouzelius, 44
Clemens Romans, 45 Council of Carthage, 46 Gracian, 47 Waldenses, 48 Paulinus,
49 Acacius.
Aged and dying Testimonies.
50 Solomon, 51 Ignatius, 52 Iraenius, 53 Justin Martyr, 54 Chrysostom, 55
Charles the fifth, 56 Sir Phil. Sidney, 57 Secr. Walsingham, 58 Sir J. Mason,
59 Sir H. Wotton, 60 Lord Bacon, 61 Dr. Done, 62 Seldom, 63 Grotius, 64
Salmatius, 65 Mazarene, 66 Prince Henry.
Conclusion.
67 Philo Judaeus, 68 Eusebius Pamphili.
Of the Christian Life; and that the being contented with few things, and using
this World as if we used it not, is the true Christian State, and Life; and
that the Exercise, Vanity, Curiosity and whole Conversation of this Age are
inconsistant with the Spirit and Nature of true Christianity.

Many Errors and Improprieties have escaped the Press, which are not to he
charged upon the Author; the readiest present Collection follows.
Page, Line. Errors. Corrected. 5 6 counts count'st 7 22 requiring required 8 4
sustantial substantial 11 31 Pompius Pompeius 12 33 for in so doing in so
doing 14 14 about above 17 8 Parts Parks 18 7 discussed disused 25 men of
ordinary trades every man of an ordinary trade 19 19 tified fortified 20 33 we
it is we say it is 20 29 which what 24 14 said says 26 7 meant mark 27 25 they
so far are such such are so far from 30 17 heart hearts 18 was is 32 9 in on 26
the marriage bed marriage beds 33 32 Latudinarian Latitudinarian 34 2 to the
with the 12 Heathen Heathens 38 16 be a right Christian be right Christians 39
12 be a true Christian or Disciple be true Christians or Disciples 35 Pleasures
Pleasure 40 15 which with 42 33 are not is not 46 38 Aleman Alcman 56 16 to
security to the security 57 38 innumerably innumerable 60 32 dear earnings
deer earnings 65 17 overcome overcame 70 23 without thy self with thy self 81
17 Pagon Pagan 82 29 those these 84 37 which 91 last to murder an Heretical To
obey an Heretical Prince Prince then to obey him then to murder him 95 19 or
and 97 4 shall should 98 16 is are 102 19 And this Nations more peculierly And
more peculierly fit for 20 fit for this Nations 103 28 Pamphilius Pamphili 32
Country life Contrary life 104 24 conversations conversation 15 off and 109 7
rgain again 110 19 frowns frown

NO Cross no Crown: Or a few sober REASONS Proposed against those frequent
Ceremonies of CAP-HONOUR, etc.
CHAP. I.
To the unredeemed (of all Ranks and Qualities) from the vain Customs of a
wicked World.

READER, whether thou art a Night-walking Nicodomus, or a scoffing Scribe, one
that would Joh. 3. 1. 2.
visit the Messiah but in the dark Customs of the World, that thou might
pass as undiscerned, for fear of bearing his reproachful Cross; or else a
Favorite to Hamans pride, and counts these Testimonies but a foolish
singularity; to Thee has Divine Love enjoined me to be a Messenger of his
Truth, and a faithful Witness against the Pride and Flatteries of this
degenerated World, in which the spirit of Vanity, Lu^^, and all sorts of
impiety has got to so great an head, and lived so long uncontrolled, that it
has impudence enough to term its Darkness, Light, and call its accursed
Offspring by the Names due to an other Nature, the more easily to deceive: And
truly, so very blind, and insensible are most, of what spirit they are, and
ignorant of, the meek and Self-denying Life of holy Jesus, (whose Name they
prefess) that to call each other Rabbi or Master; to bow, to greet with
flattering Titles, and do their Fellow Creatures Homage; to spend time and
estate to gratify their wanton minds; [the Customs of the Gentiles that knew
not God] with them signify no more then Civility, good Breeding, Decency,
Recreation, Accomplishments, etc. O that men would consider, since there are
but two Spirits, (good or evil, that acts them to all things) which really of
them it is that does incline the World to these men-pleasing Customs? And
whether it be Nicodemus or Mordecai [in thee that does befriend the despised
Quakers] which makes thee ashamed to own that openly in conversation with the
World, which the true Light has made vanity and sin to thee in secret? Or if
thou art a Dispiser, tell me, I prithee, which do thou think thy mockery,
anger and contempt does most resemble, proud Haman or Mordecai? My Friend, know
that none has been more prodigal and expensive in those vanities (called
Civilities) then my self; and could I have covered my Conscience under the
fashions of the World, truly I had found a shelter from those showers of
Reproach that have fallen so heavily upon me; but had I (with Joseph) conformed
to Egypts Customs, I had sinned against my God, and lost my peace: nor would I
have thee think it is an Hat, Thou, or Raiment, nakedly in themselves; or that
we would beget any Form inconsistant with Sincerity and Truth [there's but too
much of that] but the esteem and value the vain minds of men do put upon them
[who must be stripped and crucified] constrains us to testify so severely
against them: And this know from the infallible sense of the Eternal Spirit,
That which requires those Customs, begets fear to leave them, pleads for them,
and is displeased if not used and paid to them, is the spirit of Pride and
Flattery in the ground (though Custom or generosity may have abated its
strength in some) and this being discovered by the Light that now shines from
Heaven among the despised Quakers, necessitates them to this Testimony, and my
self as one of them, and for them, for a reproof to the unfaithful, (who would
walk undiscerned) though convinced to the contrary) and for an allay to the
proud Despisers, who scorn us as a people guilty of affect^tion, and
singutrity, from the Eternal God who is great amongst us, and on his way to
root up every Plant that his right hand has not Planted, do I declare that
this is but the Seed of exalted Lucifer; yea, that wonton nature that must be
yoked, and crucified; and that it may appear what its said to be, let these
ensuing serious Reasons have thy Consideration, which were mostly given me from
the Lord, in that time, when as my condescension to those things would have
been purchased at almost any rate; so, the certain sense I had of their
contrariety to the meek and self-denying Life of holy Jesus, requiring my
steady and faithful Testimony against them, as Guests that are forbidden the
Heavenly Kingdom that is now once more appearing to the Sons of men, into which
whatsoever defiles can never enter.

Sixteen Reasons why Cap-Honour, and Titular Respects are neither Honor nor
Respects.
Reason I.
BEcause true Honor is from God, and consists in a virtuous esteem for the
only sake of Virtue, manifested in a real service, and actual benefit both to
God Levit. 19. 15. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
and Mankind, and true Civility in the right ordering of men's Affections and
Actions; but if in Hats, Bows, or Titles, then are the most profane and deboist
the most civil, since most expert in those vain Ceremonies, which is Ps. 50. 23
Isa. 33. 15.
impossible.

Reason II.
Because real Honor is a sustantiall thing manifested by obedience, which
therefore cannot stand in invented (...) 13
Gestures, and most deformed Cringings, after men's wanton Invention, or in any
shadow void of the thing it self, which is must necessarily do, in Case the
Ceremony of the Hat be an honor or respect.

Reason III.
Because no man can honor and dishonor a man under that Honor; but its well
known what grudges, illwill, Prove. 3. 16. Chapter 11. 8.
animosities and bitter hatred reigns in the hearts of such Hat-Honourers at
the time of their false respects.

Reason IV.
Because Honor properly ascends, not descends, yet the Hat is never as
frequenly off to equals, and inferiors, as to Superiors.

Reason V.
If pulling off a Hat, or Title, were to pay honor; who so vile, who so
wretched, who so envious that could not honor? But this is to make honor (as
superstitious men do Religion) to consist in some external appearances, which
may please, but never profit any; wherefore, Prove. 11. 16. Chapter 15. 33. and 26.
1. 8.
it cannot be considered as of the nature of true honor, which is a virtuous
Respect to what is virtuous, demonstrated by some substantial good.

Reason VI.
Honor was from the beginning, but Hats, and most Titles, here of late;
therefore there was true Honor before Hats or Titles, and Consequently true
Honor stands not therein,

Reason VII.
Because if Honor consists in suchlike Ceremonies, then will it follow that
they are most capable of showing Honors, who perform it most exactly according
to the mode or fashion, by which means man has not the Measure of the true
Honor from the Just Principle in himself; but the fantastic dancing Masters
of the Times, wherefore many give much money to have their children learn their
honors, (falsely so called;) and what does this but totally exclude the poor
Country People, who though they Plow, Till, go to Market, yea, in all things
obey their Justices, Landlords, Fathers, and Masters, scarce use their Hats,
or those Ceremonies; but if they do, they are esteemed by a Court Crittick so
ill-favored, as only fit to make a jest, or be laughed at; but what sober man
will not deem their obedience beyond the others vanity and hypocrisy.

Reason VIII.
Real Honor consists not in a Hat, Bow, or Title, because all these things are
purchaseable by money; for which reason how many Schools, and persons are there
in the Land to whom Youth is generally sent to be educated in those vain
fashions, whilst ignorant of the honor that is of God; whereby their minds are
allured to visible things that perish, and instead of remembering their Creator,
Eccl. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4.
are busied about Toys and Fopperies and sometimes so much worse as to cost
themselves a disinheriting, and their indiscreet Parents grief and misery all
their days.

Reason IX.
True Honor stands not in these Fashions, because they had their rise since
Honor, and have been brought sorth by the Spirit that captivated from God, and
led men and women to please the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, 1 John
2. 15, 16. James 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 8, 9 10. Jude 16.
and the pride and flattery of life, both in themselves and others, and which
are used either to please themselves, or for fear of others, or because others
do it, or out of shame, or fear of being reproached, or with design to flatter
Superiors, equals, or inferiors, from whom some profit may be expected; all
which is contrary to the nature of true Honor that comes from God, and only
is paid by a good esteem in the mind, shown by some real service to God, or
godly men; yet if such honor were to be paid, since persons are of diverse
ranks, it will be requisite, that some Law or direction be given, how low to
bow, pull off the Hat, etc. since to give more then is due is an abuse of
Honor; but would not these be ridiculous, as it is to use them at all?

Reason X.
We cannot esteem pulling off Hats, Bows or Titles to be real Honors, because
such like Ceremonies have been prohibited by God, and his servants in days
past; neither did the holy Men of old respect men's persons, as may be seen in
the case of the Israelites, who though other Matthew. 20 25, 26, 27 Luke 22. 25,
26, 27.
Nations had many Lords, and many Gods, yet one was their God, and him only
must they bow unto, and reverence his holy Name.

Reason XI.
This made Mordecai (who stands a Representive for the Jew and Circumcision in
heart) rather expose both Rom 1. 28, 29. (...). 32.
his own, and whole Nations life to Hamans rage, and Cruelty, (whom the King
had so much honored, as to require all in his Court to pay him homage) then
gratify the Nations Custom, in bowing to the Kings Favorite, so hateful are
vicious men and vain customs to the pious and sincere.

Reason XII.
Its manifest from the Case of the Centurion in Christ time, who made not the
honor and respect due to him Matthew. 8, 5. to 12.
from his Soldiers to consist in Hats, Gestures, or vain Ceremonies, but in
the ready execution of his Commands, as when he said to one, Go, and he goes;
and to Luke 7 6, 7, 8, 9.
another, Do this, and he does it; nor is it practiced now amongst Soldiers,
(as being an effeminate Custom, unworthy of Masculine Gravity,) yet are they
obedient, and truly honor their Officers.

Reason XIII.
The very practice of familiar greeting, with show of respect to each others
persons, was so severely reprehended by the Lord Jesus Christ, that he makes it
a mark of the Mat. 23. 5. to 12. Mark 12. 38. Luke ^^. 43. Joh. 5. 44.
Apostasy and wickedness of that Age, of so great show of Profession; for he
gives it in charge to his Disciples, that they should beware of those that love
salutations, and to be called Rabbi, or Master of men; a mark of honor in
those times, etc. for he that is greatest among you shall be your Servant, says
he to his Followers: and call no man Master, for one is your Master; and James
as expressly enjoins the same; My Brethren, Be not many Masters, knowing Jam. 3.
1.
that we shall receive the greater condemnation; by which it is apparent, that
the true Disciples of Christ were not to assume Lordship, nor Superiority, as
was the Custom of the Heathens; but that they should know a religious
community, and live as Servants to each others necessities, acknowledging but
one God, one Lord, one Lawgiver, Isa. 33. 22. Jam. 4. 12.
and but one Master, even Jesus Christ, who is God over all: neither has it
been used among many Nations to give great Titles, or call Magistrates by other
names then what they ever had; as particularly amongst the Romans, Plut. In.
vit. Romans
namely, Brutus, Valerius, Cato, Marcellus, Scipio, Pompius, Cicero, etc. In
Scripture, Adam, (though Lord of the whole World) Cain, Abel, Euoch, Noah,
Abraham, Lot, Moses, Christ Jesus, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, Peter,
James, etc. nor is it common, or pertinent in Greek or Latin Authors, to
mention, or quote the Names of any, but as already instanced; as Irenaens,
Tertullian, Justin, Alexander, Constantine, Justinianus, Maximinian,
Theodosius, Jerome, Barnard, Luther, Sarania, Calvin, Beza, Grotius, Vossius,
Amiraldus, and the like; yet does not this in the least diminish or detract
from their reputation, or discover the least dis-respect or incivility in any
to mention their names as thus expressed, since its the practice of all
Writers; nor do our English Histories, bestrew our Ancestors with those vain
and superfluous Titles, which are common in these days, and without which men
are reputed rude, and ill-bred, much contrary to the Example and Precepts of
Christ Jesus, who elsewhere tells the Jews that the reason why they did not
believe in his meek and self-denying Message, was, because of their receiving
honor one of another. Joh. 5. 44.


Reason XIV.
God is declared to be no Respecter of Persons, but as they fear him, and work
Righteousness, and James condemns such who hold the Faith of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord ^ Sam 14. 14. Acts 10. 27. 35. Ephesians. 6. 9. C^^ 3 25. Jam. 2,
3, ^, 10 11.
of Glory, with respect of Persons; telling them that they must not accept any
man for his gay clothing, rich attire, or outward appearance; neither reject
the poor, or set the rich above him, for that God had chosen the poor of this
World rich in Faith; and that if any shall fulfill, or keep the whole Law, and
yet fail in this of respecting men's persons, he is guilty of all; wherefore all
such flattering Titles, (as to call men what they are not) and fond Ceremonies
of the Hat, etc. to a mortal person, and that for any external consideration we
utterly deny; and as becomes the Children and Servants of the only true God, we
shall not, we cannot reverence, respect, or bow to the persons of men, nor give
flattering Titles, least as Elihu says, for in so doing our Maker would soon
take us away. ^^b 32. 22.


Reason XV.
John, who would have paid homage to the Angel that Rev. 22. 8. 9.
had communicated those Mysteries to him, was forbidden, saying, I am thy
Fellow Servants; much less should we to mortal men.

Reason XVI.
And lastly, from what has been said of the Nature of true Honor, and this
false Honor, and from what Scripture Reason, and Example do afford, as well as
from the Infallible sense we have of the corrupt ground and nature of these
vain Respects, fond Ceremonies, and titular Honors; in obedience to the God
whom we serve, we utterly disclaim those Customs, as the offspring of Pride,
Vanity, Flattery, Lust, etc. which have so universally reigned over the Earth,
and are the customs of the Natitions in their fallen and degenerate state, from
which we are redeemed, and therefore live Witnesses against all such Romans 12.
2. 1 Cor. 7. 31. 1 Pet. 1. 14. 1 John 2. 1^.
(practices) as knowing its not for us to be conformable to the fashions of the
world which pass away, but transformed in the renewing of our minds, that we
may do his will, and abide for ever.

The Testimonies of Ancient and Modern Writers.
TO which let me add a Testimony or two from the Marlor. out of Luther and Calv.
Writings of former times, as what through the prejudice that is received
against us in these, may be of greater moment, and more successful: Marlorat
out of Luther and Calvin, upon the remarkable passage of the Apostle James,
gives us the sense those primitive Reformers had of Respect to Persons, in
these words; viz. To respect persons (here) is to have regard to the outward
habit, and garb; the Apostle signifies that such respecting of persons is so
contrary to true Faith, that they are altogether inconsistant; but if the pomp,
and other worldly regards prevail and weaken what is of Christ, its a sign of a
decaying Faith; yea, so great is the glory and splendour of Christ in a pious
Soul; that all the glories of the world have no charms, no beauty in comparison
of that unto one so religiously inclined; the Apostle makes such respecting of
persons to be repugnant to the LIGHT within them, insomuch, as they who follow
those practices are condemned from within themselves; so that sanctity ought to
be the reason, or motive, of all outward Respect, and that none is to be
honored upon any account but holiness: But if so, doubtless those Nuseries of
fantastic Cringers, antic Dancing-Masters, and flattering Temporizers will be
of very little reputation; but I shall add to these the Admonition of a learned
Writer, called a Father, who lived above 1100 years since, of great esteem both
with Protestants and Papists; namely, Jerome, who writing to a noble Matron
Celantia, directing her how to live in the midst of her prosperity and honors,
amongst many other Religious Instructions, speaks thus: Heed-not thy Nobility,
nor let that be a reason for thee to take place of any; esteem not those Jerome
Epist. ad Celant. Int. oper.
of a meaner extraction to be thy inferiors, for our Religion admits of no
respect of persons, nor does it enduce us to repute men from any external
condition, but from their inward frame and disposition of minds; it is hereby
that we pronounce men noble or base; with God, not to serve sin is to be free,
and to excel in virtue is to be noble, God has chosen the mean and
contemptible of this world whereby to humble the great ones; besides it is a
folly for any to boast his Gentility since all are equally esteemed by God; the
ransom of the poor and rich cost Christ an equal expense of Blood; nor is it
material in what estate a man is born, the New Creature has no distinctions;
but if we will forget bow we all descended from one Father, we ought at least
perpetually to remember that we have but one Savior. But since I am engaged
against these fond and frothy Customs, (the proper effects and delights of vain
and proud minds) let me yet add one much more memorable Causab. of Use and
Custom, page 169.
passage, as it is related by the famous Casaubon in his Discourse of Use and
Custom, where he briefly reports what past between Sulpitius Severus and
Paulinus Bishop of Nola; (but such a one as gave all to redeem Captives) he
brings it in thus: He is not counted a civil man now, of late years amongst us,
who thinks it much, or refuses to subscribe himself Servant, though it be to
his equal or inferior, yet Sulpitius Severus was once sharply chid by Paulinus
for subscribing himself his SERVANT in a Letter of his, saying, Take heed
hereafter how thou being from a Servant called into Liberty, do subscribe thy
self Servant unto one who is thy Brother, and Fellow Servants; for it is a
sinful flattery, not a testimony of humility to pay those honors to a man,
and a sinner, which are due to the one Lord, one Master, and one God. This was
the sense those times had of the Customs and Fashions so much now reputed
amongst people that call themselves Christians, and their Successors; 'twas
then a Sin, it is now an Accomplishment; 'twas then Flattery, it is now Respect;
'twas then fit to be severely reproved, and now (alas!) it is to deserve severe
reprove not to use it: O monstrous vanity! O gross impiety! how much (alas!)
how deeply have those who are called Christians revolted from the plainness of
the primitive days, and practices of holy men and women in former Ages! and
are become degenerated into the loose, vain, proud and wanton Customs of the
World, that knows not God, to whom use has made these things (condemned by the
Scripture, Reason, and Example) almost natural; and so insensible are they of
their bad effects, that they not only persist to practice them, but impudently
plead for them, and as impiously make a very mock of those who cannot immitate
them. I shall proceed to what remains yet further to be proved against those
other Customs, the not conforming whereunto makes us so much the
Stumbling Block and foolishness of this inconsiderate and wanton Age.

CHAP. II.
Twelve Reasons for Thou, not You to a single Person.

Reason I.
WORDS are but as so many marks set and employed for necessary intelligible
mediums, or fit means whereby men may express their minds and conceptions to
each other, from whence comes Society and Commerce.

Reason II.
Though the World be divided into many Nations, which for the most part have
singly a peculiar Language, Speech or Dialect, yet have they ever concurred in
the same numbers and persons, as the Radix or ground of all Arithmetical
distinction in matters, and proper signification of their minds: as for
instance, I love, Thou love, He loves, are of the singular number, importing
but one, whether in the first, second, or third person; also, We love, Ye love,
They love, which are of the plural number, because in each is implied more then
one; which undeniable Grammatical Rule might be enough to satisfy any that
have not forgot their Accidence; for if Thou love be singular, and You love be
plural; and if Thou love signifies but one, and You love many; Is it not as
proper to say Thou love to ten men, as to say You love to one man? or why not I
love, for We love, and We love instead of I love? doubtless, it is the same,
though most improper and ridiculous.

Reason III.
Because there is not another word extant in any Language to distinguish
betwixt one and many, singular and plural.

Reason IV.
If it be improper or uncivil speech, as termed by this vain and ignorant Age;
how comes it that Roman Authors should be of such esteem in all your Schools
and Universities that use no other?

Reason V.
Is it not very absurd that Children should be whipped at School for missing Thou
for You; or as having made false Latin, if they place one number for another;
and yet that we must be (if not whipped) Clubb'd, or at least reproached and
laughed at, when we use the same propriety of speech?

Reason VI.
It is neither improper, nor uncivil, but the contrary, because used in all
Languages, Speeches and Dialects, Genesis 2. 16: chap 3. 9. Genesis 12. 19. chapter 14.
21. and chap. 20. 3. 2 King. 19. ^1. Jer. 13. 12. Hos. 1 1. chap. 6. 10. Dan.
2. 26. 27.
through all Ages; as for example, It was Gods Language when he first spoke to
Adam, called the Hebrew; also the Egyptian, Sodomitan, Garrarite, the Assyrian,
the Caldean; It was the Language of Ahasuerus, who reigned over 127 Provinces;
'twas Babilons; In a word, there is not a Book extant of all the Oriental
Tongues, that does not prove and evidence the matter: And now amongst the
Turks, Tarters, Muscovites, Indians, Persians, Italians, Greeks, Spaniards,
French, Dutch, Germans, Polonians, Swedes, Danes, Irish, Scottish, Welsh; yea,
all subdivided Dialects, (so numerous) as well as we of England, have no other
word to signify One from Two, Singular from Plural, then Thou for (but) One,
and You for (never less then) Two; by which its evident that Thou is no
upstart, nor improper, but the only fit and absolute word for to be used in all
Languages to a single person. Because otherwise all Sentences, Speeches and
Discourses may be very ambiguous, uncertain, and equivocal. If a Jury, or
Judge, pronounce a Verdict or Sentence, (three being at the Bar, upon three
differing occasions) You are guilty, and to die; or innocent, and discharged;
who knows what they mean, whether but one, or but two, or if all three; and in
all common discourse it holds the same; nor can this be avoided but by
Circumstances, and many unnecessary circumlocutions; and as the preventing of
this was doubtless the first Reason for its institution; so cannot that be
justly discussed till the Reason be first removed, which can never be whilst
two are in the world.

Reason VII.
Because it was first ascribed in way of Flattery to proud Popes and Emperors,
immitating the Heathen homage to their gods, thereby ascribing a plural honor,
as if one Pope had been made of many Gods, and one Emperor of many men; for
which reason You (only to be used to many) became first to be spoken to one.

Reason VIII.
Supposing You to be proper to a Prince, yet not to common persons; for usually
his Edict, which runs, We Will and Require, is in conjunction with his Council;
but its not customary nor proper for private Persons to write, We Will and
Require; and therefore You to such is an abuse of the word: but as Pride first
gave it birth, so has she only promoted it; for Monsieur, Sir and Madam, were
originally names only used to the King, his Brother, and their Wives, both in
France and England; yet now the Plowman in France is called a Monsieur, and his
wise a Madam; and men of ordinary Trades, in Cities of England, Howel's History
of France.
a Sir, and his wife a Dame or Mistress, so prevalent has Pride and Flattery
been in all Ages, as Howell relates in his Discourse of France.

Reason IX.
Nor can, Custom (usually brought to justify these) be of any force; for
though it may have power in some common matters, in the way of Commerce amongst
men, get can it never make that sense which in it self is not so, any more then
to make a Horse a Cow, or one Man a Thousand.

Reason X.
Because Custom precedes that Authority which gives life to any immitation (as
coming from Custom) but this preceeded Custom, therefore not warrantable to be
altered by any Authority so inferior to its own.

Reason XI.
If Thou be improper or uncivil, its to indite and accuse God himself, all the
holy Fathers and Prophets, Christ Jesus, his Apostles, the Primitive Saints,
and all Languages throughout the World; which were most impudent.

Reason XII.
It should not therefore be urged upon us, because it is a most extravagant
piece of pride and impudence in a mortal man to require or expect from his
Fellow Creature more civil expressions, or grateful terms, then he is wont to
give the Immortal God, and Great Creator, in all his worship to him; nay, but
does it not teach them to use it to one, since the contrary implies plurality
of Gods? why not then a plurallity of men? but were we not so well tified with
Arguments in our Defense; certain we are that the Spirit of God seeks not these
Respects, nor Titles, much less pleads for them, or would be wroth with any
that conscientiously refuse to give them; but that this vain Generation is
guilty in all these respects is but too palpable: What Capping, what Cringing,
what Scraping, what vain Words, most hyperbolical Expressions, gross
Flatteries, and plain Lies do men and women spend their precious time in? Ah,
my Friends! whence fetch you these Examples? what Chapter, and what Verse of
all the Writings of the holy men of God warrants these things? Is Christ your
example herein, whose Name you pretend to bear; or those Saints of old, that
had forsaken the respect of Persons, and relinquished the Customs, Fashions,
Honor and Glory of the World, which fade and pass away, Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Pet. 3. 4, 5.
whose qualifications lay not in external Gestures, Complements, etc. but in a
meek and quiet Spirit, adorned with temperance, virtue, modesty, gravity,
patience, which were tokens of true honor, and only badges of respect and
nobility in those Christian times? O no, but is it not to expose our selves
both to your contempt and fury, that we immitate them therein: And are not
Romances, Plays, Lampoons, Poets, Montebanks, Fiddlers, and such like Ruffanly
Romans 1 19. to the end. 1 Timothy 5. 6.
conversation that which most delights you? for had you the Spirit of
Christianity indeed, how could you consume your time in so many unnecessary
Visits, Plays and Pastimes; in Complements, Courtships, feigned Stories,
Flatteries, and what not, which never was the Christian way of Living, but the
pastimes, of the Heathens that knew not God? Oh, were your minds transformed,
and had you known what it were to have been born again, to take up the Cross,
and live therein, these things (which so much please the wanton sensual nature)
should find no place: This is not seeking the things that are above, to have
the heart set thus on things that are below: This is not working Col. 3. 1, 2,
3. Phil. 2. 12. Job 32. 22
out Salvation with fear and trembling: This is not crying with Elibu, I know
not to give flattering titles to men, in so doing my Maker would soon take me
away: This is not to deny that selfish part that would delight it self in
worldly Luk 9. 23.
pleasures, invented by men to gratify the lust of people; nor to forsake the
fashions of the world, which pass away, laying Mat. 10. 37. 38.
up for a more enduring Substance, and Eternal Inheritance in the Heavens,
which shall never pass away. Well, my Mar. 8. 34. Heb. 11. 14, 15, 16.
Friends, what ever you think, your Plea of Custom will find no Plea at the
Dreadful Tribunal; and this Spirit, against which we testify, shall then
appear to be what we it is.

The Testimonies of several Writers.
LUther, the grand Reformer, whose Sayings were Oracles Luther Lud. Int. oper.
with the Age he lived in, and of no less Reputation now with many, was so far
from condemning our plain Speech, that in his Ludus be sports himself with a
You to a Single Person, as a most ridiculons and impertinent Custom; viz.
Magister vos es iratus, which is just as good sense as to say, My Masters, thou
art angry, or what else you will that can be ridiculously absurd.

Erasmus, a Learned man, and then whom I know not Erasm. Colloq.
any, we may so properly defer the matter too; not only mocks so impertinent a
Speech, but bestows a whole Discourse upon its Refutation, plainly manifesting,
that its impossible to preserve Numbers, if You, the only mark for two be used
to express one, as that the original of it was Flattery; and paticularly,

In Spain, who knows not how contumelous it is among Hist. Hispan.
the manly People to speak in the plural number to a single person; whose
gravity and constancy does not a little condemn the foolish, fantastic and
inconstant humor of our pretended Reformed Country.

And Lipsius, maugre all contradiction, proves that the Lips. adver. voss.
ancient Romans always Thou Would and Thee'd their Senators and Emperors; and
further affirmed, that there was no such thing as Cap-Honour, or
Titular-Respects amongst them.

And to conclude, Howel in his History of France, gives How. Hist. of France
us an ingenious Account of its original; where he not only assures us, that
anciently the Peasant Thou Would the King, but that Pride and Flattery first put
inferiors upon paying a plural Respect to the single person of every
Superior, and Superiors upon receiving, and at the last requiring it; and
though we had not the practice of God and men, to so undeniably justify our
plain Expressions; yet since we are persuaded that its original was from a
partial Respect, and mere Flattery, we cannot in Conscience gratify them, nor
use it; and however we may be sensur'd as singular by those loose and airy
minds, that through the continual enjoyment of earthly pleasures, have lost the
weighty, solid and heavenly sense of things, yet not to us whom God Almighty
has convinced by his Eternal Spirit, of the folly and evil of such courses, and
brought into a spiritual discerning of the nature and ground of such things,
with their defenses, they appear to be fruits of Pride and Flattery, and we
dare not run into those vain compliances to earthly minds; but having been
sincerely affected with the reproofs of Instruction, and our minds brought into
a watchful subjection to the righteous Law of Jesus, we cannot conform our
selves to the Fashions of the World that pass away, knowing assuredly that for
every idle word men speak, they shall give an account in the day of Judgment.

And therefore, I would beseech all people to be cautious how they reproach us
on this occasion; but rather that they would seriously weigh in themselves,
whether it be the spirit of the World or of the Father that is so angry with
our honest, plain and harmless Thou and Thee; that so every Plant that God
himself has not planted may be rooted out.

CHAP. III.
Several sober Reasons urged against the vain Apparel and usual Recreations of
the Age (as Gold, Silver, Embroyderies, Pearls, precious Stones, Lockets,
Rings, Pendents, breaded and curled Locks, Painting, Patching, Laces, Points,
Ribonds, unnecessary change of Clothes, superfluous Provision out of state,
costly and useless Attendence, Rich Furnitures, Plays, Parts, Mulbery and
Spring-Gardens, Treats, Balls, Masks, Cards, Dice, Bowls, Chess, Romances,
Comedies, Poets, Riddles, Drollery, vain and unnecessary Visits, etc.) by which
they are proved inconsistent with a Christian life, and very destructive of all
civil society.

Reason I.
BEcause Sin brought the first Coat: if there had been no Genesis 3. 21.
sin, there had been no need of Apparel; 'twas Adam and Eve's fall, that made
them first seek a Covering; They were once naked, and knew no shame; but after
Transgression chap. 2. 15, 16, 17.
they were ashamed to be longer naked: Innocence was once the only covering,
but that being lost, Necessity put them to seek a worse; Ah blessed time, when
Purity, not Ignorance, freed them from such shifts! Since therefore sin brought
shame, and shame stood first in need of covering, how impudently shameless are
those, who pride and please themselves in the (...) first Institution is grossly
perverted; the utmost service that Clothes originally were designed for, when
sin had stripped them of their native Innocence and great simplicity, was to
cover their shame; therefore plain and modest: next, to fence out cold,
therefore substantial: Lastly, to differ. Sexes, and therefore distinguishing;
so that then mere necessity provoked to Clothing, now pride and vain
curiosity: In former times some benefit obliged, but now wantonness and
pleasure: they minded them for covering, but now that is the least part; their
greedy eyes must be provided with gaudy superfluities, as if they made their
clothes for triming; and as the less serviceable part, only for the sake of
other curiosities that must be tacked upon them, although they neither cover
shame, fence from cold, nor distinguish sexes; but signally display their
wanton, fantastic, full-fed, minds. Then the best of Recreations was to serve
God, be just, follow their vocations, mind their flocks, do good, exercise
their bodies in such practices as might be suitable to gravity, temperance, and
virtue; which now is extended to almost every folly that carries any mark below
open and scandalous filth (detested of the very Actors when they have done it)
so much are men degenerated from Adam in his disobedience; so much more
confident and artificial are they grown in all Impieties; yea, their minds
through custom are become so very insensible of the inconvenience that attends
the like follies, that what was once mere necessity, a badge of shame, at best,
but a mere remedy; is now the delight, pleasure, and recreation of the Age: How
ignoble is it, how ignominious, and unworthy of a reasonable Creature? That
which is endued with understanding sit to contemplate immortality, and made an
associate for God and Angels, should mind a little dust, a few shameful rags,
inventions of mere folly; toys so apish and fantastic, entertainments, so
dull and earthy, that a Rattle, a Baby, a Hobbyhorse, a Top, are by no means
so foolish in a simple Child, nor unworthy his thoughts; as that the like
inventions should exercise the noble mind of man and Image of the great Creator
of Heaven and Earth: This the very Heathens of old had so clear a prospect of,
that they detested all such foolery; looking upon curiosity of Apparel, and
that variety of Recreations now in voge and estimation with Christians, to be
destructive of all good; as what more easily stole away the minds of People,
into wantonness, idleness, effeminacy; and made them only companions for the
Beast that perishes; witness those famous men, Socrates, Plato, Aristides,
Cato, Epictetus, etc. who placed true honor, and satisfaction in nothing below
Virtue and Immortality: Nay, such are the remains of Innocence amongst some
Moors and Indians to our times, that they not only Traffic in a naked
posture; but if a stranger called a Christian, fling out a filthy word, it is
customary with them, by way of Moral, to bring him water to purge his mouth;
how much do the like virtuous and reasonable Instances accuse the People called
Christians, of gross folly and intemperance? O that Men and Women would once
be so charitable to themselves, as to remember whence they came, what they are
doing, and to what they must return; that more noble, more virtuous, more
rational, and heavenly things, may be the matters of their pleasure and
satisfaction; that they would once be persuaded to believe, how inconsistant
the folly, vanity, and conversation they are mostly exercised in, really are
with the true Nobility of a reasonable Soul; and let that just Principle which
taught the Heathens, teach them, lest it be found more tolerable for Heathens,
than such Christians, in the day of account; For if their ruder notions, and
more imperfect sense of things, could yet discover so much vanity; if their
Light condemned it, and they in obedience thereunto, disused it, it behooves
Christians much more: Christ came not to extinguish, no, but to improve that
Knowledge; and they who think they need do less now than before, had need to
act better than they think. -- We therefore hence conclude, That the fashions
and recreations now in repute are very abusive of their first Institution, if
ever they had any; and that the inconveniences that have attended them, as
wantonness, idleness, pride, lust, respect of persons, (witness a Plume of
Feathers, or a lace Coat in a Countrey-Village, nay, almost any where; what
sirring? what scraping? what bowing? though perhaps he be a High-way-man,
rotten in body, and soul too) with the rest of the like fruits, are
inconsistent with the Duty, Reason, and true Satisfaction of men; and
absolutely destructive of Wisdom, Knowledge, Manhood, Temperance, Industry, and
whatsoever may render men truly noble, and truly good, as will more largely be
discoursed in its place.

Reas. 3.
These things which have been hitherto condemned, have never been the
conversation nor practice of the Holy Men and Women of old times, whom the
Scriptures recommend for Holy Examples, worthy of imitation. Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, were plain men, and Princes, as Grasiers are over their families,
and their flocks; they were not sollicitous of the vanities so much lived in by
the People of this Genesis 12. 1. 5.
Generation; for in all things they pleased God by Faith: the first forsock his
Fathers house, Kindred, and Country; A true Type or Figure of that Self-denial
all must know that would have Abraham to their Father: They must not think to
live in those pleasures, fashions, and customs they are called to leave; no,
but on the contrary, part with all, in hopes of the recompense of Reward, and
that better Country which is eternal in the Heavens. The Prophets were
generally poor Mechanics; Amos 7. 14, 15.
one a Shepherd, another a Herdsman, etc. they often cried out upon the
full-fed wanton Isruelites, to repent, to fear and dread the Living God, to
forsake the sins and vanities they lived in; but never imitated them. John
Baptist, the Messenger of the Lord, who was sanctified in his Mothers Luke 1.
15. Mat. ^. 1, 2, 3, 4.
womb, Preached his Embassy to the World, in a Coat of Camels hair, a rough
and homely garment; nor can it be conceived that Jesus Christ himself was much
better Apparelled, who was a man of poor Friends, and of great plainness,
insomuch that it was usual in a way of derision to say, Is not this Jesus the
Son of Joseph, a Carpenter? And this Jesus Mat. 13. 55.
tells his followers, That as for soft Raiment, gorgious Apparel, and
Delicacies, they were for Kings Courts; implying, That Mark. 6. 3. Luke 7. 25.
He and his followers were not to mind those things; but seems plainly thereby
to express the great difference that is betwixt the lovers of the fashions and
customs of the world, and those whom he has chosen out of it. And he not only
came in that mean and despicable manner himself, thereby to stain the pride of
flesh, but therein to become exemplary to his followers, of what a self-denying
life they must lead if they would be true Disciples: Nay, he further leaves it
with them in a Parable, that it might make the deeper impression, to the end
that they might see how inconsistent the pompous worldly-pleasing life is, with
the Kingdom he came to establish and call men to the possession of; And that is
the remarkable story of Dives, who is represented (1) As a Rich man, next Luke
16. 19. to the end.
a Voluptuous man, in his rich Apparel, his many Dishes, and his Packs of
Dogs: And lastly, An uncharitable man; or one who was too much concerned how
to please the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of Life,
and to fare sumptuously every day, ever to take compassion of poor Lazarus at
his Gate; no, his Dogs were more pitiful, and kind than he: But the doom of
this Jolly man, this great Dives, we read to be everlasting torments; and that
of Lazarus, eternal joy with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God.
In short, Lazarus was a good man, the other a great man; the one poor and
temperate, the other rich and voluptuous: too many of them are alive; 'Twere
well if his doom might awaken them to Repentance. Nor were the Apostles the
immediate Messengers of the Lord Jesus Christ, other then poor men, one a
Fisherman, another a Mat. 4. 18. Mat. 9. 9. Acts 18. 1, 2, 3.
Tent-maker, and he that was of the greatest (though not the honestest)
employment, was a Customer (perhaps some Waiter or the like) therefore its very
unlikely that any of them were followers of the fashions of the world; nay,
they were so far from it, that, as became the followers of Christ, they lived
poor, afflicted self-denying lives, bidding the Churches to walk Joh. 13. 15. 1
Cor. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Phil. 3. 17, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Jam. 19. 10. 1 Pet.
3, 4, 5.
as they had them for examples; and to shut up this particular, they give this
pathetical account of the Holy Women in former times, as an inducement for all
to do the same: namely, That first they did abstain from Gold, Silver, breaded
Hair, fine Apparel, or such like; and next, that their Adornment was a week and
quiet Spirit, and the hidden man of the heart, which are of great price with
the Lord: Affirming, That such as live in pleasure, are dead whilst they live;
for that the Cares and Pleasures 1 Timothy 5. 6. Luke 8. 14.
of this life, choke and destroy the seed of the Kingdom, and quite hinder all
progress in the hidden and divine life. So that we find the Holy men and Women
of former times were not accustomed to these pleasures, and vain recreations;
but having their minds set on things above, sought another Kingdom, which
consists in Righteousness, peace; and joy in the Holy Heb. 11. 2, 14, 15, 16.
Chap. 4. 9. Rev. 14. 13.
Spirit; who having obtained a good report, are entered into their eternal
rest: therefore their Works follow, and praise them in the Gates.

Reas. 4.
Next, That both such Apparel and Pleasures are not only with severity
reprehended in Scriptures, but are contrary to positive Injunctions and
Precepts. It was the ground of that lamentable Message by the Prophet Isaiah,
to the People of Israel; Moreover, the Lord said, Because the Daughters of Isa.
3. 16. to the end.
Zion are haughty, and walk with stretehed-forth necks, and wanton eyes,
walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet;
therefore the Lord will smite with a scab, the crown of the head of the
Daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts; in that day
the Lord will take away the The very practice and garb, and mean, and vanity of
this Age, being as liable to the Wrath of God.
bravery of their tinckling Ornaments, and their Cauls (or Networks in the
Hebrew) and their round Tyres like the Moon; the Chains, and the Bracelets, and
the spangled Ornaments; the Bonnets, and the ornaments of the Legs, and the
Head-bands, and the Tablets, and the Earrings; the Rings, and Nose-Jewels; the
changeable suits of Apparel, and the Mantles, and the Whimples, and the
Crisping Pins; the Glasses, and the fine Linen, and the Hoods, and the Vails:
And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smells, there shall be a
stinck; and instead of a Girdle, a Rent; and instead of well-set Hair,
Baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a girding of Sackcloth, and Burning
instead of Beauty: Thy men shall fall by the Sword, and thy mighty in the War;
And her Gates shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate, shall sit upon
the ground. Behold! O vain and foolish Inhabitants of England, your folly and
your doom: You Exchange-mongers, who live by the like vanities; is not the like
your trade, your profit, your practice, and your pleasure? yet read the Prophet
Ezekiel's vision of miserable Tire, what punishment her pride and pleasures
brought upon her; Ezekiel. 27. the whole chap.
And amongst many other circumstances, these are some, These were thy Merchants
in all sorts of things; In blue Clothes, and broydered Work, and in Chests of
rich Apparel, Emeraulds, Purple, fine Linen, Coral, and Agate, Spices, with
all precious Stones and Gold; Horses, Chariots, etc. for which hear part of her
doom; Thy Riches, and thy Fairs, thy Merchandise, and all thy Company which is
in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the Sea, in the day of thy
ruin; and the Inhabitants of the Isles shall be astonished at thee, and their
Merchants shall hiss at thee, thou shall be a terror, and shall be no more.

Thus has God declared his displeasure against the Curiosity and vain Customs
of this wanton World: Yet further the Prophet Zephaniah goes; for thus he
speaks, And it shall come Zeph. 1. 8.
to pass, in the day of the Lord's Sacrifice, That I will punish the Princes,
and the King's Children, and all such as are clothed with strange Apparel. Of
how evil Consequence was it in those times, for the greatest men to give
themselves the liberty of following the vain Customs of other Nations; or
offering to change the usual End of Clothes or Apparel, to gratify foolish
Curiosity; who went to place a Satisfaction in that which did not deserve their
Care; and to make a mere Necessity matter of Pleasure, that rather should put
in mind of shame.

This did the Lord Jesus Christ expressly charge his Disciples not to be careful
about; intimating that such as were, could not be his Disciples; for says he,
Take no care what Mat. 6. 31, 32, 33.
you should eat, nor what you should drink, neither wherewithal shall you be
clothed, (for after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your Heavenly
Father knows that you have need of all these things; but seek ye first the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you: Under which of Eating, and Drinking, and Apparel, he comprehends all
External matters whatsoever; and so much appears as well because that they are
opposed to the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, which are invisible and
Heavenly things; as that those very matters he injoyns them not to be careful
about, are the most necessary, and the most innocent; if then in such cases,
the minds of his Disciples are not to be solicitous, much less in foolish,
superfluous, idle inventions, to gratify the carnal appetites, and minds of
men; so certain it is, that those who live therein are none of his followers,
but Luke 12. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
the Gentiles; and as he elsewhere says, the Nations of the World, who know
not God. If now then the distinguishing meant between the Disciples of Jesus,
and those of the World, is, That one minds the things of Heaven, and God's
Kingdom that stands in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; Romans
14. 17.
being not careful of External matters (even the most Innocent and Necessary.)
And that the others, mind Eating, Drinking, Apparel, and the Affairs of the
World, with the Lusts, Pleasures, Profits, Honors, and the like; be you
entreated for your Souls sake, O Inhabitants of England, to be serious; to
reflect a while upon your selves; what care and cost are you at, of time and
money, about foolish, nay vicious things, so far are you degenerated from the
primitive Christian life: What buying and selling, what dealing and chaffering,
what writing and posting, what toil and labor, what noise, hurry, bustle, and
confusion; what study, what little conspiracys and over-reachings, what eating,
drinking, vanity of Apparel, most ridiculous Recreations; in short, what rising
early, going to bed late, expense of precious time is there about things that
perish? View the Streets, Shops, Exchanges, Plays, Parks, Taverns, Alehouses,
etc. and is not the World, this fading World, writ upon every face? Say not
within your selves, How otherwise should men live, and the World subsist? (the
common, though impertinent objection) there is enough for all, let some content
themselves with less; a few things plain and decent, serve to a Christian life:
It Is Lust, Pride, Avarice, that thrust men upon such folly; had God's Kingdom
the exercise of their minds, these perishing entertainments should have but
little of their time, or thoughts.

This Self-denying Doctrine, was confirmed, and enforced by the Apostles in
their Example, as we have already shown; and in their Precepts too, as we shall
yet evince in those two most remarkable passages of Paul and Peter, where they
not only tell us what should be done, but also interpret what should be denied
and avoided. In like manner I will that 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10.
Women Adorn themselves in modest Apparel; (what is that?) with shamefastness
and sobriety; not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array,
(then these are immodest) but (which becomes Women professing godliness) with
good works; absolutely implying, that those who Attire themselves with Gold,
Silver, broidered Hair, Pearls, costly Array, or the like, cannot be the Women
professing godliness; making those very things to be contrary to modesty, and
what is good; and consequently that they are evil, and unbecoming Women
professing Godliness. To which Peter joins another Precept, after the like
sort; viz. Whose Adorning, let it not be that outward Adorning, of plaiting the
Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on Apparel; 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5.
(what then?) but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price; and as an inducement, he adds, For after this
manner, in the old time, the Holy Women, who so trusted in God, Adorned
themselves; which does not only intimate, that both Holy Women were so Adorned,
and that it behooves such as would be Holy, and trust in the Holy God to be so
Adorned; but also that they who used those forbidden Ornaments, were the Women
and People in all Ages, that (for all their talk) were not Holy, nor did trust
in God: They so far are such from trusting in God, that the Apostle Paul
expressly says, That they who live in pleasures, are 1 Timothy 15. 6. Jam. 5. 5,
6. Ephesians. 4. 22. Phil. 3. 20. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 13. 13, 14. Ephesians. 5. 2.
3. Ephesians. 4. 29.
dead (to God) whilst they live. And says James, They that live want only on
Earth, slay the Just: They farther enjoined, That Christians should have their
Conversation in Heaven, and their minds fixed on things above; walk honestly as
in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambring and Wantonness,
not in Envy and Strife; let not Fornication Uncleanness, or Covetousness be
once named amongst you; neither Filthiness, nor foolish talking or jesting,
which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks; And let no corrupt
Communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good, to the use of
edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the Hearers: But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the desire Romans
13. 14.
thereof. And, grieve not the Holy Spirit; (intimating such Ephesians. 4. 30. Ephesians.
15. 1. 1. 15, 16.
Conversation does) but be ye followers of God as dear Children; walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise; redeeming the time because the days
are evil. Measure your selves hereby, O you Inhabitants of the Land, who think
your selves wronged if not accounted Christians; see what proportion your Life
and Spirit bear with these most Holy and Self-denying Precepts and Examples.
Well, my Friends, my Soul mourns for you; I have been with you, and among you;
your Life and Pastime are not strangers to my Observation; and with Compassion,
yea, unexpressible pity I bewail your folly; O that you would be wise! O that
the just Principle in your selves were heard! O that Eternity had time to plead
a little with you! Why should your Beds, your Glasses, your Clothes, your
Loves, your Plays, your Parks, your Treats, your Recreations, (poor perishing
toys) have all your Souls, your Time, your Care, your Purss, and
Consideration? Be ye admonished, I beseech you in the Name of the Living God,
by one that some of you know has had his share, and consequently time, to know
how little the like vanities conduce to true and sollid happiness; No, my
Friends, God Almighty knows (and would God you would believe and follow me)
they end in shame and sorrow. Faithful is that most Holy One, who has
determined, That Gal. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 2. 5, 6, 8, 9.
every Man and Woman shall reap, what they sow; and will not trouble, anguish,
and disappointment, be a sad and dreadful Harvest for you to reap, for all your
misspent time about superfluities, and vain recreations? Retire then, grieve not
the Holy Spirit in your selves; Redeem precious abused time; frequent such
Conversation as manifest the same: So shall you follow the Examples, and keep
the Precepts of Jesus Christ, and all his followers. For hitherto, we have
plainly demonstrated that no such way of Living, as is in request amongst you
of the Land, ever was, or can be truly Christian.

Reas. 5.
Because the best of Recreations is to do good, and all Christian customs
should be to act with temperance, and for Phil. 3. 20.
some good and beneficial end; which more or less may be in every Action; at
least no such evil Consequences to attend; 1 Pet. 1. 15. Heb. 10. 2, 15. 1
Pet. 4. 9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 6. 4. to 11. Mat. 25. 36, 37. Phil. 2. 4. Chap. 4. 8.
as for instance, If Men and Women would be diligent to follow their respective
Callings, frequent the Assemblies of Religious People, visit sober Neighbors to
be edified, and wicked ones to reform them; to be careful in the Tuition of
their Children, exemplary to their Servants, relieve the Necessitous, see the
Sick, administer to their distempers, and indispositions, endeavor Peace
amongst their Neighbors; Also to study moderately such commendable and
profitable Arts, as Navigation, Arithmetic, Geometry, Husbandry, Medicine; to
read the best reputed Histories of ancient times; to Spin, Sow, Knit, Weave,
Garden, or the like House-wife and honest Employments (the practice of the
greatest and noblest Matrons and Youth among the very Heathens;) helping
others, who for want, are unable to keep Servants to ease them in their
necessary affairs; often, and private retirements Genesis 5. 24. Psalm. 1. 2. 63.
6. 119. 15. 23. 48. 143. 15.
from all Worldly Enjoyments; secret, and steady Meditations on the Divine
Life, and Heavenly Inheritance; which to leave undone, and prosecute other
things under the notion of Pleasures, is accursed Lust, and damnable Impiety:
Besides, it is most vain in any to object, That they cannot do these always,
and therefore why may not they use these common diversions? For I ask, What
would such be at? what would they do? and, what would they have? They that have
Trades, have not time enough to do the half of what has been recommended; And
as for those who have nothing to do, [and indeed do nothing (which is worse)
but sin, which is worst of all] here is variety of pleasant, of profitable,
nay, of very honorable Employments, and Diversions for them: Such can with
great delight sit at a Play, a Ball, a Masque, at Amos 6. 3, to 8.
Cards, Dice, Check, Drinking, Revelling, Feasting, and the like, an entire
day; yes, turn night into day, and invert the very Order of the Creation to
their Lusts, and were it not for Eating and Sleeping, it would be past a doubt,
whether they would ever find a time to cease from those vain, and sinful
Eccles. 11. 3
pastimes, till the hasty Calls of Death, should summon their Appearance in
another World; yet do they think it intolerable, and not possible for any to
sit so long at a profitable, or Heavenly Exercise: But how do these think to
pass their vast Eternity away? For as the Tree falls, so it lies: Let none
deceive Eccles. 11. 3.
themselves, nor mock their immortal Souls, with a pleasant, but most false,
and pernicious dream, that they shall be changed by an irresistible and
gainsaying Power, just when their Souls take farewell of their Bodies; No, no,
my Friends, What you have Sown, that shall you Reap; if Vanity, Folly, Gal. 6.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Ephesians. 5. 4, 5.
visible Delights, fading Pleasures, no better shall you ever reap than
Corruptions, Sorrow, and the woeful Anguish of Eternal Disappointments: But
alas! what is the reason that the Cry is so common, must we always dote on
these things? Why, most certainly it is this, because they know not what is the
Joy, and Peace, of always speaking, and acting as in Phil. 4. 6, 7. Ephesians. 4.
18, 19, 20. Mat. 13. 8, 9. Romans 10. 2.
the presence of the most Holy God; they pass such vain understandings, darkened
with the glories and pleasures of the Godd of this World, whose Religion is so
many mumbled, or ignorantly-devout-said Words, as they teach Parrats; for if
they were of those whose heart are set on things above, and whose treasure was
in Heaven, there would their minds inhabit; and their pleasure constantly be;
and such who call that a burden, and seek to be refreshed by other visible
Delights, a Play, a Morrice-dance, a Punchanello, a Ball, a Masque, Cards,
Dice, or the like; I boldly affirm, not only never knew the Divine Excellency
of God, and Truth, but therein declare themselves most unfit for them in
another World; for how possibly can they be delighted to an Eternity of years
and Ages, with that Satisfaction which is so tedious and irksome for so
trifling a time as thirty or forty years? as that for a supply of Recreation to
their minds, the little toys and fopperies of this perishing World must be
brought into practice, and request; Surely those who are to reckon for every
idle word, must not use Sports to pass away that time, which Mat. 12. 36. Ephesians.
5. 15, 16.
they are commanded diligently to Redeem, considering no less work is to be
done then making their Calling and Election sure; nor study Recreations to
their vain minds, and spend the greatest part of Days, and Months, and Years
Phil. 3. 14, 15. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Col. 4. 5.
therein, not allowing a quarter of that time toward the great concernment of
their Lives and Souls, for which that time was given them; there is but little
need to drive away that by foolish divertisements, which flies away so swiftly
of its self; and when once gone, is never to be recalled; Plays, Parks, Balls,
Treats, Romances, Love Sonnets, and the like, will be a very invallid Plea for
any other purpose than their Condemnation (who are taken, and delighted with
them) at the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment: O my Friends, These never
were invented, nor employed, but by that mind which had first lost the Joy, and
ravishing Delights of God's Holy Presence; so that we conclude, First, That of
those many excelent employments already mentioned, as worthy 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5, 6,
7, to the 17.
to dispossess such minds as are inclined to the vanities of their other
recreations, there is store enough of time, not only to take up their spare
hours, but double so much, and that with great delight, diversion, and profit,
both to themselves and others, (were they but once weaned from vain and
fruitless fopperies, and did they but consider how great the Satisfaction, and
how certain the Rewards are which attend this, and the other Life, for such
universal Benefits, and virtuous Examples.) The second conclusion is, That my
Reason can be displeasing, nor the banishing these vanities from their doting
minds, ungrateful to none but such as know not what it is to walk with God, to
prepare for an eternal Mansion, to have the mind exercised on Heavenly, and
good things, to follow the examples of the Holy Men and Women of former happy
Ages, that know not Christ's Doctrine, Life, Death, Resurrection, but only have
their minds fastened to the flesh, and by the objects of it are allured,
deceived, and miserably ruined; and that lastly despise Heaven, and the Joys
that are not seen (though Eternal) for a few perishing trifles that they do
see, though they are determined to pass away; How Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1
Cor. 12. 13 Gal. 3. 27. Col. 2. 12, 13. Ephesians. 3: 12, 13.
these are baptized with Christ into his Holy Life, cruel Sufferings, shameful
Death, and raised with him to Immortal Desires, Heavenly Meditations, a Divine
new Life, that should be daily (not babbling formal words) but growing in the
knowledge of Heavenly Mysteries, and all Holiness, even unto the measure of the
stature of Jesus Christ, the great Example of all: How, I say, these resemble
such most necessary Christian qualifications, and what share they have therein,
let the just Principle in their own Consciences (if not quite smothered)
declare.

Reas. 6.
Next, Such Attires and Pastimes, do not only show the exceeding worldliness of
Peoples inclinations, and their very great ignorance of the Divine Joys, but
by imitating these fashions, and frequenting these places, and diversions, not
only much good is omitted, but a certain door is opened Job. 31. 15, 16.
for much evil to be committed; as first, Precious time (that were worth a
world in a dying bed) is lost; Money, that might be employed for some general
good, vainly expended; Pleasure is taken in mere shame; Lusts are gratified;
the Minds of People alienated from Heavenly things, and exercised about mere
folly; Pride taken in clothes, first given to cover nakedness, whereby the
Creature is neglected, and the Noble Creation of God disregarded, and men
become acceptable, by their Trims and the A-la-mode-ness of their Dress, and
Apparel; from whence respect to Persons so naturally does arise, that to deny
it, is to affirm the Sun shines not at noon day; nothing being more notorious,
than the Cringing, Scraping, Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Sirring, and Madoming of Persons, according to the gaudiness of their Attire;
which is most detestable to God, and so absolutely forbidden in the Scriptures,
that to do it, is to incur the breach of the whole Law, and consequently the
punishment thereof. Next, What great holes do the like practices make in men's
Estates? how are their vocations neglected? young Women deluded? the
Marriage Bed invaded? Contentions, and Family Animosities begotten? partings of
Man and Wife? dis-inheriting of Children? dismissing of Servants? On the other
hand, Servants made slaves, Children disregarded, Wives despised, and
shamefully abused through the intemperance of their Husbands, which either puts
them upon the same extravigance; or laying such cruel injustice to heart, pine
away all their days in grief and misery; But above all those wretched
Inventions, the Playhouses, like so many hellish Seminaries, are the most
perniciously conducing to these sad and miserable ends; where little Psalm. 4.
2. 12. 2.
beside frothy, wanton, if not directly obscene and profane humors are
represented, which are of notorious ill consequence in the minds of most
(especially the youth) that frequent them. Next, idle, deboyst, and impiously
unclean Stagers are encouraged, and maintained (then which scarcely a greater
abomination can be thought on, of that rank of Impieties, as will anon
particularly be shown, and that nothing but the great pleasure People take
therein, could blind their eyes from seeing.) And lastly, the grand
indisposition of mind to solid, serious, and heavenly employments, by the
almost continual, as well as seemingly pleasant rumination Job. 35. 13.
of those various adventures they had lately been entertained with, which in
the more youthful, can never hit amiss to inflame, and animate their boiling
and aerie Constitutions; and in the rest of the common Recreations of Balls,
Masks, Eccles. 2. 1, 2.
Treats, Cards, Dice, Check, etc. there are the like opportunities to promote
the like evils. And yet farther too; how many disorders, quarrels, Animosities,
nay, Murder it self, as well as expense of Estates, and precious time, have
been the immediate consequences of the like Recreations and Practices? In
short, These were the ways of the Gentiles that Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25.
knew not God, but never the practice of them that feared him; nay, the more
Noble amongst the Heathens themselves, namely, Anaxagoras, Socrates, Plato,
Antisthines, Aristides, Cato, Tully, Epictetus, Seneca, etc. have left their
disgust to the like vanities upon Record, as odious, and destructive, not only
of the honor of the Immortal God, but of all good Order and Government, as
leading into looseness, idleness, ignorance, and effeminacy, the grand Cankers,
and bane of all States and Empires: But such is the Latudinarian impudence of
this Age, that they Canonize themselves for Saints, if not guilty of every
Newgatefilth, and kennel-impiety, and so the pretended innocence of these
things steals away their minds into the use of them, and their great delight in
them; nay, it gives them confidence to plead for them, and by no means will
they think the contrary: but why? because it is a liberty that feeds the flesh,
and gratifies the lustful eye, and palate of poor Mortality, wherefore they
think it a laudable condition to be in equality to the Beast, that eats, and
drinks but what his nature does require, [although the number's very small of
such] so very exorbitant are men and women, in this present Age: for either
they do believe their Actions depend upon their own will, so as that they may
do what they please, without accounting for it; or else at best, that not to be
stained with the vilest wickedness, is matter of great boasting [and indeed it
is so in a time when nothing is too wicked to be done] But certainly it is a
sign of great and universal Impiety in a Land, when not to be guilty of sins,
the very Heathen loath, is to be virtuous; yes, and Christian too, and that to
no small degree of Reputation; Nay, but is it not to be greatly blinded, that
those we call Infidels, should detest those practices as infamous, which People
that call themselves Christians cannot, or will not see to be such, but guild
them over with the fair Titles of Ornament, Decency, Recreation, and the like?
Well, my Friends, if there were no God, no Heaven, no Hell, no holy Examples,
no Jesus Christ, in Cross, Doct ine, Death, and Resurrection to be conformed
unto, yet would Charity to the Poor, Help to the Needy, Peace amongst Phil. 4.
6, 7, 8, 9. Job 24. 12. Psa. 103. 22. Prove. 18. 14 Psalm. 51. 17. Mat. 5. 4.
Luke 6. 25. Romans 2. 7. Psalm. 40. 8. Prove. 13. 21. Romans 7. 22. Heb. 11. 13, 14,
15, 16.
Neighbors, Visits to the Sick, Care of the Widow and Fatherless, with the
rest of those Temporal good Offices, already repeated, be a nobler Employment,
and much more necessary, as well as worthy of your diligence, and pains: Nor
indeed is it to be conceived, that the way to Glory, is enclosed and smoothed
with such variety of carnal Pleasures; no, alas! Conviction, a wounded Spirit,
a broken Heart, a regenerated Mind, in a word, Immortality would then prove as
mere fictions as some make them, and others therefore think them, if the like
practices are not for ever to be extinguished, and expelled all Christian
society; for I affirm, That to one who internally knows God, and has a sense
of his blessed Presence, all such Recreations are death; yea, more dangerously
evil, and more apt to steal away the mind from its Heavenly exercise than
grosser Impieties; for they are so big, they are plainly seen; so dirty Romans 1.
25, 26, 27, to 33.
they are easily detested, which Education, and common Temperance, as well as
Constitution in many, teach them to abhor; and if they should be committed,
they carry with them a Ephesians. 13. 12 Job 1. 4.
proportionable conviction: but these pretended Innocents, these supposed
harmeless Satisfactions are more surprising, more fatal, more destructive; for
as they easily gain and admission Mat. 27. 38, 39.
of their senses, so the more they pretend to Innocence, the more do they
secure the minds of People in the common use of them, till they become so
insensible of their evil Consequences, that with a mighty confidence they can
plead for them.

But, as this is plainly not to deny themselves, but on the contrary, to employ
these vain Inventions of carnal Men and 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17.
Women, to gratify the desire of the Eye, the desire of the Flesh, and the
pride of Life; all which, exercise the mind below the divine and only true
Pleasure, (or else tell me what do.) So, Be it known to such, That the Heavenly
Life, and Christian Joys are of another kind, (as has already been expressed)
nay, that the true Disciples of the Lord Christ must be hereunto crucified, as
to Objects and Enjoyments that attract downwards, and that their affections
should be so raised to a more sublime and spiritual Conversation, as to use
this World, even in its most innocent enjoyments, as if they used it not; but
if they take pleasure in any thing below, it shall be in some of those good
Offices beforementioned, whereby a benefit may redound in some respect, in
which God is honored Job. 36. 7. Psalm. 5. 12. Psalm. 37. 25, 29. Prove. 10. 7.
Mar. 14. 9. Psa. 16. 10.
over all visible things, the Nition relieved, the Government bettered,
themselves rendered exemplary of good, and thereby justly entitled to present
Happiness, a sweet Memorial with Posterity, and to a seat at his Right hand,
where there are Joys and Pleasures for ever; than which, there can be nothing
more honorable, nothing more certain, world without end.

Reas. 7.
There should be no vanity of Apparel, nor Recreations, common Luke 16. 13.
Joh. 15. 17, 18, 19. Chapter 16. 20. Chapter 17. 15, 16, 17.
amongst those who would be Christians indeed, because both that which invented
them, delights to have them, and pleads so strongly for them, is inconsistent
with the true Spirit of Christianity; nor does the very nature of the Christian
Religion admit 2 Pet. 3. 11.
of these things.

For therefore was it that Immortality and Eternal Life was thereby brought to
light, that Mortality, and all the pleasures Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27.
of it, in which the world lives, might be forgone, and relinquished; and for
that reason it is that nothing less than immense Rewards, and eternal Mansions
are promised, but that Men and Women, might therefore be encouraged willingly
Romans 8. 18. 2 Timothy 3. 11, 12. Heb. 12. 1, 2. Mat. 10. 37.
to forsake the vanity, and fleshly satisfactions of the World, and encounter
with boldness the shame and sufferings they must expect to receive at the hand
of (it may be) their nearest, and otherwise dearest Intimates, and Relations.

For if the Christian Religion had admitted the Possession of this World in any
other sense, than the simple and naked use of those Creatures really given of
God for the necessity and convenience of the whole Creation; for instance, Did
it allow all that Pride, Vanity, Curiosity, Pomp, Exchange of Apparel, Honors,
Preferments, Fashions, and the Customary Recreations, with what ever may
delight and gratify their senses; Then, what need of a daily Cross? a
self-denying Life? working Mat. 16. 24. Luke 9. 23. Phil. 2. 12. Col. 3. 1, 2.
Ephesians. 5. 4, 5. Neh. 13. 9. Psalm. 112. 1. Psalm. 28. 14. Psa. 119. 97. Luke 18.
23. Heb. 11. 36. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Heb. 10. 33. Chapter 12. 37, 38.
out Salvation with fear and trembling? seeking the things that are above?
having the Treasure, and heart in Heaven? No idle talking, no vain jesting, but
fearing, and meditating all the day long, undergoing all reproach, scorn, hard
usage, bitter mockings, and cruel deaths? What need these things? and why
should they be expected in order to that glorious Immortality, and eternal
Crown? if the Vanity, Pride, Expense, Idleness, Concupiscence, Envy, Malice,
and whole manner of living among the called Christians, were allowed? No,
certainly, but as the Lord Jesus Christ well knew in what foolish trifles, and
vain pleasures (as well as grosser impieties) the minds of Men and Women were
fixed, and how much they were degenerated from the Heavenly principle of Life,
into a coverous seeking after the enjoyments of this perishing World, (nay,
inventing daily new ones, to gratify their Lusts) so did he not less foresee
the difficulty that all would have to relinquish, and forsake them, at his
call; and with what great unwillingness they would take their leave, and be
weaned from them; wherefore as inducements thereunto, he did not speak unto
them in the Language of the Law, as that they should have an Earthly Canaan,
great Dignities, a numerous Issue, a long Life, and the like; no, rather the
contrary (at least to take these things as they should fall) but he speaks to
them in a higher strain, namely, That he assures Luke 6. 20. Chapter 12. 32. Chapter
22. 29. Col. 1. 13. 1 These. 2. Heb. 12. 28. Jam. 2. 5. Joh. 15. 14, 15. Romans 8.
17. Heb. 2. 11. Heb. 12. 2, 13. Chapter 11. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 21. Luke 12. 29, 30, 31. 1 Timothy 5. 6. Mat. 19. 27, 28, 29. Luke 6. 22. Joh. 15. 20. Mat. 7. 8, 9, 10. Luke
12. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Mat. 6. 19, 20. Mat. 6. 31, 32, 33. 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11.
them of a Kingdom, and a Crown that are Immortal, that neither Time, Cruelty,
Death, Grave, nor Hell, with all its instruments, shall ever be able to
disappoint, or take away from those who should believe, and obey him; further,
That they should be taken into that near Aliance of loving Friends, yea, the
intimate divine Relation of dear Brethren, and Coheirs with him of all
Celestial Happiness, and glorious Immortality; wherefore, if it be recorded,
That those who heard not Moses, were to die, much more they who refuse to hear,
and obey, the Precepts of this great and Eternal Rewarder of All that
diligently seek and follow him.

And therefore it was that he was pleased to give us, in his own Example, a
taste of what his Disciples must expect to drink more deeply of; namely, The Cup
of Self-denial, cruel Trials, and most bitter Afflictions: He came not to
Consecrate a way to the Eternal Rest, through Gold and Silver, Ribbons, Laces,
Points, Perfumes, costly Clothes, curious Trim's, exact Dresses, rich Jewels,
pleasant Recreations, Play's, Parks, Treats, Balls, Masks, Revels, Romances,
Love-songs, flattering Sonnets, and the like Pastime of the World: No, no,
alas! but by forsaking all such kind of entertainments; yea, and sometimes more
lawful enjoyments too, and cheerfully undergoing the loss of all on the one
hand, and the Reproach, Ignominy, and the most hateful Persecutions from
ungodly men on the other; alas he needed never to have wanted such variety of
worldly Pleasures, had they been suitable to the work he came to do; for he was
tempted (as are his followers) with no less bait than all the Gloryes of the
World (however Satan ly'd, in saying they were his to give:) but he that
Commanded his followers to seek another Country, and to lay up Treasure in the
Heavens, and therefore charged them never to be much inquisitive about what
they should Eat, Drink, or put on; because, says he, after these things the
Gentiles (that know not God) do seek; (and Christians that pretend to know Mark
8. 31. to 39.
him too) but having Food and Raiment, therewith to be content: He, I say, that
enjoined this Doctrine, and led that Holy and Heavenly Example, even the Lord
Jesus Christ, bid them that would be his Disciples, to take up the same Cross,
and to follow Him.

Wherefore who will be true Christians, must not think to steer another Course,
nor to drink of another Cup then has the Captain of their Salvation done
before them; no, for it is Heb. 2. 10.
the very question he asked James, and John, the Sons of Zebedee of old, when
they desired to sit at his right, and left hand, in his Kingdom, Can you first
drink of the Cup I am to drink of? and be baptized with the Baptism I am to be
baptized withal? otherwise no Disciples, no Christians. Whoever they are, that
would come to Christ, and be a right Christian, must readily abandon every
delight, that would steal away the affections of the mind, and exercise it,
from the Divine Principle of Life, and freely write a Bill of Divorce for every
beloved vanity (for all under the Sun of Righteousness is so.)

Object. 1. But some are ready to object, (who will not want Scripture for
their lusts, although it evidently be misapplied) say they, The Kingdom of God
stands not in Meats, nor in Drinks, nor in Apparel, etc.

Answ. Right; therefore it is that we stand out of them. But surely you have
the least Reason of any to object this to us, who make those things so
necessary, as our not Conforming to them, does render us obnoxious to your
Reproach; which how Christian, or resembling it is the Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy, in which the Heavenly Kingdom stands, let the just Principle in your
own Consciences determine; our Conversation stands in Temperance, and that
stands in Righteousness, by which we have obtained that Kingdom, your latitude,
and excess have no share, nor intrest in.

If none therefore can be true Disciples, but they that come to bear the Daily
Cross, and that none bear the Cross but Romans 6. 3 4, 5, 6.
those who follow the example of the Lord Jesus Christ through his Baptism of
Afflictions, Trials, and Temptations; and Phil. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 13. Tit. 2.
11, 12, 13. Joh. 1. 9. Romans 6. 6. Gal. 2. 20. Chapter 5. 24. Chapter 6. 14. 2 Timothy 1.
10.
that none are so baptized with him, but those whose minds are retired from the
vanities in which the generality of the world lives, and become obedient to the
Holy Light, and Divine Grace, with which they have been enlightened from on
high, and thereby are daily exercised to the crucifying of every contrary
Affection, and bringing of Immortality to light; If none are true Disciples but
such, (as most undoubtedly they are not) then let the People of these days, a
little soberly reflect upon themselves, and conclude, that none who live and
delight in these vain Customs, and this un-Christ-like Conversation, can be a
true Christian, or Disciple of Crucified Jesus: for otherwise, how would it be
a Cross? or the Christian life, matter of difficulty, and reproach? No, the
offense Gal. 15. 11. 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18.
of the Cross would soon cease, which is the Power of God to them that believe,
for the subduing of every lust, and vanity, and bringing the Creature into an
holy subjection of mind to the heavenly will of it is Creator; for therefore has
it been said, That Jesus Christ was and is manifested, that by his Holy,
Self-denying Life and Doctrine, he might put a baffle upon the proud minds of
men, and by the Immortality he brought Verse. 27. 28, 29.
and daily brings to light, he might stain the Glory of their mortal Rests and
Pleasures, that having their minds weaned therefrom, and being as crucified
thereunto, they might seek Heb. 4. 1, 2, 3, to 12.
another Country, and obtain an Everlasting Inheritance: for the things that
are seen, are Temporal (those they were, and all are 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18.
to be redeemed from) but the things that are not seen, are Eternal; those they
were, and all are to be brought to, and have their Affections chiefly fixed upon.

Wherefore a true Disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ, is to have his mind so
conversant about heavenly things, That the things of this World may be used as
if they were not; and that having such things as are necessary and convenient,
therewith to be content, without the superfluity of the World, whereby the Col.
3. 3, 4.
pleasures that, in the time of Ignorance, was taken in the Customs and
Fashions of the World, might more abundantly be supplied in the hidden and
Heavenly Life; for unless there be an abiding in Joh. 15. 6, 7, 8.
Christ, it will be impossible to bring forth that much fruit which he requires
at the hands of his followers, and wherein his Father Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8.
is glorified: But as it is clear, such as live in the Vanities, Pleasures,
Recreations, and Lusts of the World, abide not in him, neither know him, (for
they that know him, depart from 1 John 2. 4.
Iniquity) so is their abiding and delighting in those bewitching follies, the
very reason why they are so ignorant, and insensible of him, that continually
stands knocking at the doors of Rev 3. 20. Psalm. 80. 18.
their hearts, in whom they ought to abide; and whose Divine Power they should
know to be the Cross, on which every beloved Lust, and alluring Vanity should
be slain, and crucified; that they might feel the Heavenly Life to spring, and
themselves quickened thereby, to seek the things that are above; Col. 3. 1, 2,
3. 4. Romans 9. 5.
that when Christ shall appear, they might appear with him in glory, who is
over All, God blessed for ever,

Amen.
Reas. 8.
Next, Those Customs and Fashions, which that great variety of Pleasure, which
is the common Attire, and Conversation of the Times, do eminently obstruct the
Retirement of Peoples minds to within, that they may behold the Glory's of
another kind, I mean Immortality; and instead of fearing their Creator in the
days of their youth, (and seeking the Eccles. 12. 1. Luke 12. 29, 30, 31.
Kingdom of God first, expecting the Addition of such other things as may be
necessary and convenient, according to the Injunctions of God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ) as soon as they can do any thing, Pride, Vanity, and that
Conversation, which is most delightful to the Flesh, becomes their most
pleasing Entertainments; all which do but exceedingly beget lustful Eccles. 4.
8. 2 Timothy 2. 16, 21, 22.
Conceptions, and inflame to inordinate Thoughts, wanton Discourses, lascivious
Treats, if not at last to wicked Actions, fond Absurdities, and strange
Impossibilities, fetched from such occasions continually haunting their minds;
To Ephesians. 4. 30. Jer. 18. 18, 19, 20. Jer. 20. 10.
whom it is tedious, and offensive to speak of Heaven, or another Life; bid them
reflect upon their Actions, not grieve the Holy Spirit; consider of an Eternal
Doom, prepare for Judgment: and the best Return that is usual is reproachful
Jests, profane Repartees, if not direct blows; their thoughts are otherwise
employed; their Mornings are too short for them to smooth, to paint, to patch,
to bread, to curle, to gum, to powder, and otherwise to attire and adorn
themselves; whilst their Afternoons Tit. 2. 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 4. 2.
2 Timothy 4. 4. Psalm. 12. 2. Eccles. 2. 1, 11. 17. Chap. 6. 9. Psalm. 58. 3. Isa.
5. 18. Isa. 41. 29. Chap. 59. 3, 4.
as commonly are bespoke for Visits and for Play's, where their usual
Entertainment is some stories fetched from the more approved Romances. Some
strange Adventures, some passionate Amors, unkind Refuses, grand Impediments,
tedious Addresses, miserable Disappointments, wonderful Surprises, unexpected
Rencounters, and meeting of supposed dead Lovers, bloody Duels, languishing
Voices, Ecchoing from sollitary Groves, overheard mournful Complaints, deep
fetched Sighs sent from wild Deserts, Intrigues managed with unheard of
Subtility; and whilst all things seem at the greatest distance, then are dead
People alive, enemies Friends, despair turned to Enjoyment, and all their
Impossibilities reconciled; things that never were, are not, nor ever shall, or
can be, comes to pass. And, as if Men and Women were too slow to answer the
loose suggestions of corrupt nature, or were too intent on more divine
speculations, and heavenly Affairs, they have all that it is possible for the
most extravagant Wits to invent, of not only express Lies, but grand
improbabilities, if not impossibilities to very nature, on purpose to excite
their minds to those respective passions, and so intoxicate their giddy fancies
with swelling nothing (but aerie fictions) as not only consume Time, effeminate
their Natures, debase their Reason, and set them on work to reduce these things
to practice, and make each adventure theirs by imitation; but if disappointed,
(as who can otherwise expect from such vanishing fantasms) the present remedy
is latitude to the greatest vice: and yet these are some of their most innocent
Recreations, which are no better then that subtle Devil, ensnaring People by
such stratagems, as may be most agreeable to their weakness; and in a more
insensible manner mastering their Affections, by Entertainments most taking to
their Senses: In such occasions, it is their hearts breed vanity, and their Eyes
turn Prove. 7. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, to 28.
interpreters to their Thoughts, and that their Looks do whisper the secret
inflammations of their intemperate minds, wandering so long abroad, till their
lascivious actings bring night home, and load their Minds and Reputations with
lust and infamy: here is the end of all their fashions and recreations, to 1 John 2. 15, 16.
gratify the lust of the Eye, the lust of the Flesh, and the pride of Life.
Clothes that were given to cover shame, now want a covering, being shameful;
and that which was an effect of sin, and should remember men of lost innocence,
they pride Genesis 2. 25. Genesis 3. 21.
and glory in; it is made the pleasure of these times, but 'twas the enforced
necessity of those; and that very conversation, the hundredth part of which,
cost them the loss of Paradise, is now the agreeable Recreation and best
Accomplishment of the times; for as 'twas Adam's fault to seek a satisfaction
Genesis 3. 6, 7.
to himself, other than what he was created in, which did consist of continual
Obedience to, and Communion with his Maker; so it is the exercise, pleasure,
and perfection of the Age, to have their minds roving abroad, and diverting
themselves in spending the greatest portion of their time in the variety of
invented vanities, which is so far from the end of their creation, namely, a
Divine Life, that it is to have the Eccles. 12. 1
greatest curiosity and care about visible toys, for which they never were
created. Were the pleasures of the Age true and sollid, Adam and Eve were
miserable in their Innocence, who Genesis 2. 25.
knew them not; but as 'twas once their happiness not to know them in any
degree, so is it theirs that know Christ indeed, to be, by his eternal Power
and quickening Spirit, redeemed and raised to Innocence again, which state of
Immortality Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. Col. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 17. 15, 16, 17, 18. Tit. 2. 11,
12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 13. 6 Jam. 5. 5. Mat. 7. 17, 18, 19. Chap. 12. 23. Romans 8. 8.
is yet a mystery to those who live, and have pleasure in their curious Trim's,
rich and changeable Apparel, nicity of Dress, invention and imitation of
Fashions, costly Attirements, mincing Gates, wanton Looks, Romances, Plays,
Treats, Balls; Feasts, and the whole series of that practice, and conversation
in request: for as these had never been, if man had staid at home with his
Creator, and given the entire exercise of his mind to the noble ends of his
creation; so certain it is, that the use of these vanities are not only a sign
that Men and Women are yet ignorant of their true Rest and Pleasure, but it
greatly obstructs and hinders the retirement of their minds, and serious
enquiry after those things that are Eternal. O that there should be so much
noise, clutter, invention, traffic, curiosity, diligence, pains, and vast
expense of time and estate, to please and gratify poor perishing Mortality;
and that the Soul, the very Image Mat. 16. 26. Mark 8. 37. 1 Cor. 6. 13. Job
34. 15. Isa. 40. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 24.
of Divinity it self, to whose authority and service the Body (but as a Case)
with all the whole Creation was given, to be regulated by it, should have so
little of their Consideration: What! O what more pregnant Instances, and
evident Tokens can be given, That it is the Body, the Senses, the Case, a little
flesh and bone covered with skin, the toys, fopperies, and very vanities of
this mortal Life, and perishing world, that please, that take, that gain Luke
8. 14.
them, on which they dote, and never have too much time, love, nor money, to
bestow upon them: Thus are their minds employed and become so vain in their
imaginations, and dark in their understandings, that they not only believe them
innocent, but Romans 1. 19. to the end. Prove. 1. 25, 30. chap. 10. 17. chap. 12.
1. chap. 15. 15. Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3. to 10. Jer. 16. 19, 20, 21. Mat. 21. 29, 30.
2 Timothy 3. 4. Tit. 3. 3. Mat. 6. 27.
persuade themselves they are good Christians all this while, and to rebuke
them is worse than Heresy; thus are they strangers to the hidden Life, thus
are they diverted from all serious examination of themselves; and a little by
rote babble with a forced zeal of an half hours task of other men's words, they
have nothing to do with, is made sufficient; (and are no more their states, or
at least their intention (as their works show) than 'twas the young man's in
the Gospel, that said he would go, and did not; But alas! Why? Oh! there are
other guests; what are they? Pharamond Cleopatra, Cassandra, Clelia, a Play, a
Ball, an idle flattering Visit, the Park, the Gallant, the Exchange, the Treat;
in a word, the World: these Stay, these Call, these are Importunate, these they
Attend, these are their most familiar Associates; thus are their hearts
captivated from the Divine and Heavenly Exercise; nay, from such external
Affairs, as immediately concern some benefit to themselves, or needy
Neighbors; pleasing themselves with the received Idaea's of those toys and
fopperies, into their loose and aerie minds, and if not in all things to
imitate them, through poverty; yet as much as may be in some respects, and at
last to dote upon them, be taken with them, and willingly suffer their Thoughts
to be hurried away by them: All which greatly Isa. 59. 4. Jer. 2. 5. Eccles.
11. 10.
indispose the minds, and distract the Souls of People from the Divine Life and
Principle of the Holy Jesus; but as it has been often said, more especially
the younger sort, to whom the like divertisments of gaudy Clothes, Romances,
and Amourous Plays; (where their Inclinations being presented with what is so
very suitable to them, they become thereby excited (it may be) to more vanity
than ever they might have thought upon;) which are incomparably dearer to them,
than all that can be said of God's Fear, a retired Life, eternal Rewards and
Joys unspeakable, and full of Glory: So vain, so blind, and so very insensible
are Men and Women, of what truly makes a Disciple of Christ; O that they would
ponder on Romans 13. 11, 12, 13, 14. Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9, to 14.
these things, and watch (out of all these vanities) for the coming of the
Lord, lest being unprepared, and taken up with other Guests, they enter not
into his Everlasting Rest!

Reason 9.
That which further manifests the unlawfulness of these numerous Fashions and
Recreations, is, That they are either the inventions of vain, idle, and wanton
minds, to gratify their own sensualities, and raise the like wicked curiosity
in others, to imitate the same, by which nothing but lust and folly are
promoted; or the contrivances of indigent and impoverished Wits, who make it
the next way for their maintenance; in both which respects, and upon both which
considerations, they ought to be detested; for the first, in that it were to
license express Impiety; for the latter, because it would be to countenance so
wretched a way of livelihood, and consequently divert from more lawful, more
serviceable, and more necessary employments; That such Persons are both the
inventers and actors of all these follies, cannot be difficult to demonstrate:
Alas! Could it possibly be, That one from Palistina should bring us Father
Adam's Girdle, and old Mother Eve's Apron to be shown? What laughing, what
fleering, what mocking of their Grandfather's and Grandam's homely fashion
would there be? surely their Tailor would find but little custom, although we
hear 'twas God himself that made them Coats of Skins: The like may be asked of
all Genesis 3. 21.
the other vanities, concerning the Holy Men and Women through all the
generations of Holy Writ; How many pieces of Ribbond, Feathers, Lace-Bands, and
the like, had Adam in Paradise, or out of it? What rich Embroyders, Silks,
Points, etc. had Abel, Enoch, Noah, and good old Abraham? Did Eve, Sarah,
Susanna, Elizabeth, and the Virgin Mary, use to Curle, Powder, Pummatum, Patch,
Paint, wear false Locks of strange colors, rich Points, Trimmings, laced
Gowns, embroidered Pettecoats, Shoes and Slip-slaps, laced with Silk or Silver
lace, and ruffl'd like Pigeons-feet, with several yards, if not pieces of
Ribbonds? How many Plays did Jesus Christ and his Apostles recreate themselves
at? What Poets, Romances, Comedies, and the like, did these Holy Men and Women
make, or use to pass away their time withal? I know Ephesians. 5. 1 2, 3, 4, 5, 15,
16. 2 Timothy 2. 16, 22 Mat. 25. 13. chap. 26 4. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3
Romans 2. 6, 7.
they bid all redeem their time, to avoid foolish talking, vain jesting,
profane babblings and fabulous stories; as what increase to more ungodliness;
and rather to watch, to work out Salvation with fear and trembling, to flee
foolish and youthful lusts (by name) and to follow righteousness, peace,
goodness, love, charity; and to mind the things that are above, as they would
have honor, glory, immortality, and eternal life. But if I were asked, Whence
came they then? I could quickly answer, From the Gentiles that knew not God;
(for some amongst them detested them, as will be shown) they were the Pleasures
of an effeminate Sardanapalus, a fantastic Miracles, a Comical Aristophanes, a
Prodigal Charaxus, a Luxurious Aristippus; and the practices of such Women, as
the infamous Clytemnestra, the painted Jezabel, the lascivious Campaspe, the
immodest Posthumia, the costly Corinthian Libidinosa, the most impudent Flora,
the wanton Egyptian Cleopatra, and most insatiable Messalina; Persons, whose
memory have stunk through all Ages, and carry with them a perpetual rot; these,
and not the Holy Self-denying Men and Women in ancient times, were devoted to
the like Recreations, and vain delights; nay, the more sober of the very
Heathens themselves (and that upon a Principle of great virtue, (as is by all
confessed) detested the like folly and wanton practices; there is none of them
to be found in Plato nor in Seneca's Works; Pythagoras, Socrates, Phocion,
Zeno, etc. accustomed not themselves to these entertainments; The virtuous
Penelope, the chaste Lucretia, the grave Cornelia, and modest Pontia, with many
others, could find themselves employment enough amongst their Children,
Servants, and Neighbors; they (though Nobles, next their Devotion) delighted
most in Spinning, Weaving, Gardening, Needlework, and such like good
House-wifery, and commendable entertainments; who (though called Heathens)
expres'd much more Christianity in all their actions, than do the wanton
foolish People of this Age, that notwithstanding will be called Christians.
But, above all, You Playmongers, whence think you, came your so passionately
beloved Comoedies, then which, as there is not any one divertion that is more
pernicious; so not one more in esteem and diligently frequented; Why, I will
tell you, Their great Grandfather was an Heathen, and that of the worst sort;
his Name was Epicharmus; it is true, he is called a Philosopher, or a lover of
Wisdom; but he was only so by name, and no more one in reality than the
Comoedians of these times are Christians; and that is not at all. It Is reported
of him by Suidas, a Greek Historian, that he was the first man who invented
Comoedies, and Vide Suidas.
by the help of one Phormus, he made also fifty Fables, (or if you will Lies.)
But would you know his Country, and the reason of his invention? the first was
Syracuse, the chief City of Sicily, famous for the infamy of many Tyrants, to
please and gratify the lusts of some, of whom (which is the second) he set his
wits to work: And don't you think this a most infamous original? and is it less
in any to imitate, or justify the same, since the more sober Heathens have
themselves condemned them? nay, is it not most abominable, when such as call
themselves Christians, do both imitate and justify the like inventions? Nor
had the melancholy Tragedies a better parentage; namely, one Thespis, an
Athenian Poet; to whom Vide Prod.
they also do ascribe the original of that impudent custom of painting faces,
and the counterfeit, or representation of other persons, by change of habits,
humors etc. all which are now so much in use and reputation with the great
Ones of the times; To these, let me add that Poetical Amorosoe, whom an
inordinate passion of Love first transported to those Poetical raptures of
admiration; (indeed sordid effeminacy, if not Idolatry) they call him Aleman,
or Alcina; (a Lydian, and an Heathen) he being exceedingly in Love with a young
Woman of his own Country, is said to have been the first person that gave the
World a sight of that kind of folly, namely, Lovestories and Verses; which has
been so diligently imitated by almost all Nations ever since.

Object. 2. I know that some will say, But we have many Comoedies and
Tragedies, that are on purpose to reprehend Vice, from whence we learn many
commendable things.

Answ. And truly, though it is shameful, yet many have been wont for want of
shame, or understanding, or both, to return me this for answer: Now I readily
shall confess that 'twas the next remedy amongst the Heathens against the
common Vice, to those more grave and moral Lectures of their Philosophers; of
which number I shall instance two; Euripides, whom Suidas calls a learned
Tragical Poet; and Eupolis, whom the same Historian calls a Comical Poet: the
first was a man so chaste, (and therefore so unlike those of our days, that he
was called (...), or one that hated Women; (that is, wanton ones) for otherwise
he was twice Married.) The other he characters as a most severe reprehender of
faults; from which I gather, that their design was not to feed the idle lazy
fancies of People; but since, by the means of loose wits, the People had been
debauched, their work was to reclaim them; and this appears the rather from the
description given, as also that Euripides was supposed to have been torn in
pieces by wanton Women; which doubtless was for declaring and decrying their
impudence: and the other being slain in the Battle betwixt the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians, was so regreted, that a Law was made, never after such Poets
should be allowed to bear Arms; doubtless, because in losing him, they lost a
Reprover of Vice; so that the end of the approved Comedians, and Tragideans of
those times, was but to reform the People; and that not so much by that
rational and argumentative way (usual with their Philosophers) as by sharp
jeers, severe reflections, and rendering their vicious actions so shameful,
ridiculous, and detestable, as for reputations sake they might not longer be
guilty of the like; which is but the very next expedient before a Whip, or
Bridewel. Now if you that plead for such representations, will be contented to
be accounted Heathens, and those of the more dissolute and wicked sort too, we
shall acknowledge you, that such Comoedies and Tragedies, may be serviceable;
but for shame abuse not the Name of Christ so impudently as to call your selves
Christians, whose lusts are so strong, as that you are forced to use the
necessities of meet Heathens to repel them: Is this your love to Jesus? your
reverence to the Scriptures, that are able to make the man of God perfect? Is
all your prattle about Ordinances, Sacraments, Christianity, and the like, come
to this? that at last you must betake your selves to such Instructers as were
by the sober Heathens appointed to reclaim the most vicious of the People that
were amongst them; and such Remedies too, as below which is nothing but
corporal punishment. This is so far from Christianity, that many thousands of
the Noble Heathens, Men and Women, were better taught, and better disposed:
They found out more Heavenly contemplations, and subjects of an Eternal nature
to meditate upon. Nay, so far did they outstrip the best of the common
Christians of these times, that they not only were exemplary of good in their
grave and sober Conversation; but for the public benefit, they instituted the
Gynaecosmi, or twenty men, that they should make it their business to observe
the peoples Apparel and Behavior; that if any were found immodest, and to
demean themselves loosely, they had full authority to punish them. But the case
is altered; it is punishable to reprove such; yes, it is matter of the greatest
contumely and reproach: nay, so impudent are some grown in their Impieties, as
that they merrily can sport themselves with a mere mockage of such religious
Persons; and not only manifest a great neglect of Piety, and a severe Life, by
their own looseness; but their extreme contempt of it, by rendering it ridiculous
through Comical abusive jeers on public Stages: which, how dangerous it is,
and apt to make Religion of little worth; besides the demonstration of this
age; let us remember, that Aristophanes had not a better way to bring the
reputation of Socrates in question with the People; who greatly reverenced him
for his grave and virtuous Life and Doctrine; than by his abusive
representations of him in a Play, which made the aerie, wanton, unstable crowd
rather to part with Socrates in earnest, than Socrates in jest. Nor can a
better reason be given why the poor Quakers are made so much the scorn of men,
then because of their severe reprehensions of sin and vanity; and their
self-denying Conversation amidst so great intemperance in all worldly
satisfactions: yet can such Libertines, all this while, strut and swell for
Christians; but we must be Heretics, Sedncers, Deceivers, and what not?

O blindness! O Pharisaical hypocrisy! as if that such were Judges of
Religion; or that 'twere possible for them to have a sight of true Religion, or
really to be Religious; whilst darkn'd in their understandings, by the Godd of
the pleasures of this World, and their minds so exercised by external
enjoyments, and the variety of worldly delights; No, In the Name of the
Everlasting God, you mock him and deceive your souls; the wrath and vengeance
of the Almighty is against you all, whilst in that spirit and condition; in
vain are all your babbles, and set performances; God Eternal laughs you to
scoru; his anger is kindling because of these things. Wherefore be ye warned to
temperance, and Repent. Besides, these Persons are not only wicked, loose, and
vain, who both invent and act these things; but; by your great delight in their
inventions, you encourage them therein, and hinder them from more honest, and
more serviceable employments; for, what is the reason that most Commodities are
held at such excessive rates? but because Labor is so very dear; and why is it
so? but because so many hands are otherwise bestowed, even about the very
vanity of all vanities. Nay, how common is it with these mercenary procurers to
Peoples folly, that when their Purses begin to grow empty, they shall present
them with a new, and pretended more convenient Fashion, and that perhaps before
the former costly Habits shall have done half their service, which either must
be given away, or new vampt in the Cut most A la-mode; O infamous, yet frequent
folly! I know I am coming to encounter the most plausible Objection they are
used to urge when driven to a pinch; namely,

Object. 3. But how shall those many Families subsist, whose livelihood is by
such Trades? as the like Fashions and Recreations do maintain, which you so
earnestly decry?

Answ. I answer, It is a bad Argument to plead for the Commission of the least
evil, that never so great a good may come of it: If you and they have made
Wickedness your Pleasure, and your Profit, be ye content that it should be your
grief and punishment, till the one can learn to be without such vanity, and
that the others have found out more honest employments: It Is the vanity of the
few great ones, that makes so much toil for the many small; and the great
excess of the one, occasions the great labor of the other: Would men learn to
be contented with few things, such as are necessary 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8.
and convenient (the Christian life) all things might be at a cheaper rate, and
men might live for little. If the Landlords had less lust to satisfy, the
Tennants might have less Rent to pay, and turn from poor to rich, whereby they
might be able to find more honest and domestique employments for their
Children, than turning shifters, and living by their Wits, (which is but a
better word for their sins.) And if the Report of the more intelligent
Husbandry be credible, See Blith's Husbandry.
Lands are generally improveable, ten in twenty; and were there more hands
about more lawful and serviceable Manufactures, they would be cheaper, and
greater vent might be made, by which a benefit should redound to the World in
general; nay, the burden lies the heavier upon the laborious Country, that so
many hands and shoulders (as the lust Caterers of the Cities) should be
wanting. If men never think themselves rich enough, they may never miss of
trouble and employment; but those who can take the primitive state, and God's
Creation for their Model, may learn with a little to be contented, as knowing
that desires after Wealth, do not only prevent or destroy the true Faith, but
that when 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
got, increase trouble also. It is no evil to repent of evil, but that can
never be in maintaining what they should repent of. It is a bad Argument to
avoid temperance, or justify the contrary, because otherwise the Actors and
Inventers of it, would want a Livelihood, since to feed them is to nurse the
Cause instead of starving it; let such of those Vanity-hucksters as have got
sufficient, be contented to retreat, and spend it more honestly than they got
it; And such as really are poor, be rather helped by charity to better Callings,
which were more prudent, nay Christian, than to buy foolish toys and
fopperies: Public Workhouses would be effectual Remedies to all these lazy
distempers, with more Profit and a better Conscience; therefore it is we
cannot, we dare not square our Conversation by the World's; no, but by our
exceeding plainness to testify against such extravagant vanity; and by our
grave and steady Life to manifest our dislike on God's behalf, to such
intemperance and wanton curiosity; yea, to deny our selves what otherwise
perhaps we lawfully could use with true indifferency, because of that great
abuse amongst the generality. I know that some are ready farther to object;

Object. 4. Has God given us these Enjoyments on purpose to damn us if we use
them?

Answ. But to such miserable, poor, silly souls (who would rather charge the
most High and Holy God with the invention and creation of their dirty Vanities,
then want a Plea to justify their own practice, not knowing how for shame, or
fear, or love, to throw them off.) I Answer, That what God Answer. Genesis 1. 31.
Mat. 5. chapter 6, chapter 7, chapter 8. Luke 8. 14. chap. 12. 28, 29, 30, to 38.
made was good, and what the blessed Lord Jesus Christ enjoined, or gave us in
his most Heavenly Example, is to be observed, believed, and indispensably to be
obeyed; but in the whole Catalogue the Scriptures give of both, I never found
the Attires, Recreations, and way of Living, so much in request with the called
Christians of these times. No certainly, God created man an holy, wise, sober,
grave, and reasonable Creature, fit to Govern the World, and himself; to whom
only a Divinity, and an Eternal Godhead, became the fit object both of his
Reason and his Pleasure; all External Enjoyments administering no farther
satisfaction then as used for necessity and mere convenience; with this proviso
too, That the Almighty was to be seen, and sensibly enjoyed, and reverenced 1
Cor. 10. 31.
in every one; but how very wide the Christians of these times are from this
Primitive Institution, is not difficult to determine, although they make such
loud pretentions to that most Holy Jesus, who not only gave the World a certain
Evidence of a happy Restoration in his own Example, but promised assistance to
all that would follow him; and therefore Joh. 8. 12. chap. 15. 6, 7, 8. chap.
17. 20.
has so severely enjoined no less on all, as they would be everlastingly
saved; but whether the minds of men and women are not as profoundly involved in
all excess and vanity, as those who know him not any farther than by hearsay?
and whether they being thus banished the Presence of the Lord by their greedy
seeking the things that are below, and thereby having lost the taste of that
divine Pleasure, they have not feigned to themselves an imaginary pleasure, to
smother Conscience, and pass their time without that anguish and trouble, which
are the consequences of sin; that so they might Romans 2. 8.
be at ease and security? let the truly sober, yea, their own Consciences,
declare?

Adam's temptation is represented by an Apple, thereby intimating the great
influence external objects (as they exceed Genesis 3. 6.
in beauty) carry with them upon our senses; so that unless the mind keep upon
its constant watch, so prevalent, and, in a Mat. 24. 42. Mark. 13. 33, 34, 35,
36, 37.
manner, enchanting are visible things, as sometimes they are represented, that
hard 'twill be for one to escape, being ensnared; and he shall need be only
sometimes entrap'd, to cast so thick a vail of darkness over the mind, that not
only it shall with pleasure continue in its fetters to lust and vanity; but
proudly censure such as refuse Conformity to the same, and strongly plead for
them as serviceable and convenient; that strange passion do perishing objects
raise in those minds, where way is made, and entertainments given to them. But
Christ Jesus is manifested in us, and has given unto us an 1 John 3. 5, 6, 7,
8. chap. 5. 20.
understanding of him that is true, and unto All, such a proportion of his good
Spirit as might suffice, would they obey it, to redeem their minds from that
captivity they have been in to lusts and vanities, and entirely ransom them
from the dominion of all visible objects, and whatsoever may gratify the
desire of the Eye, the Flesh, and the proud Life, that they might 1 These. 5. 13
be regenerated in their minds, changed in their affections, and have their
whole hearts set on things that are above, where moth nor rust can never pass,
nor enter to harm, or destroy.

But it is a manifest sign of what mould and make those persons are, who
practice and plead for such Egiptian shameful rags; Its more to be feared, they
either never knew, or have forgot, the humble, plain, meek, holy, Self-denying,
and exemplary Life, which the eternal Spirit sanctifies all obedient hearts
unto; yea, it is indubitable, that either such always have been ignorant, or
else that they have lost sight of Gal. 15. 22, 23, 24, 25. Ephesians. 5. 8, 9, 10,
11, 15, 16.
that good Land, that heavenly Country, and blessed inheritance they once have
had some glimmering prospect of; O that they would but withdraw a while, sit
down, weigh, and consider with themselves where they are, and whose work and
will they are doing, that they would once believe the Devil has not a
stratagem more pernicious to their immortal Souls than this of exercising their
minds in the foolish fashions, and wanton recreations of the times; great and
gross Impieties beget a detestation in the opinion of sober education, common
temperance and reputation; and therefore since the Devil rightly sees such
things have no success with many, it is his next (and fatall'st) project to
find some other entertainments that carry less of infection in their looks,
though more of security, because more of pleasure in their enjoyment, on
purpose to busy and arrest the minds of such from a diligent search and
enquiry after those matters, which Ephesians. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
necessarily concern their eternal peace, that being ignorant of the heavenly
Life, they may not be induced to press after it; but being only formally
Religious according to the traditions and precepts of others, proceed to their
common pleasures, and find no check therefrom; (their Religion and Conversation
Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Chap. 4. 12, 13. 2 Pet. ^. 18.
for the most part agreeing well together,) whereby an improvement in the
knowledge of God, a going on from grace to grace, a growing in the measure of
the stature of Jesus Christ himself is not known, but as it was in the
beginning at seven, so is it at seventy; nay, not so innocent, unless by reason
of the old saying, Old Men are twice Children. Oh! the Mystery of Godliness,
the heavenly Life, and true Christian is another thing; wherefore we conlude,
that as the design of the Devil (where he cannot involve and draw into gross
sin) is to busy, delight, and allure the minds of men and women by
moreseeming-innocent entertainments, on purpose that he may more easily secure
them from minding their duty and progress in the knowledge of, and obedience to
the only true God, which is eternal Life; and thereby employ their minds from
heavenly and eternal Meditations; so are those who Joh. 17. 3.
would be delivered from those snares, to mind the holy, just, grave, and
self-denying Teachings of God's Grace and Spirit in Romans 8. 11. 14. Gal. 5. 16.
Tit. 2. 11, 12 13, 14.
themselves, that they may reject, and for ever abandon the like vanity and
evil, and by a reformed Conversation condemn the World of its Intemperance; so
will the true Disciple-ship be obtained; for otherwise, not only self prejudice
redounds, but many other enormous Consequences and pernicious Effects: It Is to
encourage such impious persons to continue and proceed in the like Trades of
feeding the Peoples lusts, and thereby to make themselves partakers of their
Plagues, besides their own proper punishment, who by continual fresh desires to
the like curiosities, and that way of spending time and estate, induce them to
spend more time in studying how to abuse time; nay, in hopes of farther gains
tempt and provoke those Caterers to all inordinate desires, and lustful
appetites, to invent and furnish them with more provision of the sort, lest
through their pinching and small allowances, those Prodigals should call their
Fathers house to mind; for whatsoever any think more pleasant baits, alluring
objects, grateful entertainments, cunning emissaries, acceptable Sermons,
insinnating Lectures, taking Orators; the crafty Devil has not, nor ever had by
which to entice, and ensnare the minds of People, and totally to divert them
from heavenly reflections, and divine meditations, than the great excess of
vain Attire and that variety of Recreations so much in repute in these times,
and which we have hitherto so reasonably condemned.

Reas. 10.
But should these things be as indifferent, as they are proved perniciously
unlawful (for I never yet heard any advance their plea beyond the bounds of
mere indifferency) yet so great is their abuse, so universal the sad effects
thereof, like to an infection, that therefore ought they to be rejected of all,
especially those, whose sobriety has preserved them on this side of that
excess, or whose judgments (though themselves be guilty) suggest the
inconveniency of such Intemperance: For what is an indifferent thing, but that
which may be done, or left undone? granting, I say, this were the case, yet
does both Reason and Religion teach, that when they are used with such an
extraordinary appetite, as to relinquish them, would be a contradiction to
their desires, and an abate of their satisfaction; they have exceeded the
bounds of mere indifferency, and are thereby rendered no less than necessary;
which being a violation to the very nature of the things themselves, a perfect
abuse enters, and consequently are no longer to be considered in the rank of
things simply indifferent, but unlawful. Now, that the whole Exchange of
vanities against which I have so earnestly contended, are generally abused, by
the excess of almost all ages, sexes, and qualities of People, will be
confessed by many who yet decline not to be conformable themselves; and to
whom, as I have understood, it only seems lawful, because (say they) the abuse
of others should be no Argument why we should not use them But to such I
answer, (for God Almighty knows I seek the temporal and eternal happiness of
all) That they have quite forgot, or will not remember, they have acknowledged
these things to be but of an indifferent nature. If so, (as undoubtedly men in
their wits (and for others we are not concerned) nay, vanity never urged more)
I say, there can be nothing more clear, than since they acknowledge their great
abuse, that they are wholly to be forgone and relinquished; for since they may
as well be let alone as done at any time, surely they then of duty should be
let alone when the use of them is an abetting the general excess, and a mere
exciting others to continue in their abuse, because they find persons reputed
sober, Phil. 3. 17.
to imitate them, or otherwise to give them an Example; Precepts are not half
so forceable as Examples. Nay, every one that pretends to seriousness, ought to
suspect himself, as having bin too forward to help on the excess, and can never
make too much haste out of those inconveniences, that by his former example he
encouraged many to, and that by a new one he may put a seasonable check upon
the Intemperance of others. A wise Parent ever with-draws those objects,
however innocent in themselves, which are too prevalent upon the weak senses of
his Children, on purpose that they might be weaned. And it is as frequent with
men, to bend a crooked stick as much the contrary way, that they might
streighten it at last. Those that have more sobriety than others, should not
forget their stewardships, and exercise that gift of God to security of their
neighbors; 'twas murdering Cain that rudely Phil. 2. 4. Genesis 4. 9.
asked the Lord, Was he his Brothers Keeper? For every man is necessarily
obliged thereto, and therefore should be so wise, as to deny himself the use of
such indifferent enjoyments, as cannot be used by him, without too manifest an
encouragement 2 King. 18. 2, 3, 4 5.
to his neighbors folly. God has sufficiently excited men to what is said;
for, in the case of the Brazen Serpent, which was an heavenly Institution, and
Type of Christ, He with great displeasure enjoined it should be broke to
pieces, because they were too fond and doting upon it; yes, the very Groves
themselves, however pleasant for situation, beautiful for their walks and
trees, must be cut dowu; and why? only because they had been abused to
Idolatrous uses. And what is an Idol, but that which the mind puts an
over-estimate, or value upon? None can benefit themselves so much by an
indifferent thing, as not rather to prevent an injury to others by not using
that liberty. Romans 14. to the end.
If those things were convenient in themselves (which is a step nearer
necessity, than mere indifference) yet when by circumstances they become
prejudicial, such convenience it self ought to be put up, much more what is but
indifferent should be denied. People are not to weigh their private
satisfactions, more than a public good; nor please themselves in too free a
use of indifferent things, at the cost of being so really prejudicial to the
public, as they certainly are whose use of all these vanities becomes
exemplary to others, and begets an impatiency in their minds to have the like;
Psalm. 10. 3, 4
wherefore it is both reasonable and incumbent on all, to make only such things
necessary, as tend to life and godliness; and to 2 Pet. 1. 3.
employ their freedom with most advantage to their Neighbors: So that here is a
twofold obligation on them; the one, Ephesians. 5. 7, 8.
not to be exemplary in the use of such things, which though they may use them,
yet not without giving too much countenance to the abuse, and excessive vanity
of their Neighbors. The other obligation is, That they ought so far to
condescend Romans 14. 1. to the end.
to such Religious People who are offended at these fashions, and that kind of
conversation, as for ever to reject them. Now those, who (notwithstanding what
I have urged) will yet proceed; what is it, but that they have so involved
themselves, and their affections in them, as that it is not less difficult to
reform them, whom all this while we have determined in the greatest excess, And
that for all their many Protestations against their fondness to such fopperies,
they in sincerity are no better than People that have lost the measure both of
common Prudence and Conscience, that neither know what is indifferent, nor what
not; how far they are to respect the good of others, how far not: and, how
should they? who do so little respect their own. For, after a serious
consideration, What vanity, pride, idleness, expense of time, and estates, have
been, and yet are? How many Persons debauched from their first sobriety, and
Women from their natural sweetness, and innocent dispositions, to loose, aerie,
wanton, and many times Lam. 4. 5. Prove. 2^. 17. Job 21. 13, 14. Psalm. 55. 23.
Psalm. 37. 10. Eccles. 8. 12. Psalm. 37. 9. and 76. 12. Prove. 2. 22.
more enormous practices? How many plentiful estates have been surpised by
numerous debts; Chastity ensnared by accursed lustful Intregues, youthful
Health overtaken by the hasty seizure of unnatural distempers, and their
remaining days spent upon a Rack of their vices procuring, and so made slaves
to the sad and unmerciful effects of their own inordinate pleasures: in which
agony they vow the greatest temperance, but no sooner out of it, then in their
vice again. That these things are the case, and almost innumerably more, I am
persuaded no ingenious person, of any experience, will deny; how then upon this
serious reflection, any that pretend Conscience, or the least fear of God
Almighty, can longer continue in the Garb, Livery, and Conversation of those,
whose Jer. 16. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
whole life tends to little else then what I have repeated; much less join with
them in their abominable excess; I leave it to the truly Conscientions, and the
just Principle in themselves, to judge. No surely! This is not to obey the
Voice of God, who in all Ages did loudly cry to all, Come out: from whence?
from the ways, fashions, converse, and spirit of Babylon; who is that? the
Mother, or that Womb, which has been so fruitful in all these vain, foolish,
wanton, superfluous, Isa. 3. 13, 14, to 26. Jer. 50. 8. chap. 51. 6, 7 Amos 6.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Rev. 18. 7, 9
earthly, wicked births; against whom the Scriptures denounce more dreadful
Judgments than any, ascribing all the Intemperance of Men and Women to the Cup
that spirit of wickedness has given them to drink; whose are the things
indifferent, if they must be so: And for witness, hear what the Revelations say
in her description, How much she has glorified her self, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. And the Kings of the Earth
who have lived deliciously with her, shall bewail and lament her; And the
Merchants of the Earth shall Verse. 11, 12.
weep over her, for no man buyeth their Merchandise any more: The Merchandise
of Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones, and of Pearls, and fine Linen, and
Purple, and Silk, and Scarlet, and all manner of Vessels of Ivory, and all
manner of Vessels of most precious Wood; And Cinnamon, and Odours, and
Ointments, Verse. 13.
and Frankincense, and Wine, and Oil, and fine Flour, and Beasts, and Slaves,
and Souls of Men: which though I know to have a farther signification then what
is litteral, yet there is enough to show the Pomp, Plenty, Fullness, Idleness,
Ease, Wantonness, Vanity, Lust, and Excess of Her, and all her Favorites. But
at the terrible day, who will go to her Exchange any more? who to her Play's?
who shall Traffic about her delicious Inventions? Not one; for she shall be
judged; no Plea shall excuse, or rescue her from the wrath of the Judge, for
strong is the Lord who will perform it. If yet these reasonable Verse. 8.
Plea's will not prevail, though I have something farther to adjoyn, however I
shall Caution such in the repetition of part of Babylon's miserable doom; Mind,
my Friends, more Heavenly things, hasten to obey that righteous Principle which
would exercise and delight you in that which is Eternal; or else with Babylon,
the Mother of lust and vanity, the fruits that Verse. 14.
your Souls lust after, shall depart from you, and all things which are dainty
and goodly shall depart from you, and you shall find them no more; Lay your
treasures therefore up in Heaven, where nothing can break through to harm them,
but where Time shall shortly Luke 12. 33, 34.
be swallowed up of incomprehensible Eternity. And for your farther persuasion
(if yet any can remain unsatisfied) I further argue;

Reas. 11.
Next, Because the contrary is very much conducing to good; namely, plain and
decent Apparel, with a meek shamefaced Col. 4. 5, 6. 1 These. 4. 11, 12. 1 Pet.
3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 4. 29. and 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 4. 12 Phil. 3. 16, 17, 18,
19. 20. 1 Pet. 2. 12.
and quiet Spirit; and that Conversation which does only express the same, in
all godly honesty. As the Apostle says, Let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may
administer grace to the Hearers; neither filthiness nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, but rather giving of thanks: for, let no man deceive you with vain
words; because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of
disobedience. Wherefore, if Men and Women were but thus adorned, and did they
but once demean themselves after this truly Christian manner, impudence would
soon receive a check, lust, pride, vanity, and wantonness, a rebuke: For, with
what countenance could they attempt such universal Chastity, or encounter such
godly Austerity? No, there would scarcely be left a passage for vanity and
pride to look out at; all their large windows would be barred, and almost every
cranny stopped: And however impious any persons might be in private, for certain
they would find no Prove. 31. 23, to 31. 2 Chronicles. 19. 7. Prove. 24. 23. Jam. 2.
1, 2, to 9.
Merchants abroad to buy it, no fondlings to Indulge and embrace it, all
respect to Persons for their Apparel, and empty Titles, would cease; which is a
notorious evil, and contrary to the very express letter and command of the
Scriptures; though common Experience teaches us what place they have with the
generality, to Cap, to Sir, to Worship, to Honor, to Madam, and to Lady, them
in almost all places of the Land; whereby a great step might be made toward
primitive Innocence, and that plain-hearted, downright and harmless Life might
be restored, of not much careing about what Luke 12. 29, 30. 1 Timothy 5. 8. 2
Pet. 3. 11.
we should eat, drink, or put on; (which, however Christ called the practice of
them that knew not God) is the very Spirit of this Age under all its babble
about Religion. But with such moderate care, as might provide what should be
necessary and convenient for themselves and families, be entirely devoted Psalm.
26. 5.
to the concernments of a Celestial Kingdom; And diligently minding their
daily growth and improvement in the Righteousness of it; as what only makes
this life truly and sollidly comfortable; and at their dying moments, can
fairly entitle them to that blessed Salutation of, Well done my good and
faithful Servants, enter into the Mat. 25. 21.
endless Joys and Eternal heavenly Rewards of your Lord; who is Jesus, who is
God over All blessed and renowned for ever.

Reas. 12.
This would be a ready means, and good expedient toward the enrichment of the
land; for by how much the less there were Prove. 10. 4.
of that great Superfluity in all these vanities, by so much the more should
the Commodities of our own Country be in repute; Eccles. 10. 16, 17, 18.
the great vent of foreign Goods, being that which indebts the Land to
foreigners; whereas otherwise they would become debtors to us for our Native
Manufactures. Prove. 19. 15.


By this means, such Persons, who by their Excess have deeply engaged their
Estates, may in a short space be enabled to clear them from those encumbrances;
which otherwise Prove. 21. 17.
(like Moths) soon eat out very plentiful Revenues, nor does it less than
greatly advantage Persons of mean subsistence (especially Servants) to improve
their small stocks, by their diligent attendance on their business; And not
expending their dear-earnings, and hard got wages, upon superfluous Apparel,
foolish Prove. 20. 24, 27.
May-games, Play's, Dancing-shewes, Taverns, Alehouses, and the like folly and
intemperance; of which this Land is more infested, and by which it is rendered
more ridiculous than any Kingdom in the World; Yea, it has been the very
Refuge of almost all the cheating Mountebanks, savage Morrice-dancers,
Pick-pocket and profane Players and Stagers of Neighboring Countries; to the
ruin of Religion, the shame of Government, and the great idleness, expense,
and debauchery of the People; for which the Spirit of the Lord is grieved, and
the Judgments of the Almighty are at the door, and the Sentence ready to be
pronounced, Let him that is injust, Rev. 22. 11.
be injust still: Wherefore it is that we cannot but loudly call upon the
generality of the times, and testify both by our Life and Doctrine against the
like vanities and abuses, if possibly any may be weaned from their folly, and
choose the good-old-way of Temperance, Wisdom, Gravity, and Heavenly Prove. 22.
4, 29.
Conversation; the only way to inherit the blessings of Peace and Plenty here,
and Eternal Happiness hereafter.

Reas. 13.
Lastly, Supposing we had none of these foregoing and important Eccles. 12. 1.
Psalm. 37. 21. Job 31. 16, Psalm. 10. 2, Psalm. 4. 2. Psalm. 79. 12. Psa. 82. 3, 4.
Prove. 13. 14. chap. 22. 7. and 16. 22. Isa. 3. 14 15. Ezekiel. 22. 28, Amos 5. 11,
12. chapter 8. 4, 7, 8. Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Jer. 7. 6. Romans 12. 20. 2 Chr. 19. 7.
Reasons to justify our selves, and justly to reprove the practice of the Land
in these particulars; however, let it be sufficient for us to say, That when
People have first learned to fear and obey their Creator, to pay their numerous
Debts, to redeem their Mortgages, to clear their Estates of all Encumbrances,
to alleviate and abate their oppressed Tennants; but above all outward regard,
when the pale faces are more commiserated, the gripped bellies relieved, and
naked backs clothed; when the famished Poor, the distressed Widow, and
helpless Orphant (God's Works, and your fellow Creatures) are provided for;
then I say, (if then) it will be early enough for you to plead the Indifferency
of your pleasures: But that the sweat and tedious labor of the Husbandman, be
it early or late, cold or hot, wet or dry, should be converted into the
pleasure, ease, and pastime of a small number of men, that the Cart, the Plow,
the Thrash, should be in that continual severity laid upon nineteen parts of
the Land, to feed the inordinate lusts and delicious appetites of the
twentieth, is so far from the appointment of the Great Governor of the World,
and God of the Spirits of all men, that to imagine such horrible injustice as
the effect of his determinations, Psalm. 40. 4. Acts 10. 34. Romans 2. 11. Ephesians. 6.
9. Col. 3. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Jam. 5. 4, 5.
and not the intemperance of men, were wretched and blasphemous; As on the
other side, it would be to deserve no pity, no help, no relief from God
Almighty, to continue that expense in vanity and pleasure, whilst the other
objects great necessities go unanswered; especially, since God has made the
sons of men but stewards to each others exigency's and relief; yea, so strict
is it enjoined, that on the omission of these things, we find that dreadful
sentence partly Psalm. 41. 1. Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36. Romans 15. 36. Jam. 2. 15, 16.
Psalm. 112. 9. Prove. 14. 21. Mat. 19. 21.
to be grounded, of Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. As on
the contrary, to visit the sick, see the imprisoned, relieve the needy, etc.
are such excellent properties in Christ's account, that thereupon it is he will
pronounce such blessed, saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for ye, etc. So that the Great are not (with the Leviathan in
the deep) to prey upon the small, much less to make a sport of the lives and
labors of the lesser ones, to gratify their inordinate senses.

Wherefore this we offer, and address to the serious Consideration as well of
Magistrates as others, That if the Money which is expended in every Parish
(there being near ten thousand in the Land) in those unnecessary, vain, nay
sinful fashions and entertainments; as, Laces, Jewels, Embroydery's, Ribbonds,
Presents, Play's, Treats, Balls, Taverns, unnecessary Provisions and
Attendants, of Servants, Horses, Coaches, gaudy Furnitures, with much more
fruitless and excessive matters, were collected into a public Stock, (which
would indubitably amount to several hundred thousand pounds a year) There might
be reparations to the broaken Tennant, Workhouses erected, where the able
might at easy labor procure a plentiful subsistence; and the unable and aged,
might have such an Annuity as would free the Land from Beggars; the cry of the
Widow and her Orphants would cease; and charitable reliefs might easily be
afforded toward the redemption of poor Slaves, or the refreshment of such
distressed Protestants as labor under the miseries of Persecution in other
Countries. Nay, the Exchequer's needs, on just emergency's, might be supplied:
All which would be a most pleasant Sacrifice to the just and merciful God, a
noble Example of Gravity and Temperance to foreign States, and of an
unspeakable benefit to ourselves at home: Alas! Why should men need persuasions
to what their own felicity so necessarily depends upon? Had these Vitioso's of
the times a sense of Heathen-Cato's Exodus 32. 6. Isa. 22. 13, 14. Jer. 16. 7,
8, 9. Amos 7. 3, 4, 5, 6. Joh. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Mat. 10. 15. and 11. 22. Luke
8. 14. 2 Timothy 3. 4. Rev. 3. 9.
generosity, they rather would deny their carnal appetites, than leave such
noble enterprises unattempted; But that they should eat, drink, play, game, and
sport away their health, estates, and above all their irrevocable precious
time, which should be given to the Lord as an necessary Introduction to a vast
Eternity (and then which, did they but know it, no outward sollace can come in
competition) I say, that they should be continually employed about these
things, is to have the Heathens Memorial, and their Ashes judge them, as well
as Christian Precepts and Examples to condemn them: And their final doom will
prove the more astonishing, in that this Vanity and Excess were acted under a
dream of being Christians all the while, whilst short of Heathens in reality.

That which remains to the accomplishment of this Discourse, is some of those
very many Testimonies that might be brought, for farther Confirmation of what
has hitherto been said to these particulars.

The Testimonies of several Great and Pious Personages, both Heathens and
Christians, against the common Attire of the Age.
Solon, called one of the seven Sages, a noble Philosopher Plutar.
and Lawgiver to the Athenians, being asked by Croesus, King of Lydia, Who was
the most happy man in the World? (expecting he should have said he was, because
none so famous for excessive Riches) Answered, Tellus; who though a poor man,
yet an honest and good man, and content with what he had; And after having
served the Commonwealth faithfully, and seen his Children and their Children
virtuously educated, died in a good old Age.

This much displeased Croesus, but he dissembled it. Some Laerti.
few days after, the King being most richly clothed, and magnificently
Adorned, and seated in his Throne; demanded of Solon, If he had ever seen any
thing more glorious? to whom he answered, Cocks, Peacocks, and Pheasants, who
are much more beautiful in their natural dress. These undervaluing expressions
of wise Solon, displeased the luxurious wanton mind of Croesus, upon which they
parted; the one desirous of toys and vanities, the other an instructor and
example of true Nobility and Virtue, which utterly contemned the King's
effeminacy's; But notwithstanding, the Wealth and Pleasure of Croesus, gave him
but little time to think upon the importance of such remarkable sayings, till
robbed of both; yet at last he was of another mind: for being taken Prisoner by
Cyrus, the first Great Emperor of the Persian Herodot. Ha^icar.
Monarchy, and by his Command, put on a Pile to be burnt; after some pause,
sighed deeply and cried, Solon, Solon, Solon; the Emperor hearing, bid the
Interpreters ask on whom he called? On one (said he) that I wish, above all the
Wealth and Pleasure of the World, might have spoken with all Tyrants: Upon
which the Emperor being curious to know further of the business, he told him
of the serious, grave, religious life and discourses of this Athenian
Lawgiver; which so affected Cyrus, that he commanded Croesus to be released,
and used him, the remainder of his life, for one of his Privy Council.

And as it was in his time that Tragical Play's were first invented, so was he
most severe against them, foreseeing the inconveniency's Plutarch.
that would attend, finding the People affected with that Novelty of
Recreations; It is reported of him, That he went himself to the Play, and after
it was ended, went to Thespis the great Actor, and asked him, If he were not
ashamed to tell so many Lies in the face of so great an Auditory? Thespis
answered (as it is now usual) There is no harm nor shame to Act such things in
jest: Solon striking his Staff hard on the ground, replied, But in a short
time, we who approve of this kind of jest, shall use it in earnest, in our
common affairs and contracts. In fine, he absolutely forbad him to teach or act
Play's, conceiving them deceitful and unprofitable, diverting youth and
Tradesmen from more necessary and virtuous employments. Laert.


He affirmed that Family the best, who got not unjustly, kept Plut. vit. Sol.
Symp. sept. Sapi. Arist. Ethic. 10. 8. Demetr. Phaler. Stob. Sermon. 3
not unfaithfully, spent not with repentance; and that happiness consists in a
virtuous and honest Life, in being content with a competency of outward things,
and in using them temperately. And to conclude, he earnestly enjoined all to
fly corporal pleasure; for (says he) it certainly brings sorrow; but observe
an honest life more strictly than an oath, meditate on serious things.

Hippias, a Philosopher; It is recorded of him, That he Cic. lib. de Orat.
would have every one provide necessaries for himself, and to have been his own
Tradesman; he was singular in all such Arts and employments, that he made the
very Buskins he wore.

The Gymnosophistae; were a sect of Philosophers in Epypt, that so Plin. 7. 2.
Cic. Tusc. Quest. 5.
dispis'd gaudy Apparel, and the rest of the Worlds intemperance, that they
went almost naked, living poorly and with great meanness, by which they were
enabled against all cold; and overcome that Lust by innocence, which people
that are called Christians (though covered) are overcome withal.

The Bamburacii, were a certain great people that inhabited about the river
Tygris in Asia; who observing the great influence Gold, Silver, and precious
Jewels had upon their minds, agreed Plin.
to bury all in the Earth, to prevent the corruption of their manners: they
used inferior Metals, and lived with mean and very ordinary accommodation;
wearing mostly but one very grave and plain Robe to cover nakedness. It were
well if Christians would mortify their insatiable appetites after wealth and
vanity, as did these Heathens.

Gynaecosmi, and Gynaeconomi, were two distinct numbers of Persons among the
Athenians, appointed by the Magistrates to overlook the actions of the
Inhabitants; the first was to Vide Suid.
see that they Appareled and behaved themselves gravely; especially that Women
were of modest behavior; and the other was to be present at their Treats and
Festivals, to see that there was no excess, nor disorderly carriage; and in
case any were found Criminal, they had full power to punish them. When, alas!
when shall this temperance be seen amongst the called Christians of the times!

Cornelia, a Noble Roman Matron; and Sister to Scipio, Valor. Maxim.
was esteemed the most famous and honorable Personage of her time; not more
for the greatness of her birth, than her exceeding temperance: And History
particularly mentions this as one great instance of her virtue, for which she
was so much admired; to wit, That she never was accustomed to wear rich Attire,
but such Apparel as was very plain and grave; rather making her Children (whom
her Instructions and Example had made virtuous) her greatest Ornaments. A good
pattern for the wanton Dames of the Age.

The ancient Heathens had gaudy Apparel, change of Fashions, Petrar. Herodot.
Stob. Sermon. 161. Laert.
and curiosity of Dress in such detestation, that they made them a mark of an
effeminate mind, and wanton disposition, and seldom used but by Comedians and
Curtezans.

Gregory (by some called) the Great, and esteemed a Father of the Church, speaks
thus, There be some are of opinion, Luke 16. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
that the wearing of precious and sumptuous Apparel, is no sin; which if it
were no fault, the Divine Word would never have so punctually expressed nor
Historically related, how the Rich man that was tormented in Hell, was clothed
in Purple and Silk: whence we may note, that touching the matter or subject of
Attire, humane curiosity avails highly: The first substance of our Garments
was very mean, to wit, Skins with Wool; whence it is we read, God made Adam
and his Wife, Coats of Skins; that is, of Skins of dead Beasts: Afterward, (to
see the growing pride and vanity of Men and Women) they came to pure Wool,
because lighter; after that to Flax, then to Dung and Ordure of Worms; to wit,
Silk: Lastly, to Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones; which excess of Apparel
highly displeases God; for instance whereof (which the very Pagans themselves
observed) We read that the very first among the Romans, who ever wore Purple,
were struck with a Thunderbolt, and so died suddenly for a terror to all
succeeding times, that none should attempt to live proudly in precious Attire:
this was the sense of Gregory Naziancen, that ancient Christian Writer, who
wore commonly a poor Coat, like to a Frock; so did Justin Martyr, Jerome,
Austin, etc. as their best Robe.

But above all others, Jerome, a famous man, whom we Jerome. Epist. Int. Oper.
have had occasion to mention once before, wrote thus to a Noble Virgin, called
Demetrias; exhorting her, that (having ended her Devotion) she should take in
hand Wool, and Weaving, after the commendable example of Dorcas; that Acts. 9.
36, 39.
by such changing and variety of works, the day might seem less tedious, and
the attempts of Satan less grievous; concluding his Religious Exhortation with
this positive sentence; (says he) I speak generally, No Raiment or Habit
whatsoever, shall seem precious in Christ's sight, but that which thou make
thy self, either for thy own particular use, or example of other Virgins; or to
give unto thy Grandmother, or Mother; No, though otherwise thou did
distribute thy Goods to the poor. Let but this strictness be observed, and
compared with the Apparel and Conversation of the Age. For however,
Pharisee-like, they otherwise Saint him, or call him an Holy Father. Sure it
is, they reject his counsel.

The great Duke of Momerancy, Colleague to the Duke of Orleance (Brother to the
French King, Lewis the 13th) in the War by them agitated against the Ministry
of Cardinal Richlieu (then grand Minister of State) being taken and convicted
at Lions, a little before his beheading, looking upon himself, who was very
richly attired; Ah (says he) this becomes not a Servant of the Crucified
Jesus; What do I Richlieu. Mem.
with these vanities about me? He was poor, despised, and naked, when he went
to the Cross to die for my sins. And immediately stripped himself of all his
finery, and put a more grave and modest garment on him. A serious reflection at
a time when he best knew what was best.

And for the great intemperance of the Age in Recreations, and Pleasures (most
falsely so called) hear what more particularly, both Heathens and Christians
have left recorded; although they were before touched upon; nor can they well
be separated from the other: Both being the most natural production of the same
Womb of Lust, Pride, and Vanity; unworthy of the Nobility of rational and
immortal Souls.
Chilon, another of the wise men of Greece, left these Three Vide Calip. Plin.
l. 7. 32.
serious Apothegmes, or Pathetical Sayings, behind him: (1) Whosoever thou art,
learn to know thy self. (2) Be not earnest in thy desires after any visible
thing. (3) Misery will be the end of meddling with many matters. Intimating, the
trouble that attends much Traffic; and those debates and suites that
necessarily follow such a course of living.

Bias and Stillpo, two great Philosophers; the first esteemed Valor. Max. 7. 2.
Laret. l. 4.
one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece, and Prince of his Citizens; who, when his
City was taken, and every one going Bag and Baggage, carried nothing with him;
and being asked, Why he helped not to secure something with him? Answered, That
he carried all he had about him. Meaning a good Conscience, and a virtuous
Mind, which none could rob him of. The latter was of the City Megara, who, when
his Country, Wise, and Children, were all destroyed by fire, being asked by
Demetrius what loss he had sustained? answered, Nothing: for I only count that
to be my own, which no body can take from me, which is the peace of a good
mind.

Anaxagoras, a Noble man, but a true Philosopher; He Plutar. cont. Usar. Cic.
Tusc. Quest. 5.
had a great Estate, and large Patrimony, which he surrendered to his Friends;
and being reproved for his carelessness; answered, It Is enough for you to care.
One asked him, Why he had no more love for his Country? I have, (said he)
pointing his finger toward the Heavens. When he returned from his Travels, and
saw his great Possessions, he uttered this expression, Non ego essem salvus,
nisi istae periissent; If I Plin. 1. 58.
had not dis-regarded them, I had perished; meaning, That if he had let his
mind gadd after such fading objects, and been exercised with those perishing
concerns, he had never known the sweetness of a divine life; but had been
ignorant of that, for which his life was given him; and consequently had died
as miserable as the dispisers of a Heavenly life, and lovers of this worlds
pleasures, are wont to do.

Themistoeles, a great Athenian General, being told by Symachus, That he would
teach him the Art of Memory; Gravely Plutarch.
answered, He had rather learn the Art of Forgetfulness: adding, He could
remember enough, but many things he could not forget, which were necessary to
be forgotten; as the Honors, Glory's, Pleasures, and Conquests he had spent
his days in, too apt to transport to vain glory.

Socrates, the most divine and learned Philosopher of his time, Plat. Apolog.
Diog. Laert. Helvic. Cic. Tusc. Quest. 1. Xenoph. Brut. Cic. Okat. Liban. Apol.
Varro. Hist. Schol. Arist.
(and whom it is feigned that Apollo (called the Godd of Wisdom) gave this
Character, That he was the wisest man on Earth) was a man of severe life, and
instructed People gratis, in just, grave, and virtuous manners; for which,
being envied by the vain Comical wit of the Age, Aristophanes, (as spoiling
their Trade of Plays) and exercising the generality of the People with more
noble and virtuous things, was represented in a Play by Aristophanes, in which
he rendered Socrates so ridiculous, that the Vulgar would rather part with
Socrates in earnest, than Socrates in jest; which made way for their impeaching
him as an enemy to their Godds, for which they put him to death. But in a short
space, his 80 Judges, and the whole People so deeply resented his absence, that
they slew many of his Accusers; some hanged themselves; none would trade with
them, nor answer them a question. They erected several Statues to his praise;
they forbid his Name to be mentioned; that they might forget their injustice:
They called home his banished Friends and Scholars: Eunap. Calim. Epig^ Ae^^s.
And by the most wise and learned men of that Age; it is observed, That famous
City was punished with the most dreadful Plague that ever raged amongst them;
and all Greece with it, never prospered in any considerable undertaking, but
from that time always decayed.

Amongst many of his sober and Heavenly Maxims, on which he was accustomed to
discourse with his disciples, these are some;

He taught every where, That an upright man, and an happy man, were all one.
Clem. Alex. Strom. 2. 417


They that do Good, are employed; they that spend their time in vain
Recreations, are idle. Xen. Mem. 1. p. 720.


To do Good, is the best course of Life; he only is idle, who might be better
employed. Xen. Mem. 3. p. 78. 779, 780. Stob. Each. Sermon. 1. 11.


A Horse is not known by his furniture, but qualities; so Men are to be
esteemed for Virtue, not Wealth.

Being asked, Who lived without trouble? He answered, Those who are conscious
to themselves of no evil thing. Stob. 4. 6.


To one who demanded, What was Nobility? He answered, A good temper and
disposition of Soul and Body. Stob. 218.


They who know what they ought to do, and do it not, are not wise and
temperate; but fools, and stupid. Xenoph. Mem. 3.


To one that complained, he had not been benefited by Senec. Epist. 1. 103.
his Travels; Not without reason (says Socrates) Thou did travel without thy
self: Intimating, he knew not the eternal Mind, or God, to direct and inform
him.

Being demanded what Wisdom was? said, A virtuous Stob. 28.
composure of the Soul. And being asked, who were Wise? answered, Those that
sin not.

Seeing a young man Rich, but ignorant of Heavenly Stob. 32.
things, and pursuing Earthly pleasures; Behold (says he) a Golden Slave!

Soft ways of living in pleasure, beget neither good constitution Xen. mem. 1.
of body, nor mind.

Fine and rich Clothes, are only for Comedians, that would Aelian. 9.
sport the People with only making themselves fools.

Being demanded, from what things Men and Women Stob. 37.
ought to refrain? He answered, PLEASUR'S.

Being asked, What Continence and Temperance were? Stob. 37. Stob. 87. Xen.
mem. 3, 4.
said, Government of corporal desires, and pleasures; the wicked live to eat,
etc. but the good eat to live: temperate Persons become the most excellent: Eat
that which neither hurts the body nor mind, and which is easy to be gotten.

One saying, It was a great matter to abstain from what Aelian. Var. Hist. 9.
one desires? But (says he) it is better not to desire at all.

It is the property of God to need nothing; and they that need, Stob. 37.
and are contented with least, come nearest God.

The only and best way to Worship God, is to mind and obey whatsoever Xenoph.
mem. 4. 802.
he Commands.

That the Souls of Men and Women partake of the Divine Nature; Xen. mem. 4.
Plat. Phaed.
that God is seen of the virtuous mind; that by waiting upon him, they are
united unto him, in an inaccessible place of purity and happiness; which God he
asserted always to be near him.

Many more are the excellent Sayings of this great man, who was not less famous
for his Sayings, than his Examples with the greatest Nations; yet died he a
Sacrifice to the sottish fury of the vain world.

The History of his Life reports, That his Father was told, He should have the
guide of his Life within him, which should be more to him than five hundred
Masters; which proved true. Xen. mem. 1. p. 710.
Instructing his Scholars herein, Charging them not to neglect these divine
affairs which properly concern man, to mind or enquire after such things as are
without in the visible world.

He taught the use of outward things only as they were necessary to Life and
Commerce; forbidding superfluities and Curiosities. Xen. mem. 4. Plato de legib.
He was executed for his Doctrine after having lived seventy years; the most
admired, followed, and visited of all men in his time, by Kings and
Commonwealths; and then, whom, Antiquity mentions none with more reverence and
honor.

Well were it for poor England, if her conceited Christians were true
Socrates's; whose divine, severe, just, and self-denying life, does not bespeak
him more famous, than it will Christians infamous at the revelation of the
righteous judgment; where Heathens Virtue shall aggravate Christians
Intemperance; and their Humility, the others excessive Pride; and justly too,
since a greater than Socrates is come, (whose Name they profess) but they will
not obey him.

Plato, that famous Philosopher (and Scholar to Socrates) Plato de rep.
was so grave, so heavenly devoted, nay, so discreetly Politic, that in his
Commonwealth, he would not so much as harbor Poetical Fancy's, (much less open
Stagers) as being too effeminate; and apt to withdraw the minds of youth from
more noble, more manly, as well as more heavenly exercises.

Plato seeing a young man play at Dice, Reproved him sharply; the other
answered, What, for so small a matter? Diog. Laert.
Custom (says Plato) is no small thing; let idle hours be spent more usefully.

Let youth (says he) take delight in good things; for Laert. in vit. Xenocras.
Stob. Aelian.
Pleasures are the baits of evil. Observe, the momentory sweetness of a
delicious life, is followed with eternal sorrow; the short pain of the
contrary, with eternal pleasures: being commanded to put on a Purple garment by
the King of Sicilly; he refused, saying, He was a man, and scorned such
effeminacy's.

He addicted himself to heavenly Contemplations, and is Alcin.
said to have lived a virtuous but single Life; always eying and obeying the
Mind, which he sometimes called God the Father of all things; affirming, Who so
lived, should become like him; and so related, as to be joined with, or to the
Divinity it self.

This same Plato, upon his dying bed, sent for his Friends about him, and told
them, the whole World was out of the way, in that they understood not, nor
regarded the Mind (that is God) assuring them, those men died most comfortably,
that lived most conformable to right Reason, sought and adored the first Cause,
meaning God.

Antisthenes, an Athenian Philosopher, who had taught in Laert. vit. Socrat.
Aelian.
the study of Eloquence several years; but upon his hearing Socrates treat of
the seriousness of Religion, of the divine Life, eternal Rewards, etc. bid all
his Scholars to seek them a new Master, for he had found one for himself;
wherefore selling his estate, he distributed it to the poor, and betook himself
wholly to the consideration of heavenly things, going cheerfully six miles
every day, to hear Socrates.

But where are the like Preachers and Converts amongst Stob.
the People called Christians! Observe the daily pains of Socrates; surely he
did not study a week to read a written Sermon; we are assured of the contrary;
for 'twas frequent with him to Preach to the People at any time of the day, in
the very streets, as occasion served. Neither was he an Hireling, or covetous;
for he did it gratis; surely then, he had no fat Benefices, Tithes, Gleabs,
etc. And let the self-denial and diligence of Antisthenes be considered; of a
Philosopher and Mister, to become a Scholar, and that a daily one; surely it
was then matter of reproach, (as it is now) showing both want of Knowledge,
(though called a Philosopher) and his great desires to obtain it. None of these
used to go to Plays, Balls, Treats, etc. they found more serious employments
for their minds, and were examples of temperance to the world.

I will repeat some of his grave Sentences, as reported by Laertius, Diocles,
and others; namely, That those are only Laert.
noble, who are virtuous; that virtue was self-sufficient to happiness; That it
consists in actions, not requiring many words, nor much learning, and is
self-sufficient to wisdom; for that all other things have reference thereunto.
That men should not Govern by force; nor by Laws, unless good; but by Justice.

To a Friend, complaining he had lost his Notes, Thou should have writ them
upon thy mind (says he) and not in a Book.

Those who would never die (says he) must live justly, and piously.

Being asked, what learning was best? That (says he) which unlearneth evil.
Stob.


To one that praised a life full of pleasures and delicacies; Let the sons of
my Enemies (says he) live delicately; counting it the greatest misery.

We ought (says he) to aim at such pleasures as follow honest labor; and not
those which go before it. Ibid. 117.


When at any time he saw a Woman richly dressed, he would, in a way of
reproach, bid her Husband bring out his Diog. Laert.
Horse and Arms; meaning, If he were prepared to justify the injuries such
wantonness uses to produce, he might the better allow those dangerous
freedoms; Otherwise (says he) pluck off her rich and gaudy Attire.

He is said to exclaim bitterly against Pleasures; often saying, I had rather
be mad, than addicted to Pleasure, and Agell. lib. 9. c. 5.
spend my days in decking and feeding my Carkase.

Those (says he) who have once learned the way to temperance and virtue; let
them not offer to entangle themselves again with fruitless stories and vain
learning; nor be addicted to corporal delicacies which dull the mind, and will
divert and hinder them from the pursuit of those more noble and heavenly
virtues.

Upon the death of his beloved Master, Socrates; he instituted a Sect, called
Cynicks; out of whom came that vast Laert. vit. Menedr.
Sect of the Stoicke: both which had these common principles, which they daily
with great and unwearied diligence did maintain, and instruct People in the
knowledge of, viz.

No man is wise or happy, but the good and virtuous man; that Laert. Plut. de
rep. Stoic. Stob. Cic. de not. Deo. lib. 2.
not much learning, nor study of many things was necessary; that a wise man is
never drunk nor mad, that he never sins. That a wise man is void of passion.
That he is sincere, religious, grave; that he only is divine; that such only
are Priests and Prophets; that they have God in themselves, and that his Law is
imprinted in theit minds, and the minds of all men, that such a one only can
pray, is innocent, meek, temperate, ingenious, noble; a good Magistrate, Lact.
de Ira. Dei. cap. 10.
Father, Son, Master, Servant, and worthy of praise: On the contrary, that
wicked men can be none of these; that the same belongs to Men and Women. Their
diet was slender, their food only what would satisfy nature; their coverings
exceeding Plut. Pl. Ph. 16. Cic. Tusc. Quest. 4. Diog. Laert. vit. Mend. Stob.
mean; their habitations solitary and homely: They affirmed those who lived
with fewest things and were contented, most nearly ap proached God, who wants
nothing. They voluntarily despised riches, glory, and nobility, as foolish
shows, and vain fictions, that had no true and solid worth or happiness in
them. They made all things to be good or evil, and flatly denied the idle
stories of Fortune and Chance. Certainly, these were they, who having no
(external) Law, became a Law unto themselves; and did not abuse the knowledge
they had of the invisible God; but to their capacities improved that piety of
life, and instructed men in that righteous, serious, sollid, and heavenly
Principle, which leads to true and everlasting happiness.

Aristotle, Scholar to Plato, and the Oracle of Philosophy Stob. Sermon. 45.
to these very times, (though not so divinely Contemplative as his Master,
nevertheless) follows him in this; and looks upon all such Productions, to be
that folly and vanity, which should by good discipline be exiled humane
societies.

Aristotle seeing a youth finely dressed; said, Art thou not ashamed, Stob. 161.
when Nature has made thee a man, to make thy self a woman? And to another,
gazing on his fine Cloak; Why Ibid. 46.
do thou boast of a Sheeps fleece? He said, It was the duty of a good man,
to live so under Laws, as he should do if there were none.

Clitomathus, and Epaminondas, two great Captains and Champions at War: The
first is reported to have been so Vide Aelian
very chaste, and virtuous in his disposition, That if he had heard any talk
vain or obscene discourse, he presently was wont Vide Xenoph. and Prob.
to quit the Company and be gone: The later, is described to have been a man
out-stripping any of his time, in good and virtuous things; and therefore had
in great reverence by the People of those times; but above other things, they
observed, That he would never lie, neither in jest nor earnest, though for his
own advantage; so devoted was he to a just and righteous Conversation.

Phocion, a very famous Athenian, honest and poor, yet he contemned Riches:
Philip, King of Macedonia, could not corrupt Vide Suid.
him with all his Wealth; and when several persuaded him to accept of his
offers, or else his Children would be in need: He answered, If they be like me,
that which served me will serve them; If unlike, I will not seek to nourish
their luxury by providing superfluities; good men will be content with few
things, and they that would seek for more, do not deserve what they have. How
much do these wise expressions condemn the pride and wantonness of this Age?
Surely 'twere better to be a Phocion in the day of Judgment, than thousands
that call themselves by the splended Name of Christian, who are strangers to
the Life of it.

Mandanius, a great and famous Philosopher of the Gymnosophisies, whom
Alexander, the first Greecian Emperor (called the Great) required to come to
the Feast of Jupiter's Son, (meaning himself) declaring that if he came, he
should be rewarded; if not, he should be put to death. The Prilosopher
contemned his Message, as vain and sordid. He first told them, That he denied
him to be Jupiter's Son (a mere fiction.) Next, That as for his gifts, he
esteemed them nothing worth; his own Country could furnish him with
necessaries, beyond which he coveted nothing: And lastly, as for the death he
threatened, He did not fear it; but of the two, he wished it rather; In that
(said he) I am sure it is a change to a more blessed and happy state. How
little these called Christians are true Philosophers, and how much more this
Philosopher was a Christian than they; let the righteous Principle in every
Conscience judge. Is it not then intolerable that these bablers of the times
should be esteemed for Christians, who are yet to learn to be good Heathens?
that prate of Grace and Nature, and know neither; who saucely will determine
what is become of Heathens, and know not where they are themselves; nor mind
what may become of them; that can run readily over a tedious List of famous
Personages; and callumniate such as will not with them celebrate their memories
with extravagant and superstitious praises, whilst it is laudable to act the
contrary; and no so ready away to become vicious, as not to be so; a strange
paradox but too true; so blind, so stupefied, so besotted are the foolish
sensualists of the world, under their great pretenses to Religion, Faith, and
Worship. Ah! did they know the peace, the joys, the unspeakable ravishment of
soul, that inseparably attend the innocent, harmless, still, and retired Life
of Jesus: Did they but weigh within themselves, the Authors of their vain
delights and pastimes; the nature and disposition they are so grateful to; the
dangerous consequences of exercising the mind and its affections below, and
arresting them from their due attendance, and obedience to the most holy crying
Voice in their Consciences; repent, return, all is vanity and vexation of
spirit. Were but these things reflected on, were the incessant woings of Jesus,
and his importunate knocks, and entreaties at the door, but kindly answered,
and he admitted to take up his possession there. And lastly, were such resolved
to give up to the instructions and holy guidance of his eternal Spirit, in all
the humble, heavenly, and righteous Conversation it requires, and of which he
is become our Captain and Example; then, O then, both root and branch of
Vanity, the Nature that invented, and which delights her self therein, with all
the folly's themselves would be consumed and vanish. But they, alas! cheat
themselves by misconstrued Scriptures, and daub with the untempered Mortar of
misapplied Promises* My Friends, mind the just Witness and holy Principle in
your selves, that you may experimentally know more of the divine Life, in
which, and not in a multitude of vain repetitions, and aerie fancies, true and
sollid felicity eternally consists.

Hipparchia, A fair Macedonian Virgin, Noble of Blood, Diog. Laert. vit. Crat.
and Hipp.
(as they term it) but more truly noble of mind, I cannot omit to mention; who
entertained so earnest an affection for Crates, the Cynical Philosopher, as
well for his severe life, as excellent discourse, that by no means could her
Relations, nor Suitors, by all their wealth, nobility, and beauty, dissuade her
from being his companion: Upon which strange resolution, they all betook
themselves to Crates, beseeching him to show himself a true Philosopher, in
persuading her to desist; which he strongly endeavored by many arguments, but
not prevailing; went his way, and brought all the little furniture of his house
and showed her; This (says he) is thy Husband; that, the furniture of thy
house: Consider on it, for thou can not be mine, unless thou followest the
same course of life; (for being rich above 20 tallents, which is more then
50000. l. he neglected all to follow a retired studious life) all which had so
contrary an effect, that she immediately went to him before them all, and said,
I seek not the pomp and effeminacy of this world, but knowledge and virtue,
Crates; and choose a life of temperance, before a life of delicacies; for true
satisfaction, thou know; is in the mind; and that pleasure is only worth
seeking, that lasts for ever. Thus was it, she became the constant companion,
both of his love and life; his friendship, and his virtues; traveling with him
from place to place, and performing the public Exercises of Instruction with
Crates, wherever they came: She was a most violent enemy to all Impiety, but
especially to wanton men and women, and those whose garb and conversation
showed them devoted to vain pleasures and pastimes; Effeminacy, rendering the
like persons not only unprofitable, but pernicious to the whole world. Which
she as well made good by the example of her exceeding industry, temperance, and
severity, as those are wont to do by their intemperance and folly: for ruin of
health, estates, virtue, and loss of eternal happiness, have ever attended, and
ever will attend such earthly minds.

Thus may the voluptuous Women of the times, read their reproofs in the
character of a brave Heathen; and learn, That sollid happiness consists in a
divine and holy composure of mind; in a neglect of wealth and greatness; and
contempt of all corporal pleasures, as more befitting Beasts than immortal
Spirits: And which are used by none, but such as not knowing the excellency of
heavenly things, are both inventing and delighting like brutes, in that which
perishes; giving the preference to poor mortality; and spending their lives,
to gratify the lusts of a little dirty flesh and blood, that shall never enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: by which their minds become dark'ned, and so
insensible of more Celestial Glory's, that they do not only refuse to enquire
after them; but infamously scoff and despise whosoever do, as a foolish,
frantic, and mere mad People; to that strange degree of darkness, and
impudence this Age has got. But if the exceeding temperance, chastity, virtue,
industry, and contentedness of very Heathens, with the plain and necessary
enjoyments, God has been pleased to vouchsafe the Sons and Daughters of Men, as
sufficient to their wants, that they may be the more at leisure to answer the
great end of their being born, will not suffice, but that they will exceed the
bounds, precepts, and examples, both of Heathens and Christians, by the
invention of vanities to indulge their bodies; Wrath and inexpressible anguish
shall overtake them, when they shall have an Eternity, to think with gnashing
teeth, on what, to all Eternity, they can never remedy; These dismal wages are
decreed to be their lot, who so far affront God, Heaven, and Eternal
felicities, as to neglect their acquaintance with them, and daily increase in
the love and knowledge of them, merely to gratify the desires of perishing
flesh, and for the enjoyment of a few fading toys. For such to think, that
notwithstanding their lives of sense and pleasure, wherein their minds become
slaves to their bodies, that they shall be everlastingly happy, is one of the
greatest evils they can commit; since it is the greatest abuse to the Holy God,
that Men and Women should believe him an eternal companion for their carnal and
sensual minds; for, as the tree falls, so it lies; as death leaves them,
judgment finds them: there is no repentance in the grave. Therefore you, to whom
this comes, O retire, withdraw a while; let not the Body see all, taste all,
enjoy all; but let the Soul see too, taste, and enjoy that knowledge and divine
food, and those heavenly refreshments proper to that invisible World, of which
she is an Inhabitant, and where she must abide in an eternal state of peace, or
plagues, when this visible one shall be dissolved.

Quintillian, had so ill an opinion of the Stage Players, that besides other
enormities, he plainly termed them Hypocrites, gross dissemblers, and liars,
from counterfeiting the manner, measure, motion, gesture, gate, feature, and
actions of such persons as they represent, whose fashion and humor they too
often insinuate in beholders, as well as they retain them themselves, when they
have put on their own clothes again. How true this guess was in an Heathen, the
impiety's of called Christians, have notoriously demonstrated.

Tertullian, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Gregory Naz. accounted Tert. lib. de
Patien. Chrysostom.
ancient Fathers; especially Tertullian, who lived about two hundred years
after Christ; now fourteen hundred and sixty nine years since: Upon that
remarkable passage, recorded by Matthew, as the words of Christ himself,
namely, But I say Mat. 12. 36.
unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of Judgment: Almost agree. Says Tertullian, of all vain and
superfluous words; more talk than is necessary; Says Chrysostom, Of such words
as are not convenient, nor profitable, but move immodesty. Says Theophylact,
Of all Lies, Callumny's, all inordinate, and ridiculous speeches. Says
Gregory, Such words men shall account for, which want that profit, ever
redounding from modest discourses, and that are seldom uttered from any
preceding necessity, or cause; things frivolous, fables, old-wives-tales. All
which sufficiently reprehend the Recreations of the times, of great folly,
vanity, and sin.

Ambrose, another Father, who first was Lieutenant of the Socrat. lib. 4. chapter
25.
Province and City of Millan; and upon his discreet appeasing of the Multitude,
somewhat disorderly upon some difference amongst them, about Electing a Bishop,
was by their uniform Consent chosen himself; Although this Person of all
others, might have been thought to plead for the accustomed Recreations,
especially not having been long a Christian, (for he was a Catechumenist, (or
one but lately instructed) at the time of his being Elected;) yet does he in so
many words determine the matter thus; Plays ought not to be known by
Christians. And,

Augustine, more famous much for his many Books, and August. de Civit. Dei.
lib. 2. chapter 7.
knowledge in Church affairs, whose sentences are oracles with some, gives this
as his Opinion of Plays, and the like Recreations; That they were more
pernicious and abominable than those Idolatrous Sacrifices which were offered
in honor of the Pagon Godds; Doubtless he thought the one not so offensive to
Reason, and the impressions Divinity has made on every understanding; as the
other was very pleasant to the senses, and therefore apt to steal away the mind
from better things; for 'twas his maxim, That every thing a man does, is
either a hindrance, De Civ. Dei. lib. 9. chapter 5.
or furtherance to good. This would be esteemed intolerable Doctrine in a
Quaker, yet will the Quaker rejoice if it be esteemed and followed, as good
Doctrine in Augustine.

Nay, Polybius, Cicero, Livius, Tacitus, great Heathen Writers, ascribed the
flourishing of the Roman State and Empire, to the Gravity, Religion, and Virtue
of those Ages; many times bitterly envying against the excess, and vanity, we
have here condemned, as that which does deboyst civil society's, and bring them
under such effeminate security, as to expose them to the violence of the first
Pretenders; which both Augustine and Lactantius further attest.

Machiavel, in his Disputations says, The first promoters Match. disp. lib. 2.
chapter 5.
of Christianity, were so diligent in rooting out the vanity's, and
superstitions of the Gentiles, that they commanded all Poets and Historians,
which contained any thing of the Gentile Conversation or Worship, to be burned:
But that Spirit's extinguished, and those follys revived.

Cardan, more particular relates to us, how Gregory, though a Pope, (another
from him aforementioned) did cause Cardan de sapient. l. 2.
many Latin Authors to be burned, because of their vanity and lasciviousness;
as Caecilianus, Affranius, Naevius, Licinus, Zennius, Attilius, Victor, Livi's
Dialogues; nor did Plautus, Martial, and Terrence (so much in request both in
the Schools and Academies of the Land) escape their honest zeal, although the
multitude of Copies so far frustrated their good intentions, as they are
multiplied of late; In like manner (says Cardan) did Gregory Naziancen
suppress the Greek Authors, Menander, Diphilos, Appollodonus, Philemon, Alexis,
Sappho, etc.

Petrus Bellonius, that great and inquisitive Traveller, when he came to Mount
Athos, where there live in several Monasteries Pet. Bell. obser. l. 1. c. 35.
six thousand Caloieri, or Religious persons (so called) He did not so much as
find there, (no nor in all Greece) one man acquainted in the Conversation of
these parts, for Vid ^ 40.
though they had several Manuscripts of Divinity in their Libraries, yet not
one Poet, Historian, or Philosopher; for the Rulers of that Church were such
enemies thereto, that Chap. 39.
they Anathematized all such Priests, and Religious persons, as should read or
transcribe any Books, but what treated of Religion: And persuaded all others,
that it was not lawful for a Christian to study Poesy, etc. though nothing is
more grateful in those days.

Ouzelius, in his Animadversions on Minucius Felix, says, That as the Gentiles
did object to the Christians, their rude style, ill bred Language, and
destitute of all Address, or civil Ouzel. Animad. in Min. Felix. p. 25.
Salutation; calling them Rusticks and Clowns: so did the Christians, by way of
Irony and contempt, term them the wellbred, the eloquent, and the knowing. This
he proves by ample testimonies out of Arnobius, Lactantius, Isidorus,
Pelusiota, Theodoret, and others.

In the Constitutions of Clemens Romanus, (as supposed) it is Constitut. Clem.
Romans lib. 1. chapter 6.
enjoined, Abstain from all the Books of the Gentiles; What have you to do with
strange, and unprofitable discourses, which seduce weak People?

The Council of Carthage, had an express Canon against reading Distinct. 37.
cap. Episcop. citant.
the Heathen Authors, much less their foolish Commoedies. And,

Gratian also has suchlike passages as these, We see that Jac. Laurentio, de
lib. Gentil. p. 40, 41.
the Priests of the Lord, neglecting the Gospels, and the Prophets, read
Commoedies, or Play-books, and sing Loveverses, and read Virgil; (a Book now in
so much request, as to have been of late rendered into English.) Strange! that
these things should have been so severely censured of old, and that those
persons whose Names are had in so much reverence, should make the like Actions
the constructions of Christ's Precepts, and the natural consequences of the
Christian Doctrine; and yet that they should be so far neglected of this Age,
as not to be judged worthy an imitation.

The Waldenses, so called from one Peter Waldo, a Citizen Alb. Capet. Hist.
deorig. Waldens. Vignia. Hist. Biblio. p. 130. Dubran. hist. Bohem. l. 14.
Thuan. in hist. sui temp. p. 458* Mat. Paris hist. of Engl. An. 1174.
of Lions in France, in the year 1160; elsewhere called Albigenses, from the
Country Albi; Lollards in England from one. Reynard Lollard, who sometime after
came into these parts, and Preached boldly against the Idolatry's,
Superstitions, and vain Conversation of the Inhabitants of this Island. They
had many other Names, as Arnoldists, Esperonists, Henriciens, Siccars,
Insabachas, Patarenians, Turlupins, Lyonists, Fraticelli, Hussites, Bohemians,
(still the same;) but finally, by the Papists, damnable Heretics, though by
the Protestants, the true Church of Christ: And to omit many testimonies, I
will instance only in Bishop Usher, who in his discourse of the succession of
the Christian Church, defends them not only for the true Reformers, but makes
the succession of the Church Bellar. tom. 2 lib. 1. cap. 26. col. 86. Ecchius
com. loc. c. 28. Alphon. l. 6. Cont. Haeret. p. 99. Clne. Syl. ^ist. Bohem.
Usher de suc. Eccl. Christ.
to be mainly evinceable from their Antiquity: I shall forbear all the
Circumstances and Principles they held, or in which he strongly defends them
against the horrid cruelty and ignorance of the Romanists, particularly
Rainerius, Rubis, Capetaneis, etc. only what they held concerning our present
subject of Apparel and Recreations; I cannot be so injurious to the Truth,
their self-denial, the good of others, at whose Reformation I aim, and my own
discourse, as to omit it; and therefore I shall proceed to allege their Faith
and Practice in these matters, however esteemed but of a trifling importance by
the loose, wanton, and carnal minded of this generation, whose feeling is lost
by the enjoyment of their inordinate desires; and that think it a high state of
Christianity to be no better than the Beasts that perish; namely, in not being
excessive in Newgate and mere Kennel-enormities, that these first Reformers had
another sense of these things, that they made the Conversation of the Gospel of
a Crucified Jesus, to intend, and require another sort of life than what is
usual with almost all those who account themselves Members of Christ; I shall
show out of their own Doctrines, as found in the most authentic Histories.

To be brief, In their Exposition upon the Lord's Prayer, Jo. Paul. Per. hist.
Wald. Incat. l. 1. c. 3 p. 37, 38. Dona nos lo nostre pan quotidian enchoi.
Memor. Morrel. Vign. Mem. fol. 7. Ezekiel. 16. 49 Thesaur. fed. Ap. Wald.
that part of it which speaks thus, Give us this day our daily bread; Where
next to that spiritual bread, which they make it to be the duty of all to seek
more than life; they come positively to deny the praying for more than is
requisite for outward necessities, or that its lawful to use more; condemning
all superfluity, and excess out of fashion, pride, or wantonness; not only of
bread, but all outward things, which they judge to be thereby comprehended,
using Ezekiel's words, That fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, was
the cause of the wickedness and the abominations of Sodom, for which God by
fire destroyed them off the Earth; whereupon they conclude with an ancient
Father of the Primitive Church, after this manner, That costly Apparel,
superfluity in diet, (as three Dishes when one will serve) play, idleness, and
sleep, which fatten the body, nourish luxury, weaken the spirit, and lead the
soul unto death; but (say they) a spare diet, labor, short sleep, plain and
mean garments, help to purify the soul, tame the body, mortify Ibid. l. 2. c.
3. Li filli ligual naisson ali pairons carnals deuon esser rendus, etc.
the lusts of the flesh, and comfort the spirit. So severe were they, that in
that Chapter of the Instruction of their Children, they would not suffer them
to converse with those of strange places, or principles, whose conversation was
Gameing, Plays, and the like wanton Recreations; but especially concerning
young Women.

A Man (say they) must have a great care of his Daughters: Have thou Daughters?
keep them within to wholesome things; see they wander not; for Dina, Jacob's
Daughter, was corrupted by being seen of strangers: they affirm no better to be
the general event of such conversation.

To which I shall add their Opinion and Practice concerning Ibid. l. 2. c. 8.
Taverns, public Houses for Treats, and Pleasure, of which the Land swarms in
our days.

A Tavern is the fountain of sin, the school of the Devil, La Taverna and
maisons de pleisirs es fontana de pecca, eschola del Diavola, etc.
it works wonders fitting the place: It is the custom of God to show his power
in his Church, and to work Miracles; that is to say, to give sight to the
spiritually blind, to make the lame to leap, the dumb to sing, the deaf to
hear: But the Devil does quite contrary to all these in Taverns, and the like
places of Pleasure; for when the Drunkard goes to the Tavern, he goes upright;
but when he comes forth, he cannot go at all; he has lost his sight, speech,
and hearing too. The Lectures that are read in this school of the Devil (say
these poor Waldenses, and first Reformers) are Gluttony's, Oaths, Perjury's,
Lyings, Blasphemy's, Flattery's, and diverse other wicked Villany's, and
pernicious effects, by which the heart is withdrawn further and further from
God. And as the Ecclesiasticus says, The Taverner shall not be freed from sin.

But above other Recreations, do but seriously observe of what danger and ill
consequence these first Reformers thought Dancing, Music, and the like
Pastimes to be, which is Ibid. l. 2. c. 9.
the greatest divertisement of these days.
Dancing is the Devils Procession, and he that enters into his procession, the
Devil is the guide, the middle, and Lo bal es la procession del Diavol and q i
intra en la bal, etc. Spir. Alm. fol. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.
the end of the dance; as many paces as a man makes in dancing, so many paces
does he make to go to Hell. A man sins in dancing diverse ways; as in his
pace, Job 14. 16. chap. 31. 4. Psalm. 37. 23. Prove. 16. 9. Fer. 10. 23. Mark 6.
23, 24, 25 26, 27, 28. Exodus 32. 4, 5, 6, 7.
for all his steps are numbered; in his touch, in his ornaments, in his hearing,
sight, speech, and other vanities. And therefore we will prove first by the
Scripture, and afterward by diverse other Reasons, how wicked a thing it is to
dance. The first testimony that we will produce, is that which we read in the
Gospel, where it is said to please Herod so well, that it cost John Baptist his
life. The second is in Exodus, when Moses coming near to the Congregation, saw
the Calf, he cast the Tables from him, and broke them at the foot of the
mountain, and afterward it cost three and twenty thousand their lives.
Besides, the Ornaments which Women wear in their dances, are as Crowns for many
victory's which the Devil has got against the Children of God. For the Devil
has not only one Sword in the dance, but as many as there are beautiful and
well adorned Persons in the dance; for the words of a Woman are a glittering
sword. And therefore that place is much to be seared wherein the Enemy has so
many swords, since that one only sword of his may be (justly) feared.

Again, The Devil in this place strikes with a sharpened sword; for, the Women
(who make it acceptable) come not willingly to the dance, if they be not
painted, and adorned; that which (painting and ornament) is as a Whetstone, on
which the Devil sharpneth his sword.

They that deck and adorn their Daughters, are like those that put dry wood to
the fire, to the end it may burn the better: for such Women kindle the fire of
Luxury in the hearts of men. As Sampson's foxes fired the Philistines corn; so
these women, they have fire in their faces, and in their gestures and actions,
their glances and wanton words, by which they consume the goods of men.

Again, The Devil in the dance uses the strongest Armor that he has; for his
most powerful arms are Women; which is made plain unto us, in that the Devil
made choice of the Woman to deceive the first Man; so did Balaam, that the
Children of Israel might be rejected (of God.) By a woman he made Sampson,
David, and Absalom to sin.

The Devil tempts men by women three manner of ways; that is, by the Touch,
by the Eye, by the Ear; by these three means he tempts foolish men to
dancings; by touching their hands, beholding their beauty, hearing their songs
and music.

Again, They that dance break that Promise and Agreement they have made with
God in Baptism, when their Godfathers promise for them, That they shall
renounce the Devil and all his pomp; for dancing is the pomp of the Devil, and
he that danceth maintains his pomp, and sings his mass. For the Woman that
sings in the dance, is the Prioress (or chiefest) of the Devil; and those
that Answer are the Clerks, and the Beholders are the Parishioners, and the
Music are the Bells, and the Fiddlers the Ministers of the Devil. For as when
Hoggs are strayed, if the Hog-herd call one, all assemble themselves together;
so the Devil causes one Women to sing in the dance, or to play on some
Instrument, and presently gather all the dancers together.

Again, In a dance, a man breaks the Ten Commandments of God: As first, Thou
shall have no other Godds but me etc. for in dancing a man serves that Person
whom he most desires to serve, (after whom goes his heart:) and therefore Jerome
says, Every man's Godd is that he serves and Jerome in dec. inc. oper.
loves best (and that he loves best, which his thoughts wander and gadd most
after.) He sins against the second Commandment, when he makes an Idol of that
he loves. Against the third, in that Oaths, (and frivolously using God's Name)
are frequently amongst dancers. Against the fourth, for that by dancing, the
Sabbath day is profaned. Against the fifth, for in the dance, Parents are many
times dishonored, since thereby many bargains are made without their counsel.
Against the sixth, A man kills in dancing, for every one that sets about to
please another, he kills the soul as often as he persuades unto lust. Against the
seventh, For the party that danceth, be it male or female, commits adultery
with the party they lust after; for he that looks on a Woman to lust after
her, has already committed Adultery with her in his heart. Against the eighth
Commandment, A man sins in dancing, when he with draws the heart of another
from God. Against the ninth, when in dancing he speaks falsely against the
Truth, (and for some little honor, or secret lascivious end, deny's what is
true; or affirms what is false.) Against the tenth, when Women affect the
Ornaments of others, and Men covet the Wives, Daughters, and Servants of their
Neighbors. (which undeniably attends all such Plays and Sports.)

Again, A man may prove how great an evil dancing is, by the multitude of sins
that accompany those that dance; for they dance without measure or number: And
therefore, says Augustine, The miserable Dancer knows not, that as many
Angust. de Civit. Dei.
paces as he makes in dancing, so many leaps he makes to Hell. They sin in
their Ornaments, after a Five-fold manner. First, By being proud thereof.
Secondly, By inflaming the hearts of those that behold them. Thirdly, When they
make those ashamed that have not the like Ornaments, giving them occasion to
covet the like. Fourthly, By making Women importunate in demanding the like
Ornaments of their Husbands. And Fifthly, When they cannot obtain them of their
Husbands, they seek to get them elsewhere by sin. They sin by singing and
playing on Instruments; for their songs bewitch the hearts of those that hear
them with temporal delight, forgetting God; uttering nothing in their songs but
lies and vanities; and the very motion of the body which is used in dancing,
gives testimony enough of evil.

Thus you see that dancing is the Devils Procession, and he that enters into a
dance, enters into the Devil's Procession. Of dancing, the Devil's the guide,
the middle, and the end; and he that enters a good and a wise man into the
dance, (if it can be that such a one is either good or wise) comes forth a
corrupt and a wicked man: SARAH, THAT HOLY WOMAN WAS NONE OF THESE: Behold the
apprehensions of those ancient good old Reformers, touching those things that
are so much in Practice and Reputation in these times; thus far verbatim. But I
cannot leave off here, till I have yet added the Conclusion of their Chatechism
and Direction, with some passages out of one of their Pastors Letters; fit to
the present occasion.

They Conclude in this Direction; namely, how to rule Ibid. lib. 2. Concl. p.
68. Encar en qual manier. fidel debian regir li lor Corpse. Non servir a li
desirier mortal, etc.
their bodies, and live in this World as becomes the Children of God. Not to
serve the mortal desires of the flesh. To keep their Members that they be not
arms of Iniquity, (and vanity) To rule their outward senses. To subject the
body to the soul. To mortify their members. To fly idleness. To observe a
sobriety and measure in their eating and drinking, in their words and cares of
this life. To do works of mercy. To live a moral (or just) life by Faith. To
fight against the desires. To mortify the works of the flesh. To give
themselves to the exercise-of Religion. To confer together touching the Will of
God. To examine diligently the Conscience. To purge and amend, and pacify the
Spirit.

To which I shall add the Epistle of one of their Pastors, as I find recorded
amongst other matters relating to those poor afflicted People.

An Epistle of Pastor Barthelmew Tertion, written to the Waldensian Churches of
the Valley of Pragela; thus translated.
JESUS BE WITH YOU.
TO all our faithful and well-beloved Brethren in Christ Hist. Wald. l. 1. c.
11. p. 55, 56, 57.
Jesus; Health and Salvation be with you all. Amen.
These are to put you in remembrance, and to admonish you, my Brethren, (hereby
acquiting my self of that duty which I owe unto you all, in the behalf of God,
principally touching the care of your Souls Salvation, according to that light
of the truth which the most High God has bestowed on us) that it would please
every one of you, to maintain, increase, and nourish to the uttermost of your
power, without diminution, those good beginnings and examples which have been
left unto us by our forefathers, whereof we are no ways worthy. For it would
little profit us to have been renewed by the Fatherly visitation, and the light
which has been given us of God, if we give our selves to worldly, carnal
conversations, which are diabolical, abandoning the Principle which is God, and
the Salvation of our Souls, for this short and temporal life. For the Lord
says, What does it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his own
Soul? For it would be better for us never to have known the way of
Righteousness, than having known it, to do the contrary. Let me therefore
entreat you by the love of God, that you decrease not, not look back; but
rather increase the charity, fear, and obedience which are due unto God, and to
your selves, amongst your selves; and stand fast in all those good Principles
which you have heard and understood of God, by our means: and that you would
remove from amongst you, all vain conversation and evil surmizes, troubling the
peace, the love, the concord, and whatsoever would indispose or deaden your
minds to the service of God, your own Salvation, and the administration of the
Truth, if you desire that God should be merciful to you in your goods temporal
and spiritual; for you can do nothing without him; and if you desire to be
Heirs of his Glory, do that which he commands: If you would enter into Life,
Mat. 19. 17.
keep my Commandments.

Likewise be careful that there be not nourished amongst you ANY SPORTS,
Gluttony, Whoredom, Dancings, nor any Lewdness, or Riot, nor Questions, nor
Deceipts, nor Usury, nor Discords; neither support or entertain any Persons of
a wicked conversation, or that give any scandal or ill example amongst you; but
let charity and fidelity reign amongst you, and all good example; doing to one
another as every one desires should be done unto him; for otherwise it is
impossible that any should be saved, or can have the grace of God, or good-men
in this world, or glory in another. And therefore, if you hope and desire to
possess eternal Life, to live in good esteem and credit, and to prosper in this
world in your goods temporal and spiritual, purge your selves from all
disorderly ways, to the end that God may be always with you, who forsakes not
those that trust in him. But know this for certain, that God hears not, nor
dwells with sinners, nor in the soul that is given unto wickedness, nor in
the man that is subject to sin. And therefore let every one cleanse the ways
of his heart, and fly the danger, if he would not perish therein. I have no
other thing to write at this present, but that you would put in practice these
things; and the God of peace be with you all, and go along with us, and be
present among us in our sincere, humble, and fervent prayers, that he will be
pleased to save all those his faithful, that trust in Christ Jesus.

Entirely yours, ready to do you service in all things possible, according unto
the Will of God, Bartholmew Tertian.


Behold the Life and Doctrine, Instruction and Practice of these ancient
Waldenses; how harmless, how plain, how laborious, Bern. de Gir. lord. de Hail.
hist. de la Fr. lib. 10. Vesemb. orat. in Wald. Beza Hist. hom. dig. Viret. de
ver. and falls. Relig. l. 4. c. 13. p. 249.
how exceeding serious, and heavenly were they in their Conversation? These are
the Men, Women, and Children, who, for above these five hundred years, have
valiantly maintained a cruel War, at the expense of their most innocent blood,
against the unheard of Tyranny's, and more than Paganish inhumanities, of proud
blood-thirsting Popes, Princes, Cardinals, Legates, Nuncio's, Archbishops, and
Bishops, but above all of the Monkish Inquisitors; whose most barborous
invented cruelties are the only demonstrations of their wit; with whom its held
to be a greater sin to conceal a Heretic, than to be perjured; to obey an
heretical Prince, than to murder him; to marry a lawful Wife, than to keep a
Whore. In short, Cat. Test. ver. p. 534.
to dissent, though never so conscientiously, than to murder, lie, steal, and
commit all the inormities prohibited both in the first and second Table: yea,
so dark, so blind, so cruel have most generations Vineaux. Memor. fol. 6 Hist.
Wald. l. 2. c. 3. p. 20
been, that there could be no so silly a dotage, no so ridiculous a
superstition, no so detestable an idolatry, but did or might have found, not
only an acceptance, but the favor of being imposed, on most severe penalties;
who having lost the sense of the true God, became so darkened as to believe
whilst they were most zealous in fulfilling the will of Beelzebab, they were
performing the most acceptable Paul. Per. Hist. Wald. l. 2. c. 3. p. 48 49.
sacrifice to God; with whom the filthiest villain and sordidst wretch was more
acceptable, than the most patient, sober, heavenly-minded man; Nay, let him be
never so virtuous, to say that the flesh, blood, and bones of Jesus, once
nailed upon the Cross, were not in a Wafer, (held by the nasty fist of a
fornicating Paul. Per. Hist. Wald. l. 2. c. 4. p. 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82.
Priest) nay, God not in that Wafer, (though nibl'd by a Mouse, or the like
vermin, just before) were enough to Rack, Hang, or Burn, without any farther
Appeal, or Examination. 'Twas against the like Adversary's these poor Waldenses
fought, by sufferings throughout the Nations, by Prisons, Confiscations,
Banishments, Wanderings from Hill to Valley, from Den to Cave, Vign. Bib. hist.
part. 1. Vineaux. Mem. fol. 6, 7. Mat. Paris in Hen. 3. An. 1220. Sigonius de
Reg. Ital. l. 7. Sernay. chap. 47. Chass. l. 3. chap. 7.
being mocked, whipped, racked, thrown from Rocks and Towers, driven on
Mountains, and in one night, hundreds perishing by excessive Frosts, Snows, and
the like colds; smothered in Caves, Starved, Imprisoned, Ripped, Hanged,
Dismembered, Rifl'd, Plundered, Strangled, Burned; and whatsoever could be
invented to ruin men, women, and children. These you pretend to be your
Ancestors; from them you say you have your Religion; often are you in building
their praises by your panigerical discourses; but, Oh! look back, I beseech
you, how unlike are you to these afflicted Pilgrims? what resemblance is there
of their life in yours? Did they purchase you a Liberty and Religion (can you
think) at the loss of all that was dear to them, that you might pass away your
days and years in pride, wantonness, and vanity? What proportion bears your
excess with their temperance? your gaudiness with their plainness? your luxury,
and flesh-pleasing conversation, with their simplicity and self-denial? but,
are you not got into that Spirit they condemned? into that carnality and
worldly mindedness they reproved in their Persecuters? nay, into a strain of
Persecution too, whilst you seem to hide all under a cloak of Reformation. What
have you, besides their good words, that is like them? And do you think that
words shall fend off the blows of Eternal vengeance? That a little by-rote
babble, (though of never so good expressions in themselves) shall serve your
turn? No; From God I tell you, That whilst you live in the wantonness, pride,
and luxury of the world, pleasing, and fulfilling the lust of the Eye, 1 John
2. 14, 15, 16, 17.
the lust of the Flesh, and the pride of Life, God detests you all, and laughs
you and your worship to scorn. Never tell me I am too rash, it is the Devil that
says so; he has got two Scriptures at his fingers end in these days; one,
That there is none that does good; to the end, he may persuade all it is
impossible to The Devil a Scripturian.
overcome, which is the reason so many are overcome; although glory is promised
to none but conquerers. The second, That we must not judge lest we be judged:
but away with the Devil and his hypocrisy too: I know what I say, and from
whom I speak; once more I tell you all, That unless you forsake your pride,
luxury, avarice, and whole variety of vanities, and mind the eternal Light in
your hearts to obey it, Wrath shall be your portion for ever; whether you hear
or forbear. Trust not your Souls on misapplied Scriptures; He that is a Child
of God must 1 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14.
be holy, for God is holy; and none are his Sons and Daughters, but those who
are adopted by the Eternal Spirit, and led thereby. 'Twas a holy, plain,
humble, divine Life these poor suffering Christians both professed and
practiced; refusing to converse Rain. Cap. de stud. pervert; alios and modo
dicendi. f. 98. Barron. Eccl. Annal. Tom. 12. an. 1176. p. 835. Kran ^ in
Metrop. l. 8. sect. 18. and in Sax. l. 8. c. 16.
with any that lived in the superfluities and excess of the world; for which
(if you will believe their very Adversaries,) they were persecuted: For says
Rainerius, They use to teach first what the Disciples of Christ ought to be,
and that none are his Disciples but they that imitate his Life: And that the
Popes, Cardinals, etc. because they live in luxury, pride, avarice, etc. are
not the Successors of Christ, but themselves only, in that they walk up to his
commandments; thus (says he) they win upon the People: But if so, that none
are Christians but those who imitate Christ, what will become of those who call
themselves Christians, and yet live at ease in the flesh, which should be
crucified? This was the ground of their suffering, and their loud cries against
the Impieties of the greatest; not sparing any ranks from the Throne to the
Dunghill, as knowing their God was no respector of Persons. And now if you would
follow them indeed, if you would be Protestants in substance, if you would
obtain the heavenly Inheritance, if you would be Eternally blessed, be ye
persuaded to shake hands with all the pride and pemp of this vain World; mind
the concerns of an everlasting rest; let the just and serious Principle of God
be the constant guide Mic. 6. 8, 9.
and companion of your minds; and let your whole hearts be exercised thereby,
that you may experiment an entire Reformation and change of Affections: that
having the joys and glory of another world in your view, you may give your
best diligence to make your Calling and Election to the possession of them,
sure and certain; left selling that noble Inheritance for a poor mess of
perishing potage, you never enter into his Eternal Rest. And though this
testimony may seem tedious, yet could it by no means be omited.

But because no Instance has been made to authorize our last Reason of
converting superfluities into the relief of distressed persons (although one
would think it is so equal, and sober; that it needs no other Authority than
its own, yet) I shall produce Two Testimonies so remarkable, that as they ever
were esteemed truly good, so cannot be believed so by any, that refuse to do
the same, without believing their condemnation.

It is reported of Paulinus, Bishop of Nola in Italy; That Eccles. Hist. p. 5.
593.
instead of converting the Demeans of his Diocese to particular enrichments, he
employed it all in the Redemption of poor Slaves and Prisoners; believing it
unworthy of the Christian Faith, to see God's Creation labor under the want of
what he had to spare. All agree this was well done, but few agree to do the
same.

But more particularly that of Acacius, Bishop of Amida; Socrat. scholast. l.
7. c. 21.
represented by Socrates Scholasticus, in this manner; When the Roman Soldiers
purposed in no wise to restore again unto the King of Persia such Captives as
they had taken at the winning Azazena, being about seven thousand in number,
(to the great grief of the King of Persia) and all ready to starve for food;
Acacius lamented their condition, and calling his Clergy together, said thus
unto them, Our God has no need of DISHES, or of CUPS, for he neither eats
nor drinks, these are not his necessaries; wherefore seeing the Church has
many precious JEWELS, both of GOLD and SILVER, bestowed of the free will and
liberality of the Faithful, it is requisite that the Captive Soldiers should
be therewith redeemed, and delivered out of prison and bondage; and they
perishing with Famine, should therewith be refreshed and relieved. After these,
and the like Arguments, he prevailed to have them all converted into Money;
some for their immediate Refreshment, some for their Redemption, and the rest
for Costage, or provision to defray the charges of their Voyage. Which noble
act had such an universal Influence, that it more famed the Christian Religion
amongst the Infidels, than all their Disputes, or Battles; insomuch that the
King of Persia, and an Heathen, said, The Romans endeavor to win their
Adversaries both by Wars and Favors; and greatly desired to behold that man,
who is Religion taught so much Charity to Enemies; which it is reported
Theodosius the Emperor, commanded Acacius to gratify him in. And if the
Apostle Paul's expression has any force, That he is worse than an Infidel 1 Timothy 5. 8.
who provides not for his Family; how greatly does this Example aggravate your
shame, that can behold such pity and compassion expres'd to Strangers, nay
Enemies, and those Infidels too, and be so negligent of your own Family, (for
England is no more) as not only to see its great necessity's unanswered; but
that wherewith it should be satisfied, converted to gratify the lust of the
Eye, the lust of the Flesh, and the pride of Life. But however such can please
themselves in the deceitful daubings of their Priests, and dream themselves
members of Jesus Christ: Sure it is, these things were otherwise in the
beginning; for all was sold, and put into Acts 4. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
a common Purss, to supply all Indigences; not mattering earthly Inheritances
further than they might, in some sense, be subservient to the great end for
which they were given; namely, the good of the Creation; having their minds and
thoughts taken up with better things, and ravished with the assurance of a more
excellent Life and Inheritance in the Heavens, that should never pass away. And
for any to flatter themselves with being Christians, whilst exercised in the
vanities, recreations, and customs of the world, as at this very day, is to
mock the great God, and abuse their immortal Souls; the Christian Life is quite
another thing. And lest that any may object, Many do great and seemingly good
Actions, to raise their Reputation only; and others only decry Pleasure,
because they have not wherewithal, or know not how to take it: I shall present
such with the several brief Expressions of dying men, and those of the greatest
Note and Rank; and whose Experience could not be wanting, to give the truest
account how much their Honors, Pleasures, and Recreations, conduced to their
satisfaction, upon the extreme moments of their dying beds, when Death, and
that passage into vast Eternity, looked them in the face.

The serious Apprehensions and Expressions of several aged and dying Men of
fame and learning.
1. Solomon, than whom none is said to have more delighted Eccles. 2. 1, 2, 4,
5. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
himself in the enjoyments of this world, hear what he says, after all his
experience: I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth;
therefore enjoy pleasure: and behold, this also is vanity. I said of Laughter,
It is mad, and of Mirth, What does it? I made me great works, builded Houses,
planted Vineyards, made Gardens and Orchards, planted Trees in them of all kind
of Fruit. I got me Servants and Maidens, also great Possessions; I gathered me
Silver and Gold, and the peculiar Treasure of Kings, and Provinces; also
Men-singers, and Women-singers, and the delights of the sons of men; as Musical
Instruments, and that of all sorts: So I was great, and increased more than all
that were before me in Jerusalem. And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not
from them; I with held not mine heart from any joy. Then I looked on all the
works which my hands had wrought, and behold, ALL WAS VANITY AND VEXATION OF
SPIRIT. The reason he gives in the 18th and 19th verses, is, That the time of
enjoying them was very short; and uncertain he was who shall be benefitted
thereby when he was gone: Wherefore he concludes all with this, Fear God, and
keep his Commandments; for this is the Eccles. 12. 13, 14.
whole duty of man. FOR GOD SHALL BRING EVERY WORK INTO JUDGMENT, WITH EVERY
SECRET THING, WHETHER IT BE GOOD, OR WHETHER IT BE EVIL.

2. Ignatius; who lived within the first hundred years after Ignat. Epist. ad
Ephesians. Mag. Trall. Romans Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32.
Christ, left this, amongst other things, behind him; who was torn in pieces of
wild Beasts at Rome, for his true Faith in Jesus; There is nothing better than
the peace of a good Conscience; Intimating there might be a peace to wicked
Consciences, that is past feeling any thing to be evil, but swallowed up of the
pleasures of the World. And in his Epistle to the Churches at Ephesus Magnesia,
Trallis and Rome, upon his Martyrdom, says, Now do I begin to be a Disciple; I
weigh neither visible nor invisible things, so that I gain Christ.

3. Iraenius, (called a Father) says; Such who make large Confessions, and
speak virtuous words, and yet are not conformable to them in their life and
conversation, are nothing worth.

4. Justin Martyr, (a Christian Philosopher) plainly tells us, in his relation
of his conversion to the Christian Faith, That the power of Godliness in a
plain simple Christ, had that influence and operation on his soul, that he
could not but betake himself to a serious and strict life; and yet before a
Cynick: And this gave him joy at his Martyrdom; having spent his days as a
serious Teacher, and a good Example. And Eusebius relates that though he was a
follower of Plato's doctrine; Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 8.
yet, when he saw the Christians piety and courage, he concluded no people so
temperate, less voluptuous, and more set on divine things; which first induced
him to be a Christian.

5. Chrysostom, (another Father, so called) said, To sacrifice the whole soul
and body to the Lord, is the highest service we can pay unto him. God promises
mercy to penitent sinners, but he does not promise them they shall have so much
time as to morrow for their repentance.

6. Charles the 5th, Emperor of Germany, King of Spain, and Lord of the
Nether-lands, After twenty three Pitch'dfields, six Triumphs, four Kingdoms
conquered, and eight Principalities added to his Dominions, (a greater Instance
than whom can scarce be given) after all this Pomp, Resigned all up to other
hands; betook himself to his retirement; leaving this Testimony behind
concerning the life spent in the honors and pleasures of the world, and in
that little time of his retreat from them all; That the sincere study,
profession and practice of the Christian Religion, had in it such joys and
sweetness, as COURTS were strangers to.

7. Sir Philip Sidney, a person whose parts, courage and virtue were of such
reputation, as well beyond the Seas as here at home, that had Queen Elizabeth
agreed, upon the earnest solicitation of the Polanders, he had ('it was said)
been ellected King of that vast Dominion, of more than 2600 miles in
circumference: when he say upon his Deathbed, and just departing the world, he
bad his friends behold in him the end of this worlds desires and enjoyments;
Reputing what was so much pursued by the Great Ones, as poor, abject, and
unworthy of their immortal souls; and amongst other things, his Arcadia, than
which (though there have been many Newer Romances) there is not one more modest
and ingenious; yet, as an effect of his youthful Melancholy Amors, that could
be profitable unto none, but rather impress the like fancies upon others, and
raise that which with all industry should timely be allayed and totally
extinguished in them; he earnestly requested his great friend the Lord Brooks
that it might be cast into the flames, and never prove so injurious to his
Memory (which he desired to have continued and preserved on more serious
subjects) nor those who should spend their precious time in reading of it, as
to be published to the world, (although it is translated into most usual
languages:) Such were the serious apprehensions of this dying man; and his
advice to them he left behind him; who certainly then best knew the benefit or
dis-service that would redound from the like conversation; neither have I
observed any Person left upon Record, in all our English stories, whom all
Persons, as well as the Historians, agreed to merit so great an esteem: but
more especially for his great Modesty: Yet after all, we hear his Recantation
of the many unnecessary things, and his Recommendation of but the one thing
necessary to his Friends, as what would most rejoice at last.

8. Secretary Walsingham, in Queen Elizabeth's time, toward the conclusion of
his days, in a Letter to his once fellow Secretary, then Chancellor of
England, called Lord Burliegh; writes thus, We have lived enough to our
Country, our Fortunes, our Sovereign; it is high time we begin to live to our
selves, and to our God. Which giving occasion for some Court-humourist to visit
and divert him; Ah! said he, while we laugh, all things are serious round about
us; God is serious when he preserves us, and has patience toward us; Christ
is setious when he dies for us; the Holy Ghost is serious when he striveth
with us; the whole Creation is serious in serving God and us; they are serious
in Hell and Heaven; and shall a man that has one foot in his grave, jest and
laugh? None can be serious too soon, because none can be good too soon; away
then with all foolish talking and jesting, and mind more profitable things.

9. One they call Sir John Mason, who had been Privy Counselor to four
Princes, and spent much time in the preferments and pleasures of the world;
retired with these regretful sayings; After so many years experience,
Seriousness is the greatest wisdom, Temperance the best Physic, a good
Conscience is the best estate; and were I to live again, I would change the
COURT for a Cloister, my Privy Counselors bussles, for an Hermits retirement;
and the whole life I lived in the Palace, for one hours enjoyment of God in the
Chapel. ALL THINGS ELSE FORSAKE ME BESIDES MY GOD, MY DUTY, AND MY PRAYERS.

10. One called Sir Henry Wotton, thought it to be the greatest happiness in
this life, to be at leisure to be and to do good; As in his latter end, he was
wont to say, when he reflected on past times, (though a man esteemed sober and
learned) HOW MUCH TIME HAVE I TO REPENT OF, AND HOW LITTLE TO DO IT IN!

11. The Lord Bacon, sometime before his death, confessed, That to be
Religious, was to live strictly and severely; for if the opinion of another
World be false, yet the sweetest life in this World is Piety, Virtue, and
Honesty; if it be true, there be none so wretched, and miserable, as loose,
carnal, and profane Persons.

12. One Dr. Done, and a great Poet, taking his farewell of his Friends on his
dying bed, left this saying behind him, for them to measure their fancies, and
their actions by; I repent of All my life, but that part of it I spent in
communion with God, and doing good.

13. Seldom, the greatest Scholar and Antiquary of these Kingdoms; one who had
taken a diligent survey of what knowledge was considerable amongst the Jews,
Heathens, and those called Christians; at last professes this, toward the end
of his days, That notwithstanding he had been so laborious, gathered so many
curiosities of Learning in Books and Manuscripts, comprehending almost all
subjects in the world, yet could he rest his Soul on none save the Scriptures;
and above all, that passage lay as most remarkable upon his spirit, Titus 2.
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. For the grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared
to all men; teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for that
blessed hope, and glorious Appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from All iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works: These things
speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority.

14. Hugo Grotius, than whom, these latter Ages think they have not had a man
of more profound Policy and universal Learning; as well in his Commentaries on
the Bible, as various other Labors; left this remarkable saying behind him,
which should abate the edge of other men's inordinate desires after what they
falsely call Learning; namely, I WOULD GIVE ALL MY LEARNING AND HONOR FOR THE
PLAIN INTEGRITY, AND HARMLESS INNOCENCE OF JEAN URICK: who was a Religious poor
man, that spent eight hours of his time in Prayer, eight in Labor, and but
eight in Meals, Sleep, and other necessary's. And to one that admired his great
Industry, he returned this by way of complaint; Ah! I have consumed my life in
laboriously doing nothing. And to a third, that inquired of his Wisdom and
Learning, what course to take; he solemnly answered, BE SERIOUS. Such was the
sense he had, how much a serious life out of that vainglory of the worlds
fruitless learning, was of force toward a dying hour; and answering, yea,
excelling all other Considerations.

15. To whom I join Salmusius, that famous French Protestant Scholar, and the
others Contemporary; who (after his many Volumns of Learning, by which he had
acquired so much esteem, as scarcely to be named without venerable Titles)
confessed so far to have mistaken true Learning, and that in which sollid
happiness consists, that he exclaimed thus against himself, Oh! I have lost a
world of TIME; TIME, that most precious thing in the world; whereof, had I but
one year more, it should be spent in David's Psalms, and Paul's Epistles; Oh
Sirs! (said he to those about him) Mind the Prove. 9. 10. Chap. 16. 6, 17.
World less, and God more: The fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart
from evil, that is Understanding.

16. Cardinal Mazarine, the great Statesman of his time, whose aim was to
obtain the Glory and Greatness of the World; and to which end, all other
considerations he made submit; was of another mind a little before his death;
being awakened by the smart lashes of Conscience, which represented his Souls
condition in so dismal a manner, and caused such astonishment of mind, that
with weeping, he cried out, O MY POOR SOUL! WHAT WILL BECOME OF THEE? WHITHER
WILL THOU GO? And spoke one day thus to the Queen Mother of France, Madam, YOUR
FAVORS HAVE UNDONE ME; WERE. I TO LIVE AGAIN, I WOULD BE A CAPUCHIN, RATHER
THAN A COURTIER.

17. And to conclude these serious Instances, I shall make one more, which
though in order should have come in before; yet because one of the most
importent, and this Nations more peculiarly fit for consideration, I shall
place it here; and namely, The dying words of HENRY, Prince of Wales, eldest
Son to King JAMES; of whom others say many generous things: hear what account
he gives of himself at last. A Person, whom he more then ordinarily esteemed,
and that had been his companion at Tennis, asking him, How he did? was answered
thus, (amongst many other sober expressions) AH TOM! I IN VAIN WISH FOR THAT
TIME I LOST WITH THEE, AND OTHERS, IN VAIN RECREATION: So vain was Recreation,
and so precious was Time upon a dying bed. And why wished he, with others, for
more time, but that it might be otherwise employed? Thus has the just
Principle, and holy Spirit of God, throughout all Generations, convinced men of
their vanity and folly upon their dying beds, who before were too much taken up
therewith, to mind either a dying bed, or vast Eternity; but when their days
were almost numbered, when mortality hastened on them, when the revelation of
the righteous Judgment was at the door, and that all their worldly Recreations
and Enjoyments must be parted with, and that Eye for ever shut, and Flesh
turned to worms-meat that took delight therein; then, O then, it was the holy
Witness had time to plead with Conscience; then nothing but a holy, strict, and
severe life was valuable; then All the world for a little time, who before had
given all their time for a little of a vain world. But if so short a
representation of the inconsistency of the vanities of the world with the
Christian life, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. Rev. 22. 12.
could make so deep an impression; Oh! to what a noble stature, and large
proportion had they been grown in all Pious and Heavenly knowledge, and how
much greater had their Rewards been, if they contentedly had foregone those
perishing Entertainments of the World betimes, and given the exercise of their
minds to the tuition and guidance of that universal Grace and Holy Spirit of
God; which had so long shined in darkness, uncomprehended of it; and was at
last but just perceived to give a sight of what they had been doing all their
days. I shall wind up the whole with this short Description of the Christans
within the first hundred years after Christ, as what may further justify not
only my Reasons, but the Dying Expressions of these several Persons; viz. That
as a severe life is the Christian life, so that it is incomparably sweeter than
all the vain Inventions, Fashions, and Pleasures of the World.

18. The description was originally given by Philo-Judaeus, Phil. Judaeus of
the Worship. of Egypt. Alex: Eusebius. Pamphil. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 17.
and cited by Eusebius Pamphilius, thus: That those Christians renounced their
substance, and severed themselves from all the cares of this life; and
forsaking the Cities, they lived solitarily in Fields and Gardens: They
accounted their company who followed the Country-life, (of cares and bussle) as
unprofitable and hurtful unto them, (as it was likely) who then lived thus, to
the end that with earnest and fervent desire they might imitate them, which
lead this prophetical and heavenly life. In many places this people lives,
(for it behooves as well the Grecians as the Barbarians to be partakers of this
absolute goodness) But in Egypt in every Province they abound, and especially
about Alexandria. From all parts the better sort withdrew themselves into the
soil and place of these Worshippers, (as they were called) as a most commodious
place, adjoining to the Lake of Mary, in a low Vale, very fit both for its
security, and the temperance of the Air. They are further reported to have
Meeting Houses, where the most part of the day was employed in worshipping God;
that they were great Allegorizers of the Scriptures, making them all
figurative; That the external show of words (or the letter) resembles the
superficies of the body; and the hidden sense or understanding of the words,
seem in place of the soul; which they contemplate, by their beholding names, as
it were in a Glass; (meaning that their Religion consisted not in reading the
letter, disputing about it, or accepting things in litteral constructions; but
that they placed their Religion in the thing declared of, the Substance it
self, bringing things nearer to the mind, soul, and spirit, and pressing into a
more hidden and heavenly sense; making Religion to consist in the temperance
and sanctity of the Mind, and not in the formal outside. Worship so much now
a-dayes in repute, fitter to please Comedians than Christians. Such
self-denying conversations was the practice of those times, and only badge of
true Christianity; but now the case is altered; People will be Christians, and
have their worldly-mindedness too: But though God's Kingdom suffer violence by
such, yet shall they never enter; the Life of Christ and his followers has in
all Ages been another thing; And there is but One Way, One Guide, One Rest, all
which are pure and holy.

But if any (notwithstanding our many sober Reasons and numerous Testimonies,
from Scriptures, Examples and Experience, of spiritual and religious, worldly
and profane, living and dying-men, at home and abroad, of the greatest note,
fame and learning in the whole world) shall yet remain lovers and imitaters of
the folly and vanity condemned; If the cries and groans, and sighs, and tears,
and complaints and mournful wishes of so many reputed Great, nay some Good men;
O that I had more time! O that I might live a year longer, I would live a
severer life! O that I were a poor Innocent Jean Urick! All is vanity in this
world: O my poor soul, whither will thou go? O that I had the time, spent in
vain recreations! A serious life is above all, and such like: And can nothing
prevail! But if yet they shall proceed to folly, remain unsatisfied, and follow
the world; what greater evidence can they give of their heady resolution to go
on impiously to despise God, to disobey his Precepts, to deny Christ, to fear,
not bear his Cross; to forsake the Examples of his Servants; to give the lie to
the dying serious sayings, and consent of all Ages; to harden themselves
against the checks of Conscience; to befool and sport away their precious time,
and poor immortal souls to woe and misery? In short, it is plainly to discover
you neither have Reason to justify your selves, nor yet enough of Modesty to
blush at your own folly; but as having Exodus 32. 6. Amos 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 4.
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 2 Timothy 2. 19 Mat. 19. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22.
lost the sense of one and the other, go on to eat and drink, and rise to play.
In vain therefore is it for you to pretend to fear the God of Heaven, whose
minds serve the Godd of the pleasures of this world: In vain is it to say you
believe in Christ, who receive not his self-denying Message: and to no better
purpose will all you do avail. If he that had loved God, and his Neighbor, and
kept the Commandments from his youth, was excluded from being a Disciple,
because he sold not all and followed Jesus; with what confidence can you call
your selves Christians, who have neither kept the Commandments, nor yet
forsaken any thing to be so? And if it was a bar betwixt him and the eternal
life he sought; that notwithstanding all his other virtues, love to money, and
his external possessions could not be parted with; what shall be your end, who
cannot deny your selves many less things, but are daily inventing vanities to
your fleshly appetites? certainly much more impossible is it to forsake the
greater? Christ tried his love, in bidding him forsake all, because he knew
(for all his brags) that his mind was rivetted therein; not that if he had
enjoyed his possessions with Christian indifferency, much of them might not
have been continued and retained; but what then is their doom, whose hearts are
so fixed in the vanities of the World, that they will rather make them
christian than part with them? But such a Christian this young man might have
been, who had more to say for himself, than the strictest Pharisee living dare
pretend to; yet he went away sorrowful from Jesus. Should I ask you, if
Nicodemas did well to come by night, and be ashamed of Joh. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4 5.
the Great Messiah of the World, and if he was not ignorant when Christ spoke
to him of the new Birth? I know you would answer me, Yes, he did very ill, and
was very ignorant; but stay a while, the beam is in your own eyes; you are
ready doubtless to condemn him, and the young man, for not doing what you not
only refuse to do your selves, but laugh at others for doing. Nay, had such
passages not been writ, and were it not for the reverence some pretend for the
Scriptures, they would both be as stupid as Nicodemas in their answers to such
Heavenly matters, and ready to call it Canting in any to speak so; as it is
frequent for you, when we speak to the same effect, though not the same words:
just with the Jews; at the time they called God their Father, they despised his
Son; and when he spoke of sublime and heavenly Mysteries, some cried, He has a
Devil; others, He is mad; and most of them, These are hard sayings, who can
bear them? And to you all that sport your selves after the manners of the
World, let me say, That you are of those who profess you know God, but in Works
deny him; living in those Pleasures, which slay the Just in your Titus 1. 26.
selves: for though you talk of believing, it is no more then taking it for
granted, that there is a God, a Christ, Scriptures, etc. without farther
concerning your selves to prove the verity thereof to your selves, or others,
by a strict and holy Conversation; which slight way of believing, is but a
light and careless way of ridding your selves of farther examination; and
rather throwing them off with an inconsiderable granting of them to be so, than
giving your selves the trouble of making better enquiry (leaving that to your
Priests, oft-times more ignorant, and not less vain and idle than your selves)
which is so far from a Gospel-Faith, that it is the least respect you can show
God, Scriptures, etc. and next to which kind of believing, is nothing under a
doubt, and a denial of all. But if you have hitherto laid aside all Temperance,
Reason, and Shame, at least be entreated to resume them now in a matter of this
importance, and whereon no less concernment rests, than your temporal and
eternal happiness. Oh! Retire, retire, observe the reproofs of Instruction in
your own minds; that which begets melancholy in the middst of mirth, which
cannot solace it self, nor be contented below immortality; which calls often to
an account at nights, mornings, and at other seasons; which lets you see the
vanity, the folly, the end and misery of these things: that is the just
Principle, and holy Spirit of the Almighty; hear him, obey him, converse with
them who are led by him; and let the glories of another World be eyed, and the
recompense of reward kept in sight: admit not the thoughts of former follyes to
revive, but be steady, and continually exercised by his Grace, to deny all
ungodliness and Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world; for this is the true and heavenly nature of Christianity; to be so
awakened and guided by the Spirit and Grace of God, as to leave the sins and
vanities of the world, to have the affections regenerated, the mind reformed,
and the whole man so baptized into purity and faithfulness toward God and Man,
as to act with reverence, justice, and mercy; to care for very few things; to
be content with what you have; to use all as if you used them not; and to be so
disentangled from the lusts, pleasures, profits, and honors of the world; as
to have the mind raised to things above, the heart and affections fixed there,
that in all things you may glorify God, and be as Lights set on a Hill, whose
shining Examples may be conducing to the happiness of others, who beholding
such good works may be converted, and glorify God the Father of Lights, in
which you all would be eternally blessed.

But if the Impenitence of any is so great, their pursuit of folly as earnest,
and notwithstanding what has been thus seriously offered to reclaim them, they
are resolved to take their course, and not to be at leisure for more divine
things, I have this farther to leave with them; from the Almighty, who first
enjoined me this work, That tribulation, anguish, and sorrow, shall make their
dying beds; indignation and wrath, shall Romans 2. 4, 5, 6. 9.
wind up their days; trouble and vexation of mind and spirit, shall be the
miserable fruits, which are eternally to be reaped as the rewards of all their
wretched folly and rebellions; Be not deceived, God will not be mocked: It Is so
irreversibly decreed; Whatever is sown Gal. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
here, shall be reaped hereafter. And just is the Almighty, to make good his
determinations upon such, who instead of employing the time given them, to work
out their Salvation with fear and trembling, have spent it in the pleasures of
the Flesh, which perishes, as if their Heaven were here: nor can it seem
unreasonable, since he has thus long waited with remission of sin, and eternal
Life in his hand, to distribute to Rev. 3. 20.
them that repent; that if they will not, to reward so great obstinacy, and
love of this perishing world, with everlasting Rev. 21. 27. Rev. 22. 13, 14, 15.
tribulations, which he will as certainly recompense, as he is God over all,
Holy, and Just for ever.

But I am otherwise persuaded of many; yes, I am assured the everlasting
Mercies of God have been so extended to many, as this will prove an effectual
Call yet further to bring them out of the ways and customs of this World that
passes away; and a means for establishing such, who hitherto have been
unfaithful to what they have been already convinced of. And you, my Friends,
whose minds have received the ALLARUM, whose hearts have truly heard the Voice
of one crying in the Wilderness, where you have been straying from the Lord,
Repent, repent. To you, in the Name of this Living dreadful God, I speak, I
cry, Come away, come away; Ah! what do you there? Why are you yet behind?
that is not your Rest; its poluted with the Sins and Vanities of a perishing
World: Gird up your Loins; Eye your Light (One in all) Christ Jesus, the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; who has enlightened every one, follow him, he
will lead you to the City that is descended from Heaven, to the new Jerusalem,
and God the Judge of all; into which nothing that defiles can enter, or have
admission.

Mind not the difficulties of your March; great and good things were never
interpriz'd and accomplished without difficulty and hardship; which always
render their enjoyment but the more pleasant and glorious in the end. Let the
holy Men and Women of old, be your examples; Remember good old Abraham, the
excellency of whose Faith is set out by his obedience to the Voice of God, in
forsaking his Fathers house, Genesis 12. 1, 2.
Kindred, Lands, Country, and Customs of it; never to return rgain. And Moses,
that might in probability have been a King; by Faith in God, leaves Epypts
glory, and Pharoah's Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27.
favors, and chooses rather to sojourn and pilgrimage with the despised,
afflicted, tormented Israelites in the Wilderness, than to enjoy the pleasures
of that great Court for a season; Isa. 53. 3.
esteeming Christ's reproaches greater riches than Egipts treasures. But above
all, how great was the reproach, how many Heb. 12. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.
the sufferings, what bitter mockings did Jesus suffer at the hands of his
enemies? yet with what patience, meekness, forgiveness, and constancy did he,
in all his actions, demean himself toward his bloody Persecutors? Despising
the shame, enduring the Cross, for the joy that was set before him: And has
left us this glorious Example, that we should follow his steps, which has in
almost every Age been imitated. The Apostles sealed their Testimonies with
their blood, and multitudes, after the examples of their constancy; esteeming
it the greatest honor, as it was always attended with the signal'st
demonstrations of Divine Love. How memorable was that of Origin. If my Father
were weeping upon his knees before me, and my Mother hanging about my neck
behind me, and all my Brethren, Sisters, and Kinsfolks, lamenting on every
side, to retain me in the life and practice of the World, I would fling my
Mother to the ground, run over my Father, despise all my Kindred, and tread
them under my feet, that I might run to Christ: yet is it known, how dutiful
and tender he was to all. Not much unlike to this, was that noble and known
Instance of latter days, in Galeacius Caracciolus, Marquess of VICO, one of
large Revenues, great Relations, and Reputation in the World, who voluntarily
abandoned his Friends, Estate, and Country; nay, which was more intolerable
to nature, all this he did, notwithstanding the importunity and tears of an
affectionate Wife, and manny innocent young Children, that seemed to arrest his
legs, by their tender and pitiful embraces; resolutely saying with Moses, That
he would rather suffer Afflictions with the first Reformers, and Protestants,
than enjoy the plenty, favor, and pleasures that attended his former life,
whilst in the Roman Religion. Nor is it possible for any now to quit the World,
2 Timothy 3. 12. 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and live a serious godly life, without the like suffering and persecution.
There are among us also, who have not been without the exercise of suffering
the displeasure of their most dear and intimate Relations and Friends; and all
those troubles, disgraces, and reproaches, which are accustomed to attend such
as forgo the honors, pleasures, ambition, and preferments of the World, and
rather choose to live an humble, serious, and self-denying life; Wherefore, my
Friends, since we are compassed about with so great a cloud of Witnesses, let us
lay aside Heb. 12. 1. Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
every weight, and the sins of Vanities that do so easily beset us, and with a
constant holy patience run our Race, having our Eyes fixed upon Jesus the
Author and finisher of our Faith, not minding Phil. 3. 13.
what is behind; so shall we be delivered from every snare; no sin shall gain
us, no frowns scare us from our self-denying life; and honor, glory,
immortality, and eternal Life, shall recompense Romans 2. 7.
our Sufferings; and the Truth be more abundantly exalted: For the cry is long
since gone up; How long! How Rev. 22.
long! How long! O Lord God, holy and true, will it be, ere thou will come and
take thy great Power, and Reign? To which, the Psalm. 89. 46. Rev. 6. 10.
answer has been, Yet a very little while, and he that shall come will come,
and will not tarry, to visit the dark corners of the Earth with his great
Salvation, to destroy the enemies of his Chosen, and make way for the righteous
Nation; to bind Satan in chains, and Jer. 23. 1. and 36. 29. Ezekiel. 26. 11, 12.
Psalm. 79. 11. Isa. 42. 7. Zach. 9. 11, 12.
his wandering Spirits in fetters of Iron; that the Prisoner may come out of the
pit, and the Spirit that is grieved, rejoice; that the Lame may leap as an Heart,
and the tongue of the Dumb may sing; that waters may spring in the Wilderness,
and streams in the Desert, and the barren Land become a standing Pool; that
Truth may replenish the Earth, and Righteousness run down like a mighty stream;
that joy, peace, and serenity, may cover the whole Creation.

Which, as it has been promised, so is it on its way to be Isa. 35. 6, 7, 8.
Isa. 32. 16.
accomplished; for the eternal Sabbath is at hand, in which the doer of his own
works shall perish; and that everlasting Jubilee at the door, to which
whomsoever shall come without the Robe that has been first washed white in the
Blood of the Amos 5. 24.
Lamb, and the many Tribulations; shall be cast out into utter Isa. 32. 17.
darkness, where will be weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever. But as for the
Redeemed and Sanctified of God, who have followed Jesus in the narrow path of
Regeneration, and not loved Mat. 22. 11, 12, 13, 14. Rev. 7. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17.
their lives unto the death, their sorrow shall fly away, every tear shall be
wiped from their eyes, and sighing shall be heard no more within their Borders:
But joys unspeakable and full of glory shall be their everlasting Inheritance;
so shall Divine Honor, and Eternal Hallelujahs be unanimously rendered to him
that sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb, who is the most High and Holy One,
that Lives and Reigns, God blessed and renoun'd for ever.

Amen.
THE END.

