A Brief ANSWER TO A False and Foolish LIBELL, CALLED, The QVAKERS Opinions,
For their sakes that Writ it and Read it.

By W. P.

Being Defamed, we Entreat,

1 Cor. 4. 13. Printed in the Year 1678.

Sober Reader,
THe end of Controversy with good men, is the Advancement of the Truth; with
ill men, of themselves and their base Interests; in all which God is Judge, who
judges righteously, and will reward every one according to their works, nor
does his Judgment slumber.

Most Parties in Europe boast themselves of being Christians, an excellent
Character indeed; but the worst is, there is little more then a Boast in it. I
am not incharitable; I have first judged my self. Let none deceive themselves.
To be like Christ, is to be a Christian, and not else; and Christians are in
Concord; for Christ is not divided, neither is that Body, of which he is truly
Head, at Variance; how much Discord, so much Degeneracy from God; for he is
one, and so are those that are born of him; the Children of God are not
divided, because one and the same holy Spirit leads them.

That which is the Guide of one, is the Guide of all; and by this shall it be
known who are Gods Children, if they bring forth the Fruits of his divine
Spirit, which, says the Apostle, are these, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no
Law. And they, says he, that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts; this only will avail in the great Judgment of the Lord.
Therefore I beseech all vain Contenders to consider of their own Standing, what
their Work is, who Employes them, and what their Wages will be.

Tell me thou vain Disputer and Vicious Liver, what is Religion without Holy
Love? what is Faith without Good Works? what is Worship without Godly Fear and
Christianity, without true Self-denial? it is not he that cries, Lord, Lord,
but he that does the Will of my Father, said Christ, shall be accepted. There
is a great talk of man's Laps in Adam, and Restoration in Christ, but they serve
only for a sound with too many: For did people sincerely believe that they are
fallen from true Love, Meekness, Patience, Humility, Mercy, Justice, Purity,
etc. and did they but consider, that they are not restored to those Heavenly
Qualifications, but that they live in fleshly lusts of one sort or other, some
in Voluptuousness, others in Envy; and therefore not really restored or
redeemed by Christ, nor truly in a state of Salvation, but in peril of eternal
Misery, certainly they would not pass away their little span of precious time
in so much worldly Pleasure, neglect of God, and Carelessness of the other
World, if they have any the least hope of it.

Reader, the Petulancy of some Adversary or other has given occasion for this
little Treatise: The design of which is both to reprove him, and to hinder
others from being abused by him, that so the Innocence of a People, whom God
has raised by his own Power and Wisdom to glorify him in their Bodies Souls
and Spirits (which are his) may be delivered from the mistakes of his
Ignorance, and the reflections of his Malice.

And truly, my servent Prayers to Almighty God are, that he would yet more and
more send forth his Light and his Truth to inform the Understandings, and
overcome the Hearts of all People, that they may experimentally know the
Redemption of their Sou's from the prevalency of Sin, and the power of the God
of this World's Lusts by the Blood of Jesus, who is the Lamb of God that takes
away the Sin of the World; then shall Love, Faith and Holiness increase, and
all Unrighteousness come to an End,

Amen.
W. P.

AN ANSWER TO A False and Foolish Libel, CALLED, The QVAKERS Opinions.
OPINION I.
THe Quakers deny the Authority of holy Scriptures, as the Rule of Faith and
Practice unto Christians.

Answer, This we flatly deny, and charge our Adversary to make it good in
terminis, in so many words, or retract his Charge. For the Authority of the
Scripture is the Spirit This was the Doctrine of Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin,
Oecolampadius, Beza and Marlorat abroad; and of W. Tindal, D. Barns, John
Frith, John Bradford, J. Woodman, Philpot, Fox, Jewel, Whittiker, etc. at home,
that the Scriptures Authority to us stood in the inward Testimony of the Spirit
of God. See my Quakerism a New Nickname for Old Christianity, and my Rejoinder
in defense of the same, from page 24. to page 101. and from page 31. to page
186.
and Power of God, which we say is our Rule and Guide, as it was the Rule of
the holy Men of God both before the Scriptures were written, and when they
spoke and writ them. And to say we deny it to be our Rule, is to say we deny
our own Principle, for owning of which you are angry with us. Moses is taken on
all hands to have been the first Penman of Sacred Story, and that we cannot
rise higher then his time for Scripture, consequently then the Scripture must
take date; but who will deny that Abel had a Rule to worship God by, Enoch to
walk with God by, Noah to preach by, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to believe by? if
they had none, say so; if they had, what was it, if not the Spirit of Truth and
Holiness, that strove with the old World, but was resisted? And if the Spirit
of God was the Rule of Faith, Worship and Practice then, have we got another
Rule in the room of it now? No such matter; those that loved and feared God in
all Ages were ruled and guided by the Spirit of God; and though many Helpers
have been afforded men by the Father of Mercies and Lights, yet still the
Spirit of Truth is the great Rule in and through them all. This is the Rule of
all Rules, as God is the Light of all Lights; yea, this is that Rule of the New
Creature; for the walking of the true Christian is in and after the Spirit;
yea, it is the Mark of being a Child of God to be led and guided Gal. 6. 15.
Romans 1. 14.
by the Spirit of God, this is the Scripture's Testimony. There is no
Condemnation to those that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; and
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. The Argument is
plain, and altogether as unanswerable; That which is to lead Christians, is to
rule Christians; but the Spirit of Truth is to LEAD CHRISTIANS, consequently
the SPIRIT OF TRUTH is to RULE CHRISTIANS. So that to deny that the Spirit of
Truth is the Guide and Rule of Christians, is to gainsay the Testimony of
Scripture, and the very Tenure and Nature of the second, new and everlasting
Covenant of Life and Salvation; for in that state the Jer. 35. 33, 34. Hebr. 8.
13.
Law is writ in the Heart, and the Fear and Spirit put in the inward Part; and
what for, if not to rule and guide the Soul in the Path of Life?

To conclude, As the Spirit of Truth revealed to the Prophets things to come,
and was a Rule to them in discerning, receiving, declaring and writing those
things, so is the same Spirit of Truth the Rule and guide to all God's People
in their reading and understanding of them now written? and blessed are they
that read with a good Understanding.

And that the Simplicity of none may be abused, we declare, as we have
frequently done, that the Scriptures of Truth were given forth by the holy men
of God, as they were moved by the Spirit of God; and that they are a Rule, yea,
an Excellent Rule for Instruction, Reproof and Doctrine, and 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16,
17.
all true Christians ought to embrace and practice the holy Mind and Will of
God thereby declared. And they are those that truly and substantially deny
Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
the Scriptures, who in Words own them, but in Works deny them, and in their
Conversations walk not according to the godly Rules therein contained; such are
Whoremongers, Fornicators, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Drunkards, Liars, Back-biters, Slanderers, such as the Author or Authors of
this Impious Libel, Envious Persons, Rioters, Sporters, Vain Persons, Lovers of
Pleasures more then Lovers of God: These and such like are they that deny the
Authority of holy Scripture; yet as the Devil used Scripture against Christ, so
do his Children use Scripture at this day against the Disciples of Christ.

OPINION II.
The Quakers deny the Resurrection of the Body.

Answ. The Quakers deny no Resurrection, Luke 20. 35, 36, 37, 38. Joh. 11. 25.
1 Cor. 15. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. Rev. 20. 5.
that is according to Scripture; we own the Resurrection both of the Just and
Unjust; and that our Adversaries shall know one day to their Confusion, if they
repent not. And as the Charge is laid down, we literally deny it, and require
our Adversaries to prove it: for we declare to all people, we own the
Resurrection of the Body according to the Pleasure of God: and every Seed shall
have its own Body; and Woe to the Wicked in that day.

OPINION III.
The Quakers deny the Person of Jesus Christ.

Answ. If by Person of Christ is meant the Man Christ Jesus, we deny the
Charge; for there is Acts 4. 12. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2. 1 Timothy
2. 5, 6. Heb. 8. 6. Chap. 12. 24.
no other Name given under Heaven, by which Salvation can be obtained. It Is
Christ alone that has brought Life and Immortality to light: he is the
Propitiation, the Mediator and Intercessor; and by him only can man come to
God: and no man can come to him but such as come to his Spirit in their own
Hearts. And such as have not the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, are none of
his. And these are they that deny Christ, that deny his Cross, break his Law,
and live not according to his Example, who is meek and lowly, pure and
undefiled, and separated from all Sinners. So that the Antichrists of our days
are those that Romans 8. 34.
live according to the Lusts of the Eye, the Lusts of the Flesh, and Pride of
Life, without God Heb. 7. 25.
in the World, that is, without a sense of God upon their Hearts: but their
Minds run after the 1 John 2. 16.
things that are seen, which are temporal, neglecting the things that are
eternal. And though Mat. 7. 23.
such may profess Christ in words, yet it shall be said unto them in the great
Day of Account, Depart from me ye that work Iniquity.

I would have our foolish and envious Adversaries look at home, and prepare for
the Day of their Account to God, and leave off their Envy and Bitterness, and
mind God's Fear, which will teach them to be meek and loving, sober and
virtuous, that they may provide for their Latter-end: For pure Religion stands
not in accusing and slandering, reviling and persecuting, but in keeping
unspotted of the James 1. 27. John 8. 23. Chap. 15. 18, 19. Chap. 18. 36. Mat.
5. 11.
World; for they who are of the World, are not of Christ; they who love the
Pride, Pleasures, Honors and Lusts of this World deny Christ, they are the
Antichrists indeed; for Christ says, I am not of this World, neither is my
Kingdom of this World, nor are his Followers of this World, therefore it is the
World hates them; but not under the Name of Christ's Disciples, Christians or
Children of God, by no means; for such the World nominally owns; but as
Heretics; 1 Cor. 4. 10, 13.
Blasphemers, and the like, which has always been the Devil's Policy: For the
Woolf with the Sheeps-skin on him, has in every Age been worrying the Sheep
that has been covered with the Wolf's-skin; such have called Light Darkness,
and Darkness Light.

OPINION IV.
The Quakers hold, that the Light in every man is a sufficient Guide unto
Salvation.

Answ. This is unfairly laid down; but we say, that the Light of Christ in
every man is a sufficient Guide to Salvation; and who dares deny it? I am John
8. 12.
the Light of the World, faith Christ, they that follow me shall not walk in
Darkness, but have the Light of Life. And says John, If we walk in the Light,
1 John 1. 7.
the Blood of Jesus Christ shall cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. And it
was the Doctrine in old time, The Path of the Just is as the shining Light,
Proverbs 4. 18. Isa. 2. 5.
that shines more and more unto the perfect Day. And the Prophet Isaiah
prophetically writes of the latter days thus, Come, let us walk in the Light
of the Lord, and by the same Prophet says the Lord, I will give thee (Christ)
for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the Chap. 49.
6.
ends of the Earth. And the Apostle Paul had that good Opinion of the Light,
that he advised the Saints of old, to put on the Armor of Light, that Romans 13.
12, 13. 14.
they might walk honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in
Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envy; but put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and make not Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. And
it is nothing else, but the old Jewish Darkness, that John 9. 14, 16.
spurns against the Light of Christ in our day: for the same Spirit that
rejected that Light, Grace and Truth, with which he was filled in the day of 1
Cor. 12. 7.
his Bodily Appearance, is the same that resists and sleights that Light, Truth
and Grace, which from his Fullness is distributed to the Children of men; but as
it was then, so it is now the Condemnation John ^. 19.
of the World, that Light is come into the World, and that men love Darkness
rather then Light, and the Reason is plain, because their Deeds are Evil. Every
thing loves its like.

OPINION V.
They hold that Perfection is attainable in this Life.

Answ. This also is not fairly laid down, being without distinction; and did
not Compassion to the well-minded incline me to deliver our Judgment in these
matters, I would have put our Adversary upon the proof of his Assertions,
without giving him the least help by a sight of our true Principles, till he
had first seen and acknowledged his own Ignorance and Inadvertency. We own
Perfection according to the Scriptures; Walk thou before me, said God to
Abraham, and Genesis 17. 1.
be thou perfect: who dare quibble this into an Imperfection? or who dare
charge God with commanding what was impossible to be done? Noah was a just man,
and perfect in his Generation, and Genesis 5. 22. and 6. 9. Job 1. 1. Matthew 5.
48.
Noah walked with God; so did Enoch. Job also was a perfect man, and upright,
one that feared God and eschewed evil. This Christ exhorted his Disciples to,
Be ye therefore PERFECT even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. This
also the Apostle Paul prays for, That they might 1 Thessal. 5. 23. Ephesians. 4.
13.
be sanctified THROUGHOUT, in Body, Soul and Spirit. Again thus, And the very
God of Peace sanctify you WHOLELY; and I pray God your Spirit, and Soul, and
Body be preserved BLAMELESS unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yet
further, Till we all come in the Unity 1 Timoth. 3. 17.
of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God unto a PERFECT man.
Again, That the Man of God may be PERFECT. And to the Hebrews says the Author
of that Epistle, Let us Heb. 6. 1. and 13. 21.
go on to PERFECTION; and once more in the same Epistle he says, The God of
Peace make you PERFECT in every good Work to do his Will. This also was the
Apostle Peter's Prayer for the holy Strangers scattered throughout Pontus,
Gall^tia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bythinia, The God of 2 Pet. 5. 10.
all Grace, who has called us into his eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, make you
PERFECT. I will conclude with the Doctrine of the Beloved Disciple, that lay in
his Lord's Bosom, and can give a better account of his Mind and Doctrine then
any of our Adversaries can do, thus, If we walk in the 1 John 1. 7.
Light as (God) is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. Again, I write Chap.
2. 13.
unto you Young Men, because ye have OVERCOME the Wicked One. Again, Whosoever
Chap. 3. 9.
abides in Christ, SINS not; whosoever is born of God, does NOT COMMIT SIN;
for his Seed remains in him, and he^ CANNOT SIN, Chap. 4. 12, 16, 17.
because he is born of God. Again, If we love one another, God dwells in us,
and his Love is PERFECTED in us; God is Love, and he that dwells in Love
dwells in God, and God in him: Herein is our Love made PERFECT, that we have
Boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so ARE WE in this World.
What say Rioters and Envious Persons to this, such as revile, waste and destroy
their Neighbors for the Exercise of a peaceable Conscience? Does the Love of
God abide in them? are they like unto the God of Love in this World? can they
hope for his Mercies in that World which is to come, who are cruel and abusive
to their honest Neighbors in this? But more of that another time. Yet again,
Whosoever is born of God overcomes the World, and sins not; but he that is
begotten Chap 5. 4, 18.
of God keeps himself that the Wicked One touches him not. What think the
Enemies of Perfection to this?

To Conclude, They that deny Perfection from Sin, deny the End of Christ's
Coming, if this Chap. 3. ver. 4, 5, 8, 9.
beloved Disciple may be Judge; for says he, Christ was manifested to take
away our Sins; and whosoever abides in him, sins not: for this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil; and
whatsoever is born of God, does not commit Sin. And without Offense let me say,
Our Adversaries may better employ themselves, then to turn Advocates for the
Devil and his Kingdom, as they seem to do, by charging the Doctrine of
Perfection upon the Quakers as an Evil Opinion; for no man in his Wits can
believe they intend us any Reputation or Credit when they set the Mark of
Perfection upon our Creed. But is it not a great shame that men, who profess
themselves to be Christians, the Disciples of that self-denying Jesus, should
make their Lord's Office our Reproach, and the End of his blessed Coming a Mark
of Heresy? Why, Was he sent but to save? and how does he save, if people must
necessarily live in Sin, that eternally loses them, and to save them from
which he is come? And thou shall call his Name Jesus, said the Angel, because
he shall save his People from their Sins. Alas Mat. 1. 21.
what have Men to be saved from, if not from sin? for sin set aside, man is
good, and all his good; if then sin loses men Heaven and Happiness, men must be
saved from it, on they will be eternally lost; for in that state Christ will
profit them nothing. To the Quotations I shall make a brief Return.


The first Quotation; G. Whitehead says, That the Light within must be God,
because to deny it so to be, is to deny the Omnipresence of God.

To what is here alleged, this brought to disrepute our Holy Religion, I
answer, That this Adversary has not told us whether they were words spoken or
written: if spoken, where be the Witnesses? if written, where is the Book or
Paper? However, the words are not 1 John 1. 5. Acts 17. 27, 28.
indefensible; For God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; and he is
Omnipresent, therefore in man: and in him we live, move and have our being,
yea, more especially; for it is he that Jer. 23. 23, 24. Job 25. 3.
searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, and that tells unto man his
Thoughts. Upon whom, said one of old, does not his Light arise?

To the second Quotation, viz. It is damnable Heresy to deny the worshipping
the Measure of Light in every man. And that the Spirit which God breathed in
Adam, was not Man's Spirit, but another; the Breath of our Nostrils, the
Anointed Lord; this is that true Light which lights every man that comes into
the World: see Rob. West's Book, called, Damnable Heresies discovered, p. 6.

I answer, 1st, That I have not the Book cited, or cannot find, 2dly, That the
Man is not entirely in Society with us, but there has been some Dissatisfaction
in the Minds of our Friends about him in several respects, and particularly
this Book was not received or printed by us. Yet lastly, I know not but many
good things may be in it; but if in any thing it be unsound, it will not lie at
our Door: nor do I believe that the Passage it self may not be vindicated, and
that by Authority of Reason, Scripture and the Consent of Ancient and Modern
Authors. I will only say, that every Appearance of God is God; the Light that
comes from God is God; for God is Light, and God cannot be divided from
himself, and the word Measure of Light relates to our capacity, that receive
and know only by Measure, and not to God, who, properly speaking, is
immeasurable. And true it is, that the Breath God breathed into Genesis 2. 7.
Adam was Divine, if the learned Rabbis Commentators on that Scripture be of
any credit, as may be seen in my Rejoinder to John Faldo; for a mere humane
Soul could not make Adam live to God, much less make him the Image of his
Creator. And if it was the Divine Life, I hope none will question if that Life
be Christ, who says expressly of himself, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life;
who also says, I am the Light of the World; and this is John's Testimony, In
the Word (that made all things) was Life, and that Life is the Light of men;
and his (says he) is that true Light which enlightens every man that comes into
the World. So much to that Passage.

To the third Quotation, out of G. Fox and R. Hubberthorn's Book, called,
Truth's Defense, page 101. I answer.

1st, That the Quoter has wronged the Passage, and falsified the Book; for
there is that quoted which is not there. The words are these, as given by our
Adversary in the Name of G. F. and R. H. We do deny the Scriptures to be the
word of God, and also to be a Standing Rule; and that it is dangerous for
ignorant People to read them: see Fox and Hubberthorn, in Truth's Defense, page
101.

I answer, All these words [We do deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God,
and also to be a standing Rule] are not to be found there, they are added;
which is a great piece of injustice; for the last part, which lies as if we
would deny that ignorant people should read the Scriptures, hear the words
themselves:

Query. The Priest asks, Whether the Scripture being carnal, and the Letter
killing, as you (Quakers) say, we may read them without Danger?

To this G. Fox and R. Hubberthorn answer:

The Letter which kills is dangerous; for thou take it her to war with
against the Saints with thy carnal Mind and Expositions -- Again thus, Here you
read with Da^nger, who speak of them, and speak a Lie; and its dangerous to
read that and make a Trade of that which the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles
spoke forth freely; and you wrest the Scriptures to your Destruction; and to
you it is dangerous to read, etc.

Now let all people of Cander, yea, common Sense judge, if this sort of reading
and using the Scripture be not dangerous: thus the Pharisees and Jews used the
Scripture against Christ. But does this give ground to our Adversary to say, We
hold it dangerous for ignorant people to read the Scripture, because we say
that a Covetous, Persecuting or Malicious End or Use of Scripture is dangerous?
O the perversion that is made of the words and sense of this passage! the Lord
forgive him or them that deal thus with us. Hear what the same page says, But I
say, Blessed is he that does read and does understand. This I have else where
observed more at large.

To the fourth Passage, viz. That J. N. in answer to the Jews says, It is the
Devil that contends for the Scriptures to be the Word of God.

I can say the less because I have not the Book out of which it is pretended to
be quoted. But certain it is, that the Devil, that loves not the very Form of
Godliness, but to exalt it against the Power, and shelter himself for a Saint,
has more then once on the same score pleaded for the scripture against Christ,
and the letter against the spirit; not that he loves the Scripture, or that
the Scripture opposes either Christ or the Spirit, but that he has subtly
used the very Scripture, as little as he loves it, both to tempt and oppose
even Christ himself. This is plain in his tempting Christ in
Scripture Language, and in the Persecutions of the Jews both against Christ
Mat. 4. 6, 12.
and his Disciples, for which they urged Scripture; they relied upon them for
Life eternal, and not upon Christ; him they set at naught then, as John 5. 9.
and 19. 7. and 5. 39, 40.
much as the false Christians slight his Light now. And it was Christ's
Complaint then, In them you think (said he) to have eternal Life, but you will
not come unto me that you may have Life. Thus the outward Jew set up the
scripture against Christ in the flesh, and thus the outward Christian sets up
the scripture against Christ in the spirit, or in his spiritual appearance in
the soul, insomuch that a man runs the hazard of being proclaimed a Blasphemer
that speaks but of Christ within, yet it is express Scripture; and of being
stigmatized for an Heretic that calls Christ only that Word of God, to whom
only that Name is given in the Evangelical Writings, though at the same time a
man confess the holy Scriptures to be given forth by Divine Inspiration, and
that they are the Words of God. That the Word is his Name John will be our
Warrant in the beginning of his History; John 1. 1. Revel. 19. 13.
and that his Name is called the Word of God John also affirms in his
Revelation. I will end with this, that Luke the Evangelist in his Dedication of
his Luke chap. 1.
History to his excellent Theophilus, now part of the sacred Scripture, calls
it, A Declaration of those things that were most surely believed among them,
and not the Word of God. We take him for our Pattern; when he is confuted, it
will be time enough for us to confess our Mistake.

To the fifth Quotation, viz. that G. Fox says, The Soul is part of God, of his
Being, without Beginning, and Infinite, Gr. Mystery, p. 68, 9^, 29. I answer
briefly:

That G. F. speaks of the Divine Soul, or Life of Man, that comes from God, by
which Man lives to God, so Augustine calls it, anima animae, the Soul of the
Soul, or Life of man's Soul; so Rabbi Nunchmanni and Hiskuni, in the Comment of
Paulus Fagius take it, saying, its of the Being of God, his own Breath. This is
without Beginning, respecting God, and Infinite; or without End, respecting
Man. Where is the Heresy of this?

To the sixth Quotation out of the Works of G F. junior, viz. We own the
Scriptures as a true Declaration of the Saints Conditions.

I answer, The Allegation is frivolous on the side of our Adversary; for he
does not deny what G. F. asserts, nor does G. F. deny but that there are many
Scriptures which are Promissary, Threatening and Prophetic; does our owning the
Scriptures to be an account of the Experiences of the Saints of God of old
time, exclude any farther Character? or say that they are no more? What! have
people lost their senses, or must any thing serve to blemish Quakers; What
Injustice is here? For shame do as you would be done by.

To the seventh Passage, alleged out of Geo. Whitehead's Apology, page 49.
viz. That what is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures, yea and greater.

I answer in G. W's own words, which are these, That which was spoken from the
Spirit of Truth in any is of as great Authority as the Scriptures or Chapters
are, and greater, as proceeding immediately from that Spirit, as Christ's words
were of greater Authority when he spoke then the Pharisees reading the Letter;
and they and their speaking we deny: thi^* ^ays he, was my Answer.

Now I appeal to the just Witness of God in every Conscience, if this Adversary
was not very disingenuous to take no notice of this Distinction: for, in short,
two things are in our Friend's words; first, That what comes from the same
Spirit of Truth, is of the same Authority; and who denies that? no body that is
in his senses. Next, That what is spoken by the immediate Motion, Life and
Power of the Spirit, is of more Authority (that is, Force and Efficacy to move,
quicken, enliven or operate upon the Hearers) then the bare reading of a
Chapter in the Scripture, especially by such as the Pharisees were, as a Letter
cannot give that Impression which we may justly suppose the lively Presence,
Mind and Voice of the Person that writ it might. But the End of our Adversary
plainly is this, to make us undervalue the Truth of the Scripture, and to
debase the Authority of the Scripture with relation to its Verity; as if what
was said now by the Spirit of Truth in any godly Man, were more true then that
which was spoken by the same Spirit in former ages, which is a gross
suggestion. The difference lying in these two things; ^st, Whether Christ's
words, spoken by his own Mouth, were not of greater force, vigor and authority
to influence or quicken an Auditory, then the same words written and now read.
2dly, Whether the words of Christ, when spoken by his own Mouth, were not of
more Life and Authority then the Scriptures read by the Pharisees. The first is
true, and much more the last: let this Adversary then be ashamed of his
Injustice. Christ said of the words that he spoke, The words John 6. 63.
that I speak, they are Spirit, and they are Life; that is, (...) they
proceeded from his gracious Lips, and as they were uttered from that Divine
Power, Glory and Authority which dwelt in him.

To the eighth Quotation, That Richard Stubbs a Quaker should say, That the
Christ born of the Virgin, and that dyed at Jerusalem, was a False Christ, and
an Antichrist.

I answer, There was never any such man a Quaker that I know of, nor did ever
any owned by us utter so horrid a Blasphemy; we detest allsuch Impiety:
besides, the story I suppose came out of an idle Pamphlet, printed about seven
years since by a foolish Person in London, to get Money; a Fiction like to that
of the Island of Pines, etc. But if true, where is the Witnesses? shall the
SAY-SO or Authority of an Enemy prevail? what must any stuff serve to bedirt
the Quakers, no matter what, nor from whom? There is a Righteous God that will
have the Judgment of these things.

To the nineth Passage cited out of G. F's Great Mystery, page 206. viz. If
there be any other Christ then he that is crucified within, he is a False
Christ.

I answer, I have not the Book by me, but I will stand by the Passage; for
either there is no such thing as a Christ within, or if there be, there must be
two Christ's; or lastly, it is the same Christ that suffered without, which is
also crucified by sin within. Now I leave our Adversary to choose which of these
three he will accept of. Is there no Christ within? or is there two Christ's,
one within, and another without? or is there but one Christ both without and
within? choose him whether. But I would tell our Adversary, that a Christ was
revealed in Paul, and forming in the Hearts of the Galatians, and was in Gal.
1. 16. and 4. 19.
the holy Ancients the Hope of Glory, and so he is in his People in this day,
blessed be the Name of the Lord. Yea, 'twas the Apostolical Exhortation.
Examine your selves, whether ye be in the 2 Cor. 13. 4.
Faith, prove your own selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. So that such as deny Christ within
are out of the Apostolical Faith, and Reprobates. It was both Christ's Promise
and Prayer; for says he to his Disciples, Let not your Hearts be John 14. 1,
3, 18, 19, 20.
troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me. I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come to you, I will come again. Yet a little while and the
World sees me no more, but ye see me: Because I live, ye shall live also: At
that day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.
That Christ prayed for this Fellowship is as clear; Neither pray I for these
alone, Chap. 16. 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26.
but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all
may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one
in us, that the World may believe that thou have sent me: and the Glory which
thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one even as we are one. I IN
THEM, and they in me, that they may be made perfect in one: And that the World
may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me. O
Righteous Father! the World has not known thee, but I have known thee, and
these have known that thou have sent me; and I have declared unto them thy
Name, and will declare it, that the Love wherewith thou have loved me, may be
in them, and I IN THEM.

This is the Blessedness of the Righteous, even in this World, the true
Disciples of Jesus, that forsake all for his Name, that take up his Cross daily
to their Matthew 10. 38. Chap 16. 24. Mark 8. 34. Luke 9. 23. Revelat. 3. 20.
vain Affections and Lusts, and boldly confess him before all men by a Life of
true Self denial. O that all people would receive him into their hearts, that
is, into their Love and Affection.: Behold he stands at the Door and knocks;
shut not thy Door upon him; let him in, entertain him in thy Soul, that he may
wash thee and cleanse thee by his own spirit, and by his own water, and by his
own blood, that bear witness for him on Earth, and these three are but one; 1
John 5. 8.
then shall the Love of God abound in thy Soul toward God and toward thy
Neighbor; this is Christianity indeed: and the truth is, it is want of Christ
being known more within people, to purge their Hearts, and purify their
Consciences, that so much Vanity and Ungodlines are to be found among
Christians: People can let the Devil be within them, but they will not allow
Christ to be within them. But I would ask them and you, How the strong Man of
Sin must be bound, that Matthew 12. 29.
keeps the House (the Heart) and his Works destroyed, if Christ, the stronger
then he, have not entrance and sway in the Conscience? for this know, that from
within proceed Evil Thoughts, Chap. 15. 19, 20.
Murders, Adulteries, Fornication, Thefts, False Witness, Blasphemies; these
and such like are the things which defile the Man. Now, who shall purge this
Heart, and with what? Must not Christ do it, he that baptizes with Fire and
with the Chap. 3. 11, 12.
holy Ghost, whose Fan is in his Hand, and who will thoroughly purge his Floor?
This was John's record, that was sent of God for that End. Now let those that
call themselves Christians, consider seriously and in the Fear of God, if their
Floors, their Hearts, be purged, if the Dirt and Chaff be swept away, if
Christ's Baptism of Fire has burnt up their Vain Thoughts, Lusts and
Affections, or not; for by Fire will God plead with all flesh. And let such
consider, if they have been yet baptized with the holy Ghost, that makes people
alive to God, and whether they live to God, and meditate in his pure Law; or
rather if they be not carnally-minded, which is Death, let them see if Pride
don't profess Christianity, and if Wantonness, Vanity, Covetousness, Passion,
Envy, Wrath, Malice, and such like don't make Profession of Religion, read,
pray, preach, go to Church, and the like: I say, in the Fear of Almighty God,
let all that profess him and the Christian Religion examine themselves, and
prove themselves, whether Jesus Christ live in them and rule in them, or
another Nature, Principle and Spirit; for God will not be mocked, such as men
sow such must they reap in the terrible Day of Judgment.

To the tenth Quotation, out of G. F's Way to the Kingdom, viz. That the four
Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John are not the Gospel.

I answer, If this be a piece of Heresy, we have good Company; for Paul,
Ignatius, Justine Martyr, Origin, Chrisostom, and some of our English Martyrs
Romans 1. 16.
are of this Mind. Paul says, The Gospel is the Power of God; but it were
Blasphemy with a witness to call these four Narratives or Declarations, the
Power of God; in which there are the Sayings and Actions of the Devil and
Wicked Jews and Persecutors recorded, as well as the Expressions and Deeds of
Christ and his Disciples.

Ignatius, in his Epistle to the Philadelphians, calls it very near to Paul's
Expression of the Gospel, (...), The Perfection of Incorruption, which these
four Books are not, that are composed of Paper and Letters, containing mere
reports and Records, though never so true; or the Consequence would be, that
the Writings of the Prophets (because Ignatius says in the same Epistle, that
the Prophets have anounced and declared the Gospel) are the Gospel in our
Adversaries account, if he receives Ignatius, that lived soon after. But its
clear that our Adversaries refuse the Prophets Writings that Title, and do not
give it even to the Apostolical Epistles, yet are displeased with our
Tenderness in not stiling these four Books or Histories the Gospel.

When Justin Martyr speaks of those four Books, especially when he cites out
of them the mocking of Christ, prophesied of in the Psalms, and of Christ's
Silence to Pilate, he says, (...) and (...), it is written and expressed, not
in the Four Evangelists, or in the Four Evangelia, or in the Gospel, or in the
Writings of the Four Evangelists, as they do commonly now; but, says he, (...)
in the Records or History of his (Christ's) Apostles: Yea, he is so far from
calling the Books of Scriptures either the Law or Gospel, that he says, Christ
Jesus is (...), the eternal Law and the New Testament, which according to the
Prophecy should come forth to the universal World.

Chrysostom not only refused an Oath, but denied those four Books to be the
Evangile or Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 19. and 3. 3.
though he refused not to call them, The Writings of the four Evangelists. So
said William Thorp, as may be seen in the Book of Martyrs. Col. 1. 26.
Besides, the Gospel is called, A Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, which
four Books were 1 Timothy 1. 11.
not; and it is still hid from all Envious, Proud, Lustful, Vain and
Evil-minded People.

To Conclude; The Bible it self declares of the Gospel, but is not that Gospel;
it declares of the Spirit, but is not that Spirit; it declares of the Light,
but is not that Light; and it declares of the Eternal Power and Word, but it is
not that Eternal Word and Power of God: neither is the Light, Power and Spirit
in the Scripture, though they were in those that gave them forth, and live and
abide forever in him, who is the Fullness of all Wisdom, Life and Truth, who is
Lord and Author of the holy Scriptures given forth by divine Inspiration.

To the last Citation and Exception, viz. that G. F. says, That we ought not
to pray to God to give us a sight of our Sins.

I answer, That this Adversary misgives his words, and suggests by those he
cites another thing then is plainly and honestly intended by G. F. in his own
words; they are these, And to you that tempt God and say, The Lord give us a
sight of our Sins; mark, he speaks to those that tempt God, and let me add,
mock God too; for to such he speaks, as what follows declares, viz. Priests and
People (says G. F.) does not the Light which Christ has enlightened you with,
let you see your Sin? that Lying and Swearing, Cursed Speaking, Theft, Murder,
Whoredom, Covetousness, Pride, Lust and Pleasures, all these things to be the
Works of the Flesh and Fruits of Darkness? Mark now, this Light within you lets
you see it, so you need not tempt God to give you a Sight of your Sins; for ye
know enough, and waiting in the Light, Power and Strength will be given to you.

Now, let the Impartial judge if the Consequence of these words be, That we
must not pray to God to give us a sight of our Sins that we don't see, which
must be our Enemies suggestion or nothing, or not rather, that we should not
tempt and mock God by praying for a sight of our sins, whilst we see, and that
there is not a forsaking of the sins that we do already see. I ask, Does it
follow, that because we should not tempt or mock God in praying for a sight of
the sins we have a sight of, and yet don't forsake, that therefore we must not
pray to God for a sight of those sins that we have no sight of, having first
renounced those we have had a sight of? Well, the Lord keep our Lives out of
the Power of a Jury that would take this Latitude of Construction.

The following words of that good man are these, and very savoury and Christian
they are; For they that wait upon the Lord, their strength shall be renewed
(but for what, if not to forsake sin, and serve the Lord God) and living in the
Light, and walking up to God, it will bring you to true Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness, that you may receive the Blessing from God, and give over
tempting of God to give you a sight of your sins. And why? because you see more
then you forsake; forsake what you see, before you pray for more sight; for all
such Prayer in such Disobedience is a mere Mockery, and God will not be mocked:
and be Psalm 109. 7. Prove. 28. 9. Isa. 1. 13, 14, 15.
it known to all, that God has determined not to hear the Prayers of the
Wicked; for they are, says the Prophet, an Abomination unto him. This yet
appears to be his sense by the following Paragraph; And to all ye that say, God
give us Grace and we shall refrain from our Sin; there ye have got a tempting
customary word; for the free Grace of God has appeared to all men, and this is
the Grace which shows you Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts: Now, thou that live
in Ungodliness, Lying, and Swearing, and Theft, and Murder, and Drunkenness,
and Filthy Pleasures, and lusting after the World, thou art he that turns the
free Grace of God into Wantonness, and casts his Laws behind thy back, and
walk despightfully against the Spirit of Grace. Oh vain man! yet thou can
say, God is merciful, and live in thy Wickedness, passing on thy time without
the Fear of God, sporting thy self in thy Wickedness.

What think you now? Does this man say, the people ought not to pray for a
sight of their sins, which they see not in order to Repentance, or can he mean
so? let Candor speak. For that I said before must be the meaning of this
Adversary, or he means nothing, because in the other sense all must grant that
men ought not to tempt, provoke and mock God by praying for a fight, when they
have it and don't use it. What then is the Conclusion of this Matter? why
plainly this, that from G. F. saying, that those who say the Lord give us a
sight of our sins, that have a sight of them already and forsake them not, do
therein tempt God: This Enemy of ours, makes no scruple of Conscience to infer
and conclude that G. F. says, that we ought not to pray to God to give us a
sight of our sins at all, without any regard to the Distinction of having the
sight already, be it that such have forsaken what God has given them a sight
of, or that they have Sins they have yet no sight of, yet G. F. says, we must
not pray for a sight of our sins, if this Adversary may be credited. Well, the
Lord God Almighty, who is the Searcher of all Hearts, knows the end of this
Person in writing and spreading these Calumnies and Perversions, and with him I
leave him and his Work, but so, as that I sincerely desire, that he may have a
sight of his sin against God and an harmless People, if he acts ignorantly; and
that he may sincerely repent, and find Mercy with the Lord, if he acts
maliciously, before he goes bence and be no more seen; for its not a slight
thing to mischarge, and that so peremptorily too, an entire People, about
matters of the World that is without end.

I shall conclude this Defense with these three things, the first is, that most
of the Opinions he calls ours are not so evinced, or so much as attempted to be
proved by the Author of the Libel against us. 2dly, Those that are endeavored
to be fastened on us, have not their due proof, one Person it may be is
produced to make good a Charge against a Body of People; would our Adversaries
be thus used? would they be concluded by the Word or Act of any one Member of
their numerous Communion? certainly no: Besides, the Proofs that are brought,
are some lame, others perverted, and some forged, which looks very
dishonorable on the part of our Accuser, first to mis-charge, then mis-cite,
and lastly wrack words, well intended, to extort, if possible, a Consession of
guilt: but the truth is, Error can only be maintained by Error, and therefore
there is no wonder in the case. This is the Usage we have mostly met with put
thanks be to God we are neither surprised nor unqrepared.

Lastly, I do hereby offer a fair and free Conference with the Author or
Authors of the Libel, or any other that can soberly pretend to a Conscientious
Dissatisfaction about our Faith or Practice, at such time as shall be mutually
agreed upon to be convenient.

And this I offer, not out of Vanity or Oftentation, but in Duty to God my
great Lord and Master, and in good will to all such Persons; and did not these
Considerations prevail, and carry me to this Condescension, my manifold Affairs
and the many and large Books I have already writ on occasion of these and the
like Imputations, would have dissuaded me from any fresh undertaking of this
nature, and sufficiently guarded me against all Reflections upon my Silence.

I am a Friend to Mankind William Penn.

THE END.

