The Last True News FROM IRELAND, Being the Copy of a Letter sent from
Dublin, to a Gentleman of good Rank, and now Resident in this City.

Wherein is declared many great overthrowes and Defeates given to the Rebels.

Likewise the manner how a great Castle called Carricke Main (within 6. miles
of Dublin) was taken by the English, and the Rebels put to death, Man, Woman,
and Child.

Also a true intelligence that the Rebels are beaten by Sir Henry Titchbu^ne
out of Dundalke.

London, Printed for T.F. 1642.

To my Worthy Friend, W. J. Esquire in LONDON.
SIR,
THe last Letter I received from you was of the 8. of March, and if you have
written any since they are unreceived, Sir John Hoy his eldest Son William Hoy
that was at the Lord Viscount Netterfield his house, was brought to my Lord
Parsons, the 27. of March, Mr. Cadwell of Moorton, the Elder Brother to my late
Landlord the Barber, coming out of the Country, and well mounted, with his
Sword by his side, to his house here in Dublin, was observed by some of our
Soldiers, who presently followed him, and after some questions, drew out his
Sword, which was all bloody, whereupon they carried him before a Magistrate,
whence he was sent to the Coal and is like to be hanged, for it was conceived,
that he had been at the murdering of some of the English, I wrote to you in my
last Letter that Colonel Read and Mr. Mahone were Racked, he confessed that
he would have murdered both the Justices, with man, woman and child, of the
English, Read, that he should have been Lieutenant General of all Mead. and
had 600. l. per annum Pension, and 600. l. more for 2. Officers next under him,
Also that the Lord Dunsaney, Sir John Netterfield, Dondall the Register, who
was Clerk of the Council to the Rebels, Mr. Barnewell of Kilbrue, with others
came into the Justices, but Barnewell was Racked some 4. days since, and
confessed that the Lord Dunsaney was one of the chiefest Actors in all the
Pale, with much more I cannot yet learn, nor as some say to be made common as
yet; Sir, I must use an old Proverb, The Pitcher goes so long to the Water,
that at length it comes broken home, so it is with us now, for the 26. of
March. Captain Scouts Troop went out with some others (not to pray but to
pillage you may say) who met with a great party of the Rebels, and followed
them so close, that they were enforced to take Mr. Welsh his Castle of
Carricke-maine, 6. Miles from Dublin, as we go to Poorescourt and beset it
round, then sent to the Lord Justices to acquaint them by a Post, whereupon
Sir Simon Harcourt (a brave Gentleman) and one of the best Soldiers we had,
and one Captain Berry another brave Gentleman and wise, who undertook with
1500. men to take the Castle, and went hence the 27. of March on the Kings day,
after whom was sent 2. Demi Culverings, but before they could be brought to the
Castle, the Rebels dared our men, and one a brave daring Fellow upon a White
horse, came out of the Castle, and rode quite through our men, and then
discharged his Pistol in despite of all our men. The Rebels were were (as it
seemed very good marksmen, for they seldom or never made shot in vain, but
either killed or hurt, Captain Berry was shot through the shoulder, his
Lievtennant shot dead, with diverse others, at length our Ordnance arrived, and
was placed in an Irish house, where no Commander could order the placing of
them but Sir Simon Harcourt, and he after some few shot made went behind the
house to seek his best advantage, and stooping down near the ground was shot
in the left shoulder with a slug of Lead (for it seems the Rebels has not
store of moulds to cast Bulle^s in, and after the discharging of 22. Shot, a
hole was made 15 foot above ground, but not to be entered, in which time one
Lieutenant Huse making choice of some few others with Hatchets and Timber,
broke open the Bawne gate, where they found 60 horses bridled and sadled, then
Lieutenant Marret brake the Castle door and entered, where they killed man,
woman, and child, but one Welsh woman, whose Brother was one of those that
entered the Castle, she being a servant in Master Welsh his house, yet could he
not save her from some wounds, the number of them that were slain in the Bawne
or Castle were 260 or more.

The 28 of March Sir Simon Harcourt having made his Will (the day before) dyed
at Myrian the Lord Fitz-Williams his house about 3. miles from Dublin in the
afternoon; And I must now tell you, that in this Castle was a Priest, who fore
seeing their loss, desired to be put in an empty Pipe Caske, and the head to
be put on again, where he lay, but the slaughter ended, the Soldiers
conceiving the Pipe had been full of good Bear, broached it, when finding it
empty, they cut off the Hoopes, and finding the Priest, cut him as small as
Flesh to the Pot: So much for the Castle.

In my former Letter I also writ to you how Sir. Henry Ti^chburne had at Ardell
slain 300. men, with which he was not content, but marched presently with 1000
men thence to Dundalke, where was at least 5000. Rebels, and coming to the
gate broke it open and entered, in which town he took one Culvering, and
another piece of Ordnance charged with Musker Bullets a foot and half deep
from which the Gunner, for fear fled away to save his Life, and Sir Henry
took them for his Service, and slew 1800. men therein and our Horse chased
them over the Water, to the Meyrie Castle three Miles beyond Dundalke, (the
Farle of Devonshire, Mountjoy built it) the rest of the Rogues fled, but many
were slain in the pursuit, we lost but a 11. men in that Service, and the
chiefest man of note was Sir Faithful Fortescue, his second Son, this was done
the 29. of March, and Sir Henry Titchburne, remains still at Dundalk, where
he took much good pillage and Money, and a small Bark laden with Victuals,
God send Sir Henry. well back to Tredaugh, who sent Sr. Sammuell Harcot, his
Son with this News to the Lord Justices to Dublin, I pray he go not farther
without 500. men at least, the Newery being you know but 8. Miles beyond
Dundalke, which is 16. Miles from Tredaugh Sir Simon Harcuts body was brought
to my Neighbor Cap-Scon^es house, there to be inb^lmed to be sent to his house
in Staffordshire, but things fit for the service not being to be had here in
Dublin, he was buried in St. Patricks Church, I must likewise tell you your old
Landlord Mr. Henry Ashbourne is dead, he dyed six weeks since. so I rest,

Your Servant W. P.

FINIS.

