INNOCENCE WITH Her open Face PRESENTED By way of Apology for the Book
entitled The Sandy Foundation Shaken, To all Serious and Enquiring Persons,
PARTICULARLY The Inhabitants of the City of LONDON:

By W. P. j.

He that utters a Slander is a Fool; and a False Balance is an Abomination
to the Lord,

Prove. 10. 18. and 11. 1. Printed in the Year, 1669.

RELIGION, Although there can be nothing of greater concernment, nor which does
more essencially import the immortal happiness of men; yet such is the calamity
of the Age, that there is not any thing they are less solicitous about, or
serious in the prosecution of, vainly imagining it to consist in the implicit
subscription and verbal confession of men's invented Traditions and Precepts,
whilst they neglect that more Orthodox definition of the Apostle James, (viz.)
Pure Religion and undefiled before God is, Jam. 1. 27.
to visit the Fatherless, and to keep himself unspotted from the World; and
instead thereof, believe they are performing the best of Services, in
sacrificing the Reputation, Liberty, Estate, if not Life it self of others to
their own tenatious conceptions; because perhaps though Persons of more virtue,
they cannot in all punctillioes correspond therewith; how much I have been made
an instance must needs be too notorious to any that hold the least intelligence
with common fame, that scarce ever took more pains to make the Proverb good, by
proving her self a Liar, then in my concern; having been most egregiously
slandered, reviled and defamed by Pulpit, Press and Talk, tearming me a
Blasphemer, Seducer, Socinian, denying the Divinity of Christ the Savior, and
what not? And all this about my late Answer to a Disputation with some
Presbyterians: but how unjustly; it is the business of this short Apology to
show, which had not been thus long retorted, if an expectation first to have
been brought upon my examination had not required a suspense; and if I shall
acquit my self from the injurious imputations of my Adversaries, I hope the cry
will have an end; to which purpose, let but my innocence have your hearing in
her own defense, who as she never can detract from her intentions in what she
really has done; so will she as easily disprove her Enemies, in manifesting
their Accusations to be fictitious: judge not before you read, neither believe
any further then you see.

I. That which I am credibly informed to be the greatest reason for my
Imprisonment, and that noise of Bl^sphemy, which has pierced so many Ears of
late, is, my denying the Divinity of Christ, and divesting him of his Eternal
Godhead, which most busily has been suggested as well to those in Authority,
as maliciously insinuated amongst the People; wherefore let me beseech you to
be impartial, and considerate in the perusal of my Vindication, which being in
the fear of the Almighty God, and the simplicity of Scripture dialect presented
to you, I hope my Innocence will appear beyond a scruple. The Proverbs which
most agree, intend Christ the Savior, speak in this manner; By me Kings reign,
and Princes decree Prove. 8. 12, 15, 20, 23.
justice; I (Wisdom) lead in the midst of the Paths of Judgment: I was set up
from Everlasting; to which Paul's words allude, unto them which are called (we
preach) 1 Cor. 1. 24.
Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God; from whence I conclude Christ
the Savior to be God; for otherwise God would not be himself; since if Christ
be distinct from God, and yet Gods Power and Wisdom, God would be without his
own Power and Wisdom; but inasmuch as it is impossible Gods Power and Wisdom
should be distinct or divided from himself, it reasonably follows, that Christ,
who is that Power and Wisdom is not distinct from God, but entirely that very
same God.

Next, the Prophets, David and Isaiah speak thus, The Lord is my Psalm. 27. 1.
Isa. 49. 6. and chap. 60. 20.
Light and my Salvation; I will give thee for a Light unto the Gentiles; and
speaking to the Church, for the Lord shall be thine Everlasting Light; to which
the Evangelist adds, concerning Christ, That was the true Light which lights
every Joh. 1. 9. 1 John 1. 5.
man that comes into the World; God is Light, and in him is no darkness at
all; from whence I assert the unity of God and Christ, because though nominally
distinguished, yet essentially the same Divine Light; for if Christ be that
Light, and that Light be God, then is Christ God; or if God be that Light, and
that Light be Christ, then is God Christ. Again, And the City had no need of
the Sun, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Rev. 21. 23.
Lamb (Christ) is the Light thereof, by which the oneness of the nature of
these Lights plainly appears; for since God is not God without his own glory,
and that his glory lightens, (which it could never do if it were not Light) and
that the Lamb; or Christ is that very same Light, what can follow, but that
Christ the Light, and God the Light are ONE pure and eternal Light?

Next, from the word Savior its manifest, I even I am the Lord, Isa. 43. 11.
and besides me there is no Savior: And thou shall know no God but me, Hos.
13. 4.
for there is no Savior besides Me. And Mary said, my spirit has rejoiced
Luke 1 47.
in God my Savior: And the Samaritans said unto the Woman, Now we know that
this is indeed the Joh. 4. 42.
Christ the Savior of the World: according to his grace made manifest 2 Timothy
1. 9. 10.
by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ. Simon Peter to them that have
obtained like precious Faith 2 Pet 1. 1.
with us, through the Righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. For
therefore we suffer reproach because we trust in the Living God, 1 Timothy 4. 10.
the Savior of all men: To the only wise God our Savior be glory, etc. Jud.
v. 25.
From which I conclude Christ to be God; for if none can save, or be styled
properly a Savior but God, and yet that Christ is said to save, and properly
called a Savior, it must needs follow, that Christ the Savior is God.

Lastly, In the beginning was Joh. 1. 1. 3.
the ((...)) Word, (which the Greeks sometimes understood for Wisdom and divine
Reason) and the Word was with God, and the Word was God: all things were made
by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made; for by him Col 1.
16, 17.
were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth: He is
before all things, and by him all Hebr. 1. 3. 10.
things consist, upholding all things by the Word of his Power, etc. wherefore
I am still confirmed in the belief of Christ the Saviors Divinity; for he that
made all things, and by whom they consist and are upheld, because before all
things; he was not made nor upheld by another, and consequently is God: now
that this (...) or Word that was made Flesh, or Christ Joh. 1, 24.
the Light, Power and wisdom of God, and Savior of men, has made all things,
and is him by whom they only consist and are upheld, because before them, is
most evident from the recited passages of Scripture; therefore he was not made,
nor is he upheld by any other power then his own, and consequently is truly
God: In short, this conclusive Argument for the proof of Christ the Saviors
being God, should certainly persuade all sober persons of my Innocence, and my
Adversaries Malice, He that is the Everlasting Wisdom, the Divine Power, the
true Light, the only Savior, the creating Word of all things, (whether
visible or invisible) and their Upholder by his own Power, is without
contradiction God; but all these qualifications and divine properties are by
the concurrant testimonies of Scripture ascribed to the Lord Jesus Christ;
therefore, without a scruple, I call and believe him really to be the Mighty
God. And for a more ample satisfaction, let but the 28th page Guide Mistaken,
p. 28. con. 9. Clap.
of my Reply to J. Clapham be perused, in which Christ's Divinity and Eternity
is very fully asserted.

Judge then impartial Readers, (to whom I appeal in this: concern) whether my
Christian Reputation has not been unworthily traduced; and that those several
Persons who have been posting out their Books against me (whilst a close
Prisoner) have not been beating the Air, and fighting with their own Shadows,
in supposing what I never thought, much less writ of, to be the intendment of
my Book; and then as furiously have fastened on their own conceits, expecting I
should feel the smart of every blow, who thus far am no ways interressed in
their heat.

As for my being a Socinian, I must confess I have read of one Socinus, of
(that they call) a noble Family in Seen in Italy, who about the year 1574,
being a young man, voluntarily did abandon the glories, pleasures and honors
of the great Duke of Tuskany's Court at Florence, (that noted place for all
wordly delicacies) and became a perpetual Exile for his Conscience, whose
parts, wisdom, gravity and just behavior made him the most famous with the
Polonian and Transilvanian Churches; but I was never baptized into his name,
and therefore deny that reproachful Epithet; and if in any thing I
acknowledge the verity of his Doctrine, it is for the Truth's sake, of which,
in many things, he had a clearer prospect then most of his Contempories; but
not therefore a Socinian, any more then a Son of the English-Church, whilst
esteemed a Quaker, because I justify many of her Principles, since the
Reformation, against the Roman Church.

II. As for the business of satisfaction, I am prevented by a Person whose
reputation is generally great amongst the Protestants of these Nations; for
since the Doctrine against which I mostly levelled my Arguments, was, the
impossibility of Gods forgiving sin upon repentance, without Christ's paying
his Justice, by suffering Infinite Vengeance and Eternal Death for Sins past,
present, and to come, he plainly in his late Discourse about Christ's
Sufferings, against Crellius, acknowledges me no less by granting, upon a new
state of the controversy, both the possibility of Gods pardoning sins, as
debts, without such a rigid satisfaction, and the impossibility of Christ's so
suffering for the World; reflecting closely upon those persons, as giving so
just an occasion Still. con. Cr^ll. page 269, 270, 271. 272, 273, 274.
to the Churches Adversaries to think they triumph over her Faith, whilst it is
only over their Mistakes, who argue with more zeal then judgment: Nay, one of
the main ends which first induced me to that Discourse, I find thus delivered
by him, namely; If they did believe Christ came into the World to reform it, p.
160.
That the Wrath of God is now revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness,
that his Love which is shown to the World, is to deliver them from the hand of
their Enemies, that they might serve him in righteousness and holiness all the
days of their lives, they could never imagine that Salvation is entailed by
the Gospel upon a mighty confidence, or vehement persuasion of what Christ has
done and suffered for them; thus does he confess upon my Hipothesis, or
Proposition what I mainly contend for; and however, positively I may reject or
deny my Adversaries unscriptural and imaginary Satisfaction; let all know this,
that I pretend to know no other name by which Remission, Atonement and
Salvation can be obtained, but Jesus Christ the Savior, who is the Power and
Wisdom of God, what apprehensions soever people may have entertained concerning
me.

III. As for Justification by an imputed righteousness, I still say, that
whosoever believes in Christ shall have Remission and Justification; but then
it must be such a Faith as can no more live without Works, then a Body without
a Spirit; wherefore I conclude, that Jam. 2. 26.
true Faith comprehends Evangelical Obedience; and here the same Dr
Stillingflees comes into my relief (though its not wanting) by a plain
Assertion of the necessity of obedience (viz.) such who make no other condition
of the Gospel but believing, Id. page 164, 165, 166.
ought to have a great care to keep their hearts sounder then their heads;
thereby intimating the grand imperfection and danger of such a notion; and
therefore (God Almighty bears me record) my design was nothing less, or more,
then to wrest those beloved and sin-pleasing Principles out of the hands, heads
and hearts of people, that by the fond persuasion of being justified from the
personal righteousness of another, without relation to their own obedience,
they might not sin on upon trust, till the Arrest of Eternal Vengeance should
irrecoverably overtake them, that all might be induced to an earnest persuit
after holiness by a circumspect observance to Gods holy Spirit, As without
which none shall ever see the Lord. And (to shut up my Apology for religious
matters) that all may see the simplicity, Scripture Doctrine, and phraise of my
Faith, in the most important matters of Eternal Life, I shall here subjoyn a
short Confession.

I sincerely own, and unfeignedly believe (by virtue of the sound knowledge and
experience received from the gift of that holy Unction, and divine Grace
inspired from on 1 Cor. 8. 5. 6.
high) in one holy, just, merciful, almighty and eternal God, who is the
Father of all things; that appeared Hebr. 1. 1.
to the holy Patriarchs and Prophets of old, at sundry times, and in diverse
manners; And in ONE Lord Jesus Christ, the everlasting Wisdom, divine Power, 1
Cor. 8. 6.
true Light, only Savior and preserver of all, the same one holy, just,
merciful, almighty and eternal God, who in the fullness of time took, and was
manifested in the Flesh, at which time he preached (and his Disciples after
him) the Joh. 1. 14.
Everlasting Gospel of Repentance, and Promise of Remission of Sins, 1 Timothy 3.
16.
and Eternal Life to all that heard and obeyed; who said, he that is Mat. 4. 17.
with you (in the Flesh) shall be in Luke 24. 47.
you, (by the Spirit) and though he left them, (as to the Flesh) yet not
comfortless, for he would Joh. 14. 17, 3, 18.
come to them again, (in the Spirit) for a little while and they should Chapter 16.
16.
not see him (as to the Flesh;) again, a little while and they should see him
(in the Spirit,) for the Lord (Jesus Christ) is that Spirit, a Manifestation
whereof is given to 2 Cor. 3. 17.
every one to profit withal, In which holy Spirit I believe, as the 1 Cor. 1^.
7.
same Almighty and Eternal God, who, as in those times ended all shadows Romans
8. 14. 17.
and became the infallible Guide to them that walked therein, by which they
were adopted Heirs and Coheirs of Glory; so am I a living witness, that the
same holy, just, merciful, almighty and eternal God, is now, as then, (after
this tedious night of Idolatry, Superstition and humane inventions that has
overspread the World) gloriously manifested to discover and save from all
iniquity, and to conduct unto the Holy Land of pure and Rev. 21. 3 Prove. 28. 13.
endless Peace; in a word, to tabernacle in men: and I also firmly believe,
that without repenting and Luke. 14. ^^.
forsaking of past sins, and walking in obedience to this heavenly voice, (...)
which would guide into all Truth, and establish there, Remission and Eternal
Life can never be obtained, (...).
but unto them that fear his Name and keep his Commandments, they, and they
only shall have right unto the Tree of Life, for whose Name sakes I have been
made willing to relinquish and forsake all the vain fashions, enticing
pleasures; Mat. 10. 37, 38, 39.
alluring honors and glittering gloglories of this transitory World, and
readily to accept the portion of a Luke 18. 32. and
Fool from this deriding Generation, and become a man of sorrows, and of Chapter
23. 36.
perpetual reproach to my Familiars; yea, and with the greatest cheerfulness
can obsignate and confirm, (with no less seal, then the loss of whatsoever this
doting World accounts dear) this faithful Confession, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
having my eye fixed upon a more enduring Substance, and lasting Inheritance;
and being most infallibly assured, that when time shall be no more. I shall (if
faithful here unto) possess the Mansions of Eternal Life, and be received into
his Everlasting Habitations of Rest and Glory.

IV. Lastly, It may not be unreasonable to obse ve, that (however industrious
some (and those Dissenters too) have been to represent me as a person
disturbing the Civil Peace) I have not violaced any truly Fundamental Law which
relates to external property and good behavior, and not to religious
apprehensions, it being the constant Principle of my self and Friends, to
maintain good works, and keep our Consciences void of offense, paying active or
passive obedience, suitable to the meek Example of our Lord Jesus Christ; nor
would I have any ignorant, how forward I was by Messages, Letters and Visits,
to have determined this debate in a sober and select Assembly, notwithstanding
the rude entertainment we had met with before; but contrary to their own
appointments our Adversaries failed us, which necessitated me to that defense;
and finding the Truth so pressed with slander, I cannot but say I saw my just
call to her relief: but, alas! how has those two or three extempory sheets
been tossed, tumbled, and torn on all hands, yea aggrevated to a monstrous
design, even the subversion of the Christian Religion, then which there could
be nothing more repugnant to my Principle and purpose; wherefore how very
intemperate as well as unjust have all my Adversaries been in their revilings,
slanders and defamations? using the most approbrious terms of Seducer,
Heretic, See Tho. Vincent's late railing piece against the Quakers, also Tho.
Danson's and Dr Owen's.
Blasphemer, Deceiver, Socinian, Pelagian, Simon Magus, Impiously robbing
Christ of his Divinity, for whom the Vengeance of the Great Day is reserved,
etc. nor have these things been whispered, but in one Book and Pulpit after
another, have more or less been thundered out against me, as if some Bull had
lately been arrived from Rome; and all this acted under the foul pretense of
zeal and love to Jesus Christ, whose meek and gentle Mat. 5. 39. 39. 40.
Example always taught it for a principle mark of true Christianity, to suffer
the most outrageous injuries, but never to return any; nay, if my Adversaries
would but be just and constant to themselves, how can they offer to conspire my
destruction upon a Religious ground, who either are themselves under a present
limitation, or have been formerly by the Papists: Coun. Trent. p. 14.
Tell me, I pray, did Luther, that grand Reformer, whom you so much reverence
justly demand from the Emperor at the Diet of Worms (where he was summoned to
appear) that none should sit judge upon his Doctrines but the Scripture, and in
case they should be cast, that no other Sentence should be past upon him, then
what Gamaliel offered to the Jewish Council, If it were not of God it would not
stand? and if you will not censure him who first of all arraigned the Christian
World (so called) at the Bar of his private judgment, (that had so many hundred
years soundly slept, without so much as giving one considerable shrug or turn,
during that tedious winter night of dark Apostasy, but justify his
proceedings) can you so furiously assault others? but above all, you who refuse
conformity to others, and that have been writing these eight years for Liberty
of Conscience, and take it at this very season by an indulgent connivance; what
pregnant testimonies do you give of your unwillingness to grant that to others
you so earnestly beg for your selves? Does it not discover your injustice, and
plainly express what only want of power hinders you to act? But of all
Protestants in general I demand, Do you believe that Persecution to be
Christian in your selves, that you condemned for Antichristian in the Papists?
you judged it a weakness in their Religion, and is it a cogent Argument in
your? nay, is it not the readiest way to enhance and propagate the reputation
of what you would depress? If you were displeased at their assuming an
infallibility, will you believe it impossible in your selves to err? Have
Whitker, Rynolds, Laud, Owen, Baxter, Stillingfleet, Poole, etc. disarmed the
Romanists of these inhumane Weapons, that you might imply them against your
inoffensive Countrymen? let the Example and holy Precepts of Christ dissuade
you, who came not to destroy, but save; and soberly reflect upon his equal Law
of doing as you would be done unto. Remember I have not dethroned a Diviny,
subverted Faith, made void obedience, nor frustrated the hope of an Eternal
Recompense; much less have I injured your persons, or in any thing deviated
from that (...) and (...), or holy Principle, so much insisted on by
Philosophers and Lawyers as the Original of good Laws, and Life: No, your own
Consciences shall advocate on my behalf. Let it suffice then, that we who are
Nick-nam'd Quakers have under every revolution of Power and Religion been the
most reviled, contemned and persecuted, as if God indeed had set us forth in
these last days as a 1 Cor 21. 9.
Spectacle to the World, to Angels and to Men; and treat us not as if by being
what we are, our common right and interest in humane Societies were forfeited;
neither accept that for a true Measure of our Life and Doctrines, which has
been taken by the ill will or ignorance of others; but rather make an impartial
examination, that what you judge may be from what you know, and not from what
you hear at second hand; and then we shall as little question your just opinion
of our innocence, as we have too much been made sensible of the sad effects
that follow an ignorant and unadvised zeal; for so monstrously fond are some of
their persuasions, and doting on the Patrons of them, that seldom they have
discretion, much less religious desires to consider how true or false an other
Religion is, or what may be the consequence of its tolleration; but with a
fury, not inferior to their ignorance, cry, Crucify, crucify; and
Pharisee-like, out of pretense of honor and service done to God Almighty, and
the memory of his holy Prophets, not stick to persecute his beloved Son, and
righteouss Servants, so Cruel, Blind, and Obstinate is Persecution: Be
therefore advised in the words of that meek Example Jesus Christ, Call not for
fire any more; let the Tares grow with the wheat; neither employ that Sword any
more, which was commanded to be sheathed so many hundred years ago (suppose we
were Enemies to the true Religion; but have a care you are not upon one of
Saul's errands to Damascus, and helping the mighty against God and his
Anointed;) and rather choose by fair and moderate debates (not penalties
ratified by Imperial Decrees) to determine religious differences; so will you
at least obtain Tranquillity which may be called a Civil-Unity. But if you are
resolved severity shall take its course, in this; our case can never change,
nor happiness abate, that no humane Edict can possibly deprive us of his
glorious Presence, who is able to make the dismal'st Prison so many receptacles
of Pleasure, and whose Heavenly Fellowship does unspeakably replenish our
solitary Souls with Divine Consolation; by whose Holy, Meek and Harmless Spirit
I have been taught most freely to forgive, and not less earnestly to solicit
the Temporal and Eternal good of all my Adversaries: Farewell.

William Penn, jun.

A Questionary Postscript.
WHere does the Scripture say that Christ suffered an Eternal Death and
Infinite Vengeance? for did not Christ rise the third day? and is not infinite
vengeance and eternal death without end? and does not God say he was well
pleased with his Son before his death? and was not his Offering acceptable? and
did not the Apostle say that the Saints were accepted in Christ that was God's
beloved? and this was after Christ died and rose; and God was said to be
well-pleased with his Son, both before he suffered, in his suffering, and after
he suffered, though displeased with those that caused him to suffer.

These Lines were added by a Friend.
WE are bought with a price, and therefore we are to glorify God with our
bodies, souls and spirits, which are his; and not to live in sin which
dishonors God; and Christ tasted death for every man; not that men should live
in sin and death: Christ's Blood was shed for all men; and by his Blood he
redeems from iniquity; not that people should live in iniquity, and die in
their sins; for he came to make an end of sin: Christ's Righteousness is not
put upon people that lives and dies in unrighteousness; for Abraham believed,
and it was counted to him for righteousness, as it is written, he that does
righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous; and he that commits sin
is of the Devil: and he that has the Son has Life, and he that has not the
Son has not Life; and Christ was the Offering, not for our sins only, but for
the sins of the whole World; and so he is the Way and the Mediator; and so
Christ's Birth, Blood, Offering, Death, Mediatorship, Covenant, his being
Priest, Prophet and King, is owned according to the Scriptures of Truth, and
all the Prophesies of him: And Christ who is the Foundation which no other can
be laid, then what is already laid (the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles) we own; and there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Spirit, which are one; and there are three that bear record
in the Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in
one.

THE END.

