THE Continued Cry OF THE OPPRESSED FOR JUSTICE, Being A farther Account of the
late Unjust and Cruel Proceedings of Unreasonable Men against the Persons and
Estates of many of the People called Quakers, only for their peaceable Meetings
to worship God.

Presented to the Serious Consideration of the KING and both Houses of
PARLIAMENT.

With a Postscript of the Nature Difference and Limits of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Authority, and the inconsistency of such Severities with both.

Recommmended and submitted to the Perusal of Caesar's True Friends.

By the Author of England's Present Interest, etc.

Seek Judgment, Relieve the Oppressed, Judge the Fatherless, and Defend the
Widow, Isa. 1. 17. Printed in the Year 1675.

FOR THE KING AND Both Houses OF PARLIAMENT.
FOrasmuch as the Maintenance of Justice, and Preservation of the Peace of
Civil Societies have in all Ages been the great End of Government; and since it
has pleased Almighty God to cast our Lot in a Kingdom, whose Constitution is
more then ordinarily caresil of the Liberty and Property of its freeborn
Inhabitants: And because several Laws have been made upon Occasion of Dissent
in Matters of Religion, to press an Uniformity to the Religion now established,
that in the Execution of them have generally interferred with those Laws that
give and preserve English Freedoms, in that Hundreds of us have been
Imprisoned, and our Goods frequently spoiled, to the utter Ruin of many
Families, without any Legal Process or Trial by Peers; and This not for
refusing Conformity to the State, or denying Caesar his Due, or being
chargeable to Parishes, or useless to the Government but only because of our
conscientious Dissent from the present Church: And since this seems to be an
Alteration in the ancient English Government, by making an ECCLESIASTICAL
CONFORMITY the Grand and Necessary Qualification in English Men to the
Peaceable Enjoyment of their NATURAL and CIVIL INHERITANCES: and forasmuch as
this Course tends ^o a manifest Decay of Trade (the Political Life or this
Island) Discouragement of Strangers, Depopulation of the Country, Impoverishing
of many Thousand Useful Inhabitants, as well as that such Severities about
Matters of Conscience are Inconsistent with the Doctrine and Example of Christ
and his Followers in all Ages, and repugnant, not only to the very Way of true
Conviction, but the Doctrine of ancient Protestants, whose Protestation at the
Diet at Spira against Coertion in Matters of Religion, was the Occasion of
their being called Protestants. And because many malicious and covetous Persons
(under Pretense of doing God, the King and Country Service) have taken
advantage by these Laws to vent their Passions, act their Revenge, and pursue
their VVorldly Interest, beyond all Law and Humanity, as woefully appears by the
anexed Particulars, ready to be proved.

We therefore entreat; First, That it would please you to peruse the anexed
Particulars for your better Information of the Nature of our Case and
Allegations.

Secondly, That you would be pleased, for the Removal and Prevention of the
like Mischiefs, to repeal or qualify those Laws, whereby the Persons and
Estates of many Thousands of the peaceable People of this Kingdom are hourly
exposed to Ruin in this World, for mere Conscience, about Things relating to
the next World, that being assured, the sweat of our Brows, and hard-gotten
Bread for our Families shall not be made a Forfeit for our peaceable
Consciences, we may be better encouraged, for the Time to come, to all virtuous
and industrious Living under the present Government, as has hitherto been,
through God's Grace, our daily Practice.

A few Instances out of many which might be given, of the great OPPRESSIONS and
CRVELTIES lately acted upon Innocent Persons and Industrious Families, chiefly
in Persuance (as is pretended) of the late Act against Conventicles, for their
meeting in peaceable Manner to worship God: Read, Consider, and Redress.
Leichestershire.
FOR a Meeting at Long Claxton, or Clawson four persons were sent to Prison,
and so much Goods at diverse Times taken from some of the said Meeting, that
they had not a Cow left to give their young Children Milk, their very
Bed-Clothe, wearing Clothes and working-Tools escaped not the Violence or
Avarice of their Persecutors; the total Sum amounts to above Two Hundred thirty
six Pounds, nor did this satisfy our Persecutors for they cruelly dragged some
Women in the Streets by the Necks, till they were near stiffied, tearing the
Clothes off their Heads and Backs. One Woman that gave Suck was so bea^^n and
bruised on her breast* that it sestered and broke, with which she has end^red
many Weeks Misery and Torture; Another Woman of seventy five Years of Age was
violently ^^rown ^own upon the Gro^n^ by one W(...) Constable; the Men w^^^
sorely beaten, drawn and dra^ged out of the Meeti^^ some by the Heels, some by
the Hair of the Head, and (...), so br^ised, that they were not able to follow
their Day(...) others they whip^ on the Face till the Blood ran down; there was
one they furiously trod upon till Blood gusht out of his Mouth and Nose; To
complete the Matter, the Informer took away from one of the Prisoners his Purse
and Money, as if he had not been a quiet Neighbor, but a Prisoner of War; Nor
was this accidental; but Designs no short Fit of Cruelty, upon an extraordinary
Provocation; for at this bitter Rate have they treated them for several Months.

Witnesses, Edward Hallam, William Marryott, John Wilford, William Smith,
Richard Parker.


Nottingham-Shire.
UNder Pretense of prosecuting the late Act against Conventicles One Peniston
Whaley a Justice, and one Colgrave a Bum-Bayly, and one Walker, both Informers
have utterly ruined many poor Families in this County in their Estates, having
taken or caused to be taken from several Persons about Seven Hundred Pounds,
the Justice bidding the Officers take three or four Times the Value of the
Fines, that they mig^t sell good peny-worths, never returning, as we are
informed, any one Record of Conviction into the Sessions, except forced by
persons appealing: John Godrick and William Hudson of Little G^e^ly appealing
to the Sessions, the Sessions ordered them their Money again; but the aforesaid
Peniston Whaley still detains Sixty pounds in his Hands, contrary to the Orders
of the Sessions, notwithstanding it ha^ been diverse Times demanded.

T. Sampson by Warrant from G. Nevil, Justice, for two Meetings had taken from
him nineteen Head of Beasts and Goods to the Value of sixty Pounds and upwards,
as was vallued by the Neighbors; so that they left him not a Cow to give his
Children Milk: That ever these Things should be done by such as count
themselves Christians, and Followers of Christ Jesus, who suffered, but would
have none to suffer for his Religion.

Witnesses, Abraham Sampson, Francis Hawksmore, Robert Porter.


Norfolk.
FOR several Meetings in and about Cockley Clay several Persons have had Goods
taken from them to the Value of fifty three Pounds, William Wat being Informer.
John Patterson had Two Hundred Sheep taken from him worth Eighty Pounds.
William Barber being informed against by John Gibbs a Priest of Glissing, for
Meeting, had Cows, Carts, a Plough, Harrows and Hay taken from him to the Value
of Fifty Pounds; the said William's House has been rifled TEN Times, and he is
now a Prisoner upon a Writ of Excommunicato capiendo. At Fakenham several
Persons have been fined, Wat the Informer, and his Wife being the only
Witnesses against them, and Goods have been taken to a great Value;
they left one Joseph Harrison not so much as a Bed to lie upon; but he, his
Wife and Children were fain to lie on Straw.

Cambridge.
FOR a peaceable Meeting at the House of William Brasier Shoemaker in
Cambridge, he was fined Twenty Pounds by John Hunt Mayor, and John Spencer
Vice Chancellor, upon the Information of Stephen Perry a Tinker: The Officers
that came to distrein for this Twenty Pounds said, They had Warrants for Fifty
Five Pounds more; They took his Leather, Lasts, and the Seat he workt on,
wearing-Clothes, and Sheets where he lay, though on Straw, having taken his Bed
before, not leaving him any Thing to cover him withal;
; so that he was fain to lodge abroad, till he could get some old Things to
cover him at Home.

And there has lately been taken from several Persons, for meeting in and
about Cambridge, Goods and Cattle to the Value of Sixty Three Pounds and
upwards.

At Littleport, Ely, and other Places in the Isle of Ely, several Persons were
fined, and had their Goods taken for their peaceable Meetings, viz. Cloth,
Stuff, Houshold-Goods and Cattle; from one Woman the very Bed she lay on;
in all, to the Value of One Hundred Ninety five Pounds and upwards.

Edward Partridge and his Favorite Thomas Richman, the old Informer, used great
Violence to several; Edw. Partridge struck Samuel Cater twice, and being at
Prayer, pulled him down by the Nose, beating Men and Women till he broak his
staff: He also struck one Person, standing quietly at the Meeting House Door,
and felled him, that the Standers by said, There is one knocked on the Head; yet
he revived in a little Time, but within six Months after dyed,
and to his dying Day complained of that Blow.

Note, William March Justice, fined one Man (no Quaker) Five Pounds, for
refusing to help to carry away the aforesaid Sufferers Goods, which Five
Pounds, the poor Man paid; but wanting but Two Pence thereof, the said Justice
forced him to borrow it, to make up the sum; and shortly after the poor Man
dying, on his Deathbed he much rejoiced, That he had* no Hand in taking away
his Neighbor Adams his Goods.


Witnesses, William Brasier, Samuel Cater.


Oxfordshire.
FOR a Meeting at Alvskoet near Burford (Walter Powel Priest of the Town, being
Informer, who before the Meeting had spoak to the Justices, at their Peril to
be at the Meeting) several Persons, were fined, and had Goods taken away to the
Value of Forty Four Pounds and upwards.

Sommerset-Shire.
THirty two Persons were fined for being at a Burial, for which they had taken
from them in Cows, Corn and other Goods,
to the Value of Eighty Two Pounds and upwards, by Warrant from Fra. Pawlet
Justice, who when none else would buy the distreined Cattle, he sent Men to buy
them for himself.

One Margery Osmond, who was not at the Buryal, and yet was fined by F. Paulet,
went to him to know the Names of them that had sworn against her, and desired
Justice of him; he said, It was a Mistake; by which it did afterward appear,
he was willing to excuse the Informers; howbeit, he then read in a Book in the
hearing of several Persons, in which Bayner and Withey were recorded Informers
against the said Assembly at the Burial, and said withal, That she should
prosecute them for Perjury at the next Sessions, and that the Record at the
Sessions should be Evidence against them, or to that Effect; but he was not so
good as his Word; for at the Sessions Witnesses were present to testify, that
she was not at the said Burial; but Fra. Pawlet (in Favor to these Informers)
left Withey's Name out of the Record,
and put in another's Name, who was not present, and also left out her Name; so
there could be no Proceedings against the Informers for their Perjury, albeit
he had issued out his Warrant to levy the Fine imposed on her. The said Justice
Pawlet for the same Burial fined several persons Twenty Four Pounds for an
unknown Preacher, yet sent a Certificate to the Mayor of Bridgwater, to
distrein Twenty Pounds on the Goods of John Anderton for preaching at the
Burial that Day; so he would have Forty Four Pounds in all [Note,
this is Twenty Four Pounds more then the Rigor of the Law allows of,
admitting it had been a Conventicle.] for the Preacher known and one unknown
when in Truth there was none spoak, but John Anderton that Christianly exhorted
the People to consider their latter End: And when Mary Tyler, the Widow of the
deceased (who was fined Four Pounds for being at her Husband's Burial,
and had Goods taken for it) spoke mildly to him, to show him his Injustice, he
told her, It did not become Women to go to their Husbands Burials.


And several Persons for being at Meetings at Glastenbury and Gregory Stoake in
this County, have lately had Cattle, Corn and Goods taken from them, to the
Value of One Hundred Forty Five Pounds and upwards, by Warrant from two
Persons, called, Justice Waldron and Justice Cross.

At this Day there remain Prisoners in this County for the Testimony of Jesus,
Twenty one Persons.

And there has dyed in Prison,
Sufferers for good Conscience sake, in this County, since the Year 1660.
Eighteen Persons.

Witnesses, John Cuff, Henry Clothie, George Tailor.


Berk-Shire.
THomas Curtis, fined Three Pound Fifteen Shillings, had a Mare taken from him
worth about Seven Pounds, by Warrant from Justice Craven; and though an Appeal
was tendered (according to the Act) it was refused; and though the Officers
voluntarily offered the Justice the Fine, yet he would not take it;
but had the Mare valued at Four Pounds, and kept her.

The 7th Day of the 8th Month, 1675. William Armourer and George Goswel, Mayor
of Reading, came to the Meeting, and because the Women came not forth so soon
as they would have them, W. Armourer plucked out of his Pocket a sharp
Instrument, and pricked several of them in a Shameful Manner,
till it fetched Blood; and afterward tendered the Oath of Allegiance to seven
of them, on purpose to ensnare them; and because for Conscience sake they could
not swear at all, they were sent to Goal, where they now remain.

And the Mayor Thrust some Women in a very Abusive Manner, perticularly an
Ancient Woman, without regard to Age or Sex.

Of which Cruelty, and much more, many in Reading are Witnesses.

Cheshire.
JUstice Daniel of Daresbury has fined one Meeting near him several times
over, and has taken from T. Briggs and other the Value of One Hundred and
Sixteen Pounds, Fifteen Shillings and Ten Pence, in Kine and Horses (which the
Justice keeps to his Own Use and Work, as his own) also Corn, Brass, Pewter,
Bedding, and such like Goods.

William Hall of Congleton, Shoemaker, was fined Twenty Pounds, by Will.
Knight, Mayor, and two Justices, for having a Meeting at his House; for which
his Mare was distrained, when his Wife was riding on her. And some time after,
they seized on his Shoes in his Shop. And another time, in his Absence, with
Mathooks brake open the Doors of his Dwelling House, and took away Two
Cart-Loads of Goods, whereupon William tendered an Appeal,
but the said Magistrates denied it: Sometime after, the Mare, of her own
accord, came Home, in his Absence, his Wife let her in; now, notwithstanding
that upon their Crying the Mare, he went with two of his Neighbors, and
acquainted the Chief Magistrate, that he had the Mare, and she was in the
Field, without any Lock to hinder them from her, and if they had more Right to
her then he, they might fetch her; otherwise, if they pleased, he would join
Issue with them, to try whose the Mare was; which they refused, and committed
him to the Goal, and Arraigned him for his Life,
as a Fellon; but was acquitted by the Judge and Jury.

Taken from several in and about Nantwich, by Warrant from Justice Manwaring,
for Eighty Seven Pound in Fines, Goods to the Value of One Hundred and One
Pounds, in Kine, Bacon, Bedding, Brass, Pewter, Corn, Cloth, Shoes and Cheese:
And from one Man was taken,
the very Beds they lay on to the Dunghill, which they also carried away. Some
of the Sufferers appealing, the Jury acquitted them, but the Justices would not
receive their Verdict; but at the next Sessions the Justices gave Judgment for
the Informers; and not contented with this, they gave them TREBLE Cost.

Note the Chief Informer in these Sufferings, was one John Widdowbury of
Hanklow, called an Esquire, who did it to be revenged on Thomas Braisey (one of
the Meeting) for demanding Forty Pounds of him, which he owed unto Thomas
Braisey upon Bond, which, that he might (as appears) defraud the said Thomas
Braisey of, he has since (by reviving an old Excommunication) sent him to
Prison, and swears he will send his Wife after him from her four SMALL Children.

Witnesses, Henry Fletcher, Jonathan Fletcher, Samuel Ellis.


Yorkshire.
HAving in a former Narrative acquainted you, that Goods to the Value of Two
Thousand Three Hundred Eighty one Pounds, Ten Shillings, by the late Act
against Conventicles, have been taken from us, with some other of our heavy
Pressures and Sufferings in the County of York, for the Exercise of our
Consciences toward God; and having yet obtained no Redress, but rather an
Increase of our Sufferings, One having since dyed in Prison at York, where
Twenty four yet remain Prisoners, and some Hundreds of Families like to be
ruined by Prosecutions, both in Temporal and Ecclesiastical Courts, because for
Conscience sake we cannot conform to the Religion and Worship imposed on us,
nor deny the Religion and Worship which we have been taught by the Spirit of
God, according to the Holy Scriptures; and our constant adhering to the
Religion and Worship in Spirit,
which we believe God requires of us, can injure no Man; but the Denial of it
would greatly injure us, because every Man must give an Account to God for
himself: Oh why then should we by Law be exposed to Ruin and Destruction for
the Exercise of our Consciences toward God, since by our Ruins none are like
to be raised, unless it be a few Informers,
Paritors and other inferior Officers in the said Courts; but the Damage that
may come to the King, and the whole Nation, by Discouraging, Persecuting or
Ruining an industrious innocent People, is like to be very great: Therefore we
desire, that you would be pleased to put a Stop to the vexatious Proceedings of
the said Informers and Courts, and confirm to us, your selves and Posterities
the Liberty of our Consciences toward God, that we all may worship and serve
him, as we believe he requires us; so shall we be accepted of him, and receive
his Blessing, and Peace, and Tranquillity in the whole Nation.

Witnesses John Whitehead, John Hall.

In diverse other Counties in this Nation, there are many more Instances, both
of great Havoc and Spoil of Goods, impoverishing and ruining many innocent
Families in their Trades and Livelihoods, which for Brevity sake, is at present
here omitted.



A Postscript, Wherein The CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL AVTHORITY is briefly
considered in their Natures, Difference and Extents, not Unseasonably to the
present Posture of Affairs.
OUR Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ did long since distinguish the
Things of Caesar from the Things of God in his plain and notable Answer unto
that ensnaring Question of the Jews, about paying Tribute to Caesar; Render
(says he) unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar 's, and to God the Things
that are God's; that is, Divine Worship, and all Things relating to it belong
unto God, Civil Obedience to Caesar: God can only be the Author of right Acts
of Worship in the Mind, this is granted by all; therefore it is not in the
Power of any Man or Men in the World, to sway or compel the Mind in Matters of
Worship to God; where this is attempted, God's Prerogative is invaded, and
Caesar (by which Word I understand the Civil Government) has all; for he does
not only take his own Things, but the Things appertaining to God also.

If any should ask me, What are the Things properly belonging to Caesar? I
answer in Scripture Language, To love Justice, as Judgment, relieve the
Oppressed, right the Fatherless, be a Terror unto Evildoers, and a Praise to
them that do well; for this is the great End of Magistracy; but perhaps my
Answer shall be reckoned too general and ambiguous, and a fresh Question
started, Who are the Evildoers, to whom the Civil Authority ought to be
terrible? But this ought in my Judgment to be no Question with Men that
understand the Nature of Civil Authority; for those are the Evildoers, that
violate those Laws which are necessary to the Preservation of Civil Society, as
Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers, Traitors, Drunkards, Cheats, Vagabonds, and the
like mischievous and dissolute Persons, Men void of Virtue, Truth and
Sincerity, the Foundation of all good Government, and only firm Bond of human
Society; whoever denies me this, must at the same Time say, that Virtue is less
necessary to Government then Opinion, and that the most Vitiated Men,
professing but Caesar's Religion, are the best Subjects to Caesar's Authority,
consequently, that other Men, living never so honestly and industriously, and
having else as good a Claim to Civil Protection and Preferment, shall merely
for their Dissent from that Religion (a Thing they cannot help; for Faith is the
Gift of God) be reputed the worst of Evildoers, which is followed with
exposing their Names to Obloquie, their Estates to Ruin, and their Persons to
Goals, Exiles, and Abundance of other Cruelties: What is this, but to confound
the Things of Caesar with the Things of God; Divine Worship with Civil
Obedience; the Church with the State, and perplex human Societies with endless
Debates about Religious Differences? nay, is not this to erect new Measures to
try the Members of Worldly Societies by, and give an Accession to another
Power, then that which is necessary to the Constitution of Civil Government?
But that which ought to deter wise Rulers from assuming and exercising such an
Authority, is the Consideration of the pernicious Consequences of doing so.

For, First, It makes PROPERTY, which is the first and most fixed part of
English Government, floating and uncertain; no Conformity to the Church, no
Property in the State; and doubtless, the Insecurity of Property can be no
Security to the Government.

2dly, It makes me owe more to the Church then to the State; for in this Case,
the Anchor I ride by, is not my Obedience to Laws, relating to the Preservation
of Civil Society, but Conformity to certain Things belonging to the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church; to that though I may be an honest, industrious
English man, a great Lover of my Country, and an Admirer of the Government I
live under, yet if I refuse to profess the Religion that either now is, or
hereafter may be imposed, I must neither enjoy the Liberty of my Person, nor
the quiet Possesion of my Estate.

3dly, This not only alters the Government, by sacrificing Men's Properties for
that which cannot be called a Sin against Property, nor an Offense to the
Nature of Civil Government, if any Transgression at all; but it narrows the
Interest and Power of the Governors; for proportionably, what Number they cut
off from their Protection, they cut off from themselves and the Government, not
only rendering a great Body of People Useless, but provoaking them to be
Dangerous; to be sure it clogs the Civil Magistrate in his Administration of
Government, making that necessary which is not at all necessary to him as
Caesar; It is a Sort of DVVMVIRATESHIP in Power* by which the Civil Monarchy is
broken; for as that was a Plurality of Men, so this is a Plurality of Powers;
and to speak freely, the Civil Power is but Lackey, to run of all the
unpleasant Errands the froward Zeal of the other sends it upon, and the best
Preferment it receives for its Pains, is to be Informer, Jailer or Executioner
to some of the best Livers, and therefore the best Subjects in the Kingdom: Oh
what greater Injustice to Caesar! then to make his Government vary by such
Modes of Religion, and him to hold his Obedience from his People, not by their
Conformity to Him, but the Church.

4thly, This is so far from resembling the Universal Goodness of God, who
dispenses his Light, Air, Showers, and comfortable Seasons to all (and whom
Caesar ought always to imitate) and remote from increasing the Trade, Populacy
and Wealth of this Kingdom, that it evidently tends to the utter Ruin of
Thousands of Traders, Artificers and Husbandmen and their Families, thereby
increasing the Charges, by increasing the poor of the Nation.

5thly, This must needs be a great Discouragement to Strangers, from coming in,
and settling themselves amongst us, when they have Reason to apprehend, that
they, and their Children after them can be no longer secured in the Enjoyment
of their Properties, then they shall be able to prevail with their Consciences,
to believe that the Religion which our Laws do now, or shall at any Time
approve and impose, is undoubtedly true; and the Way of worshipping of God,
which shall at any Time be by our Laws enjoined, is, and shall be more
agreeable to the Will of God then any other Way in which God is worshipped in
the World.

6thly, The Religion we are commanded Conformity to, does not make better
Livers (that is a Demonstrative) nor better Artists; for it cannot be thought,
that going to Church, hearing Common Prayer or believing in the present
Episcopacy, learns Men to build Ships or Houses, to make Clothes, Shoes, Dials
or Watches, Buy, Sell, Trade or Commerce, better then any that are of another
Persuasion; and since these Things are Useful, if not Requisite in Civil
Society, is not prohibiting, nay, ruining such Men, because they will not come
to hear Common Prayer, etc. distructive of Civil Society; nor more obedient
Subjects. If any object, Dissenters have not always been so; the Answer is
ready, do not expose them, protect them in their Lives, Liberties and Estates;
for in their present Posture they think they can call nothing their own, and
that all the Comforts they have in this World are hourly liable to Forfeiture,
for their Faith, Nope and Practice concerning the other World: Is not this to
destroy Nature and Civil Government, when People are ruined in their Natural
and Civil Capacity, not for Things relating to either, but what are of a
Supernatural Import.

7thly, This deprives them of Protection that protect the Government;
Dissenters have a great Share in the Trade, which is the Greatness of this
Kingdom; and they make a large Proportion of the Taxes that maintain the
Government; and is it reasonable, or can it be Christian, when they pay Tribute
to Caesar, to be preserved in an Undisturbed Possession of the rest, and that
the rest should be continually exposed for the peaceable Exercise of their
Consciences to God?

8thly, Neither is this a Conformity to True and Solid Religion, such as is
necessary to Eternal Salvation, wherein most Parties verbally agree, but for a
Modification of Religion, some peculiar Way of Worship and Discipline: All
confess One God, One Christ, One Holy Chest, and that it is indispensably
requisite to live Soberly, Righteously and Godlikely in this present evil
World; yet is one prosecuting the other for his Conscience, seizing Corn,
driving away Cattle, breaking open Doors, taking away and spoiling of Goods; in
some Places not leaving a Cow to give poor Orphans Milk, nor a B^d to lie on;
in other Places Houses have been swept so clean, that a Stool has not been
left to fit on, nor so much as working Tools to labor for Bread. To say
nothing of the Opprobrious Speeches, Bloody Blows and Tedious Imprisonments,
even to Death it self, through Nastiness of Dungeous, that many Innocent People
have suffered for their peaceable Conscience only.

9thly, But this Way of proceeding for Maintenance of the National Religion, is
of an ill Consequence upon this Account; Heaven is barred from all further
Illuminations, let God send what Light he pleases, it must not be received by
Caesar's People, without Caesar's License; and if it happen that Caesar be not
presently convinced it is of God, at this Rate I must either renounce my
Conv^ct^ons, and loose my Soul to please Caesar or profess and persevere in my
Perswassion, and loo^e my Life, Liberty or Estate to please God; this has
frequently oc^urr'd, and may again; therefore I would entreat Caesar to
consider the sad Conseq^ence of Imp^sition, and remember, both that God did
never ask Man Leave to Introduce Truth, or make further Discoveries of ^is Mind
to the World, and that it has been a wof^l Snare to those Governments that
have been drawn to employ their Power against his Work and People.

10thly, This Way of Proceedure endeavors to stiffle, or else to punish
Sincerity; for Fear or Hopes, Frowns or Favor prevail only with base Minds,
So^ls degenerated to the third and fourth Generation; every Spark of Integrity
must be extinguished, where Conscience is sacrificed to Worldly Saf^ty and
Preferment; so that t^is Net holds no Temporizers, Honest Men are all the Fish
it catches; but one would t^ink they should make but an ill Treat to such as
reckon themselves generous Men, and what is more Christians too; but that which
renders the Matter more unjustifiable, is, the Temptation such Severity puts
upon Men, not hardy enough to suffer for Conscience, yet strongly persuaded
they have Truth on their Side, to desert their Principles, and smo^her their
Convictions, which in plain Terms is to make of sincere Men Hypocrites, whereas
it is one great End of Government, by all laudable Means to pre^erve Sincerity;
for without it there can be no Faith or Truth in Civ^l Society: nor is this
all; for it is a Maxim worthy of Caesar's Notice, NEVER TO THINK HIM TRUE TO
CAESAR THAT IS FALSE TO HIS OWN CONSCIENCE; besides, raped Consciences treasure
up Revenge, and such Persons are not likely to be longer Friends to Caesar,
then he has Preferm^^ts to a^lure them, or Power to deter them from being his
most implacable Enemies.

11thly, There is not so ready a Way to (...)eism, as this of extinguishing the
Sense of Conscience for Worldly Ends; destroy that Internal Rule of Faith,
Worship and Pract(...) t^wards God, and the Reason of my Religion will be Civil
Injunctions, and not Divine Convictions; consequently, I am to be of as many
Religions as the Civil Authority shall impose, however untrue or contradictory;
this Sacred Tie of Conscience thus broken, farewell to all ^eavenly Obligations
in the Soul, Scripture-Authority and ancient Protestant Principles; Christ may
at this Rate become what the Jews would have had him, and his Apostles be
reputed Turners of the World upside down, as their Enemies represented them,
and the godly Martyrs of all Ages so many Self-Murderers; for they might justly
be esteemed Resisters of Worldly Authority, so far as that Authority concerns
it self with the Imposition of Religion, because they refused the Conformity
commanded, even to Death. And it may not be unworthy of Caesar's Consideration,
if from these Proceedings People are tempted to infer, there is nothing in
Religion but Worldly Aims and Ends, because so much Power is abused under the
Name of Religion, to vex and destroy Men for being of another Religion, that he
hazards the best Hold and Obligation he has to Obedience, which is Conscience;
for where they are taught to obey for Interest, Duty and Conviction are out of
Doors: By all Means let Conscience be sacred, and Virtue and Integrity (the
under dissenting Principles) cherisht; Charity is more powerful then Severity,
Persuasion then Penal Laws.

Lastly, To the Reproach of this Course with wise Men it has never yet
obtained the End desired; for instead of Compliance, the Difference is widened,
the Sufferers are pitied by Spectators which only helps to increase the Number
of Dissenters; for whoever is in the wrong, few think the Persecutor in the
Right. This in all Ages having been the Issue of severe Prosecution of
Dissenters for Matters of Religion; what a Cruel, Troublesome, Thankless,
Succesless Office is it for Caesar to be employed in; may he take better
Measure of his Authority, and use his Power to the Encouragement of all the
Virtuous and Industrious, and Just Punishment of the Lazy and Vicious in all
Persuasions; so shall the Kingdom Flourish, and the Government Prosper.

For Ecclesiastical Authori^y or in plainer English Church Power, which makes
up the other Part of this Postscript, it will be requisite to consult Holy
Scripture, wh^re we shall be informed of the Institution and Practice of it
among the Ancient Ch^istians; and by that Canon all People professing
Christianity, pretend a Willingness to be concluded.
Church Power supposes a Church first; It will not be improper therefore to
examine, first, What a Scripture-New-Testament-Church is; and next, what is the
Scripture Power belonging to such a Church: A Scripture-Church is a Company or
Society of People, believing, professing and practicing according to the
Doctrine and Example of Christ Jesus and his Apostles, and not according to the
Scribes and Pharisees, that taught for Doctrine the Traditions of Men: They are
such as are Meek in Heart, Lowly in Spirit, Mat. 11. 29
Chaste in Life, 1 Pet. 3. 2. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
Virtuous in all Conversation, Phil. 4. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 15.
full of Self-denial, Mat. 16. 24
Long-Suffering and Patience, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
not only for giving, Luke 6. 37.
but loving their very Enemies; Mat. 5 44.
a People so effectually redeemed from the Impieties and Vanities of the World;
Rev. 14. 4.
he that thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 6.
thought it no Disparagement to be Head to, and account as his own Body: Ephesians.
1. 22. Col. 1. 118.
It was upon a Society thus qualified, that the Holy Ghost bestows these
excellent Names, Disciples and Friends of Christ; Job. 19. 14, 15.
Heirs and (...) with Christ Rom 8. 17.
Christ's Brethren and Ki^d^^^ Heb 2. 11.
A peculiar People Tit. 2. 14.
The p^r(...) as most p^^ci^us Blood Acts 20 28.
the Redeemed from (...) Earth Rev. 14. 3.
A Royal Priesthood, (...) Nation; 1 Pet. 2. 9.
The Church of the First Born; Heb. 12, 23.
(Christ's Body, Col. 1. 24.
and the Lamb's Brid* Rev. 21. 9.
which answers but Christ's own Character of himself, Religion and Kingdom,
which is the most apt Distinction that ever can be given of the Nature of his
Church and her Authority, viz Joh. 18. 36.
MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD. which well connects with Render unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar 's, Mat. 22. 2.
and unto God the things that are God 's,

It was an Answer to a very suspicious Question; for it was familiarly bruited,
that he was a King, and came to poss^ss his Kingdom, Luke 13. 2.
and was by some called the King of the Jews.

The Jews being then subjected to the Roman Empire, it concerned Pilate,
Caesar's Deputy to understand his pretentions, which upon better information he
found to center in this, My Kingdom is not of this World, Joh. 18. 36.
else would my Subjects fight for me: As if he had said, these Reports are a
mere perversion of my Peaceable and Self-denying Intentions, an Infamy invented
by malicious Scribes and Pharisees that they might the better prevail with
Caesar to sacrifice me to their hatred and revenge: I am Caesar's Friend, I
seek none of his Kingdom from him, nor will I sow Sedition, plot or conspire
his Ruin; no, let all Men render unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar 's
that is my Doctrine; for I am come to erect a Kingdom of another Nature then
that of this World, to wit, a Spiritual Kingdom to be set up in the Heart: Luke
17. 21.
And Conscience is my Throne, upon that will I sit, and rule the Children of
Men in Righteousness; Tit. 2. 12.
and who ever lives soberly, righteously and godlily in this World, shall be my
good and (...)s, and they will certainly make no ill ones for C(...) Virtue is
the end of Government, and renders hi^ S(...) more easy and safe then before.
Had I any other Des^g^ then ^^is, would I suffer my Self to be reproached,
traduced and per^ecuted by a conquered people? were it not more my (...) to
suffer then revenge, would not their many provocation have drawn from me some
instance of another Nature then the Forbearance and Forgiveness I teach?
Certainly were I animated by another principle then the perfection of Meekness
and Divine Sweetness, I should not have forbiden Peter fighting, Mat. 26. 52.
(...)ing, put up thy Sword, or endoctrinated my Followers to bear Wrongs, but
revenge all Affronts, and by Plots and other Stratagems have attempted Ruin to
my Enemies, and the Acquest of worldly Empire; and no doubt but they would have
fought for me: Nay I am not only patiently (and with Pity to Enemies) sensible
of their barbarous Carriage toward me for my Good Will to them (for their
Eternal Happiness I only seek) but I foresee what they further intend against
me, they design to crucify me, and to do it, will rather free a Murderer then
save their Savior, Mat. 27. 20.
they will perform that Cruelty with all the Agravation and Contempt they can,
Ver. 27. etc.
deriding me themselves, and exposing me to the Derision of others, for they
will mock my Divine Kingship with a Crown of Thorns, Ver. 29.
and in my Agonies of Soul and Body for a Cordial, ver. 48.
give me Gall and Vinegar to drink; but notwithstanding all this, to satisfy
the World that my Religion is above Wrath and Revenge, Luke 23. 34.
I can forgive them; Mat. 26. 53.
and to secure Caesar and his People from all Fears of Imposition, whatever
Authority I have, and how many Legions of Angels, soever, I might command both
to my Deliverance, and the Enforcement of my Message upon Mankind; I resolve to
promote neither with worldly Power; for it is not of the Nature of my Religion
and Kingdom: and as I neither assume nor practice any such thing my Self that
am the great Author, Promoter and Example of this Holy Way; so have I not only
never taught my Disciples to live or act otherwise or given them a Power I
refuse to use my Self; but expressly forbad them, and warned them in my
Instructions of exercising any the least Revenge, Imposition or Coertion
toward any: This is evident in my Sermon preached upon the Mount, where I
freely, publicly and with much Plainness, not only prohibited Revenge, but
^njoyned Love to Enemies making it to be a great Token of true Discipleship to
suffer Wrongs, Mat. 5. 44. 45, 46, 47.
and conquer Cruelty by Patience and Forgiveness, which is certainly a great
Way off Imposition or Compulsion upon other Men. And when I was strongly bent
for Jerusalem, and sent Messengers before to prepare some Entertainment for me
and my Company in a Village, belonging to the Samaritans, Luke 9. 53, 54, 55,
56.
and it seems the People refused, because they apprehended I was going to
Jerusalem; this provoakt some of my Disciples, particularly James and John to
that Degree, that they asked me, if I were willing that they should command
Fire from Heaven to destroy those Samaritans, as Elias in another Case had
done; I turned about, and rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what Manner of
Spirit ye are of; for I am not come into the World to destroy Men's Lives, but
by my peaceable Doctrine and Example to save them.

At another Time one of my Disciples, relating to me some Passages of their
Travails, told me of a certain Man they saw, Luke 9. 49, 50.
that cast out Devils in my Name, and because he was not of their Company, nor
followed them, said he, we forbad him; as if they had thereby served and
pleased me; but I presently testified my Dislike of the Ignorance and
Narrowness of their Zeal, and to inform them better told them, they should not
have forbid him; for he that is not against us is for us; my Drift is not
Opinion, but Piety; they that cast out Devils, convert Sinners, and turn Men to
Righteousness, are not against me, nor the Nature and Religion of my Kingdom,
and therefore ought to be cherisht rather then forbid. That I might
sufficiently declare and inculcate my Mind in this Matter, I did at an other
Time, and upon a different Occasion, preach against all Coertion and
Persecution for Matters of Faith and Practice toward God, in my Parable of the
Sower, as my Words manifest, which were these; The Kingdom of Heaven is likened
unto a Man which sowed good Seed in his Field; but while Men slept, his Enemy
came, and sowed Tares among the Wheat, and went his Way; but when the Blade
sprung up, and brought forth Fruit, there appeared the Tares also; so the
Serv^nts of the House-houlder came and said, did thou not sow good Seed in
thy Field? Mat. 13. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30
from whence then has it Tares? he answered, an Enemy has done this; the
Servants said unto him, will thou then that we go and gather them up? but he
said NAY, lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with
them, let both grow together till the Harvest, and in the Time of Harvest I
will joy to the Reapers, gather ye together first the Tares, and bind them in
Bundles to burn them, but gather the Wheat into my Barn.

And that I might not leave so necessary a Truth mis apprehended of my dear
Followers, or liable to any Mis-constructions, my Disciples, when together,
desiring an Explanation, I interpreted my Words thus;

He that sows the good Seed is the Son of Man; the Field is the World; Ver.
36, 37, 38, 39.
the good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom; but the Tares are the Children
of the Wicked One; the Enemy that sowed them is the Devil; the Harvest is the
End of the World; and the Reapers are the Angels.

This Patience, this Long-Suffering and great Forbearance belong to my Kingdom
and the Subjects of it, my Doctrine speaks it, and my Example confirms it, and
this can have no possible Agreement with Imposition and Persecution for
Conscience: And that I might sufficiently deter my Followers from any such
Thing, as I profess my self to be their Lord and Master, Joh. 15. 12.
so have I commanded them to love one another in a more especial Manner; but if
instead thereof any grow proud, high minded, and beat or abuse their Fellow
Servants in my religious Family, when I come to take account of my Household, he
shall be cut asunder, and appointed his Po^^tion among the Unbelievers; behold
the Recompense I appoint to Imposing Lordly Persons, such as count others
Infidels, and to make them such Believers as themselves, will exercise Violence
toward them, and if they prevail not, will call for Fire from Heaven to devour
them, and if Heaven refuse them, will fall a beating and killing, and think (it
may be they do God good Service) b^t their Lot shall be with Unbelievers
forever: Nay, I have so effe^^ua^^y provided against all Mastery, that I
expressly charged them, not to be many Masters; for one was their Master; I told
them, that the greatest amongst them was to be Servant to the rest, not to
impose upon the rest; nay, that to be great in my Kingdom, they must become as
gentle and harmless as little Children, and such cannot force and punish in
Matters of Religion. In fine, I strictly commanded them, to love one another,
as I have loved them, who am ready to lay down my Life for the Ungodly, instead
of taking away Godly Men's Lives for Opinions; and this is the great Maxim of my
holy Religion, He that would be my Disciple, must not crucify other Men, but
take up his Cross, and follow me, who am meek and lowly, and such so enduring
shall find Eternal Rest to their Souls, this is the Power I use, and this is
the Power I give.

How much this agrees with the Language, Doctrine and Example of Jesus Christ,
I shall leave them to consider, that read and believe Scripture; but some
affected to present Church Power, and desiring their Ruin that conform not to
her Worship and Discipline, will object, That Christ did give his Church Power
to bind and loose, and bid any Person agrieved tell the Church.

I grant it; but what Binding was that? with outward Chains and Fetters, in
nasty Holes and Dungeous? nothing less: Or was it, that his Church had that
true Discerning in her, and Power with him, that what she bound, that is
condemned, or loosed, that is remitted, should stand so in God's Sight and
Christ's Account.

But tell the Church; and what then? observe Christ's Extent in the Punishment
of the Offender; If the Offender will neither receive private Admonition, nor
hear the Church, then (says Christ) let him be to thee as an Heathen, etc.
Here Is no Fines, Whips, Stocks, Pillories, Goals, and the like Instruments of
Cruelty, to punish the Heretic; for the Purport of his Words seems to be no
more then this; If any Member of the Church refuse thy private Exhortation and
the Church's Admonition, look upon such a Person to be no more of you; let him
take his Course, thou have done well, and the Church is clear of him.

Well, but say the Church-Fighters of our Age, Did not St. Paul wish them cut
off that troubled the Church in his Time? Yes: But with what Sword think you?
Such as Christ bid Peter put up, or the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word
of God? Give him leave to explain his own Words; For the WE APONS of our
Warfare are NOT CARNAL, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high Thing that ex^lteth it self
against the Knowledge of God, and bringing every Thought into Obedience to
Christ.

What think you of this? Here are Warfares, Weapons, Oppositions and
Conformity, and not only no external Force about Matters of Religion used or
countenanced, but the most express and pathetical Exclusion and Rejection of
any such Thing that could be given.

Now observe what Sort of Church Government he recommends to his beloved
Timothy; Avoid foolish Questions, and Genealogies, and Contentions, and
striving about the Law, for they are unprofitable and vain: A Man that is an
Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, reject, knowing that he that
is such is subverted and sins, being CONDEMNED OF HIMSELF, or self-condemned.

It Is very remarkable; first, That t^is is great Apostle, instead of exhorting
Timothy to stand upon Niceties, and sacrifice Men's Natural Comforts and
Enjoyments for Opinions of Religion, injoyns him to shun Disputes about them,
leaving People to their own Thoughts and Aprehensions in those Matters, which
excellently well coheres with another Passage of his. Let us therefore, Phil.
3. 15.
as many as be perfect, be thus minded, and if in any Thing ye be otherwise
minded, God shall REVEAL even this unto you; he did not say, you shall be
FINED, PILLAGED, EXCOMMUNICATED and FLUNG into Prison, if ye be not of our Mind.

2dly, That, in the Apostles Definition, an Heretic is a self-condemned
Person, one conscious to himself of Error, and Obstinacy in it; but that are
not conscientious Dissenters; for many Ten Thousands in this Nation act as they
believe, and dissent from the National Religion, purely upon a Principle of
Conscience to Almighty God; and with Men of any Tenderness or common Sense,
their continual great Sufferings in Person and Estate, and their Patience under
them, are a Demonstration, or there can be none in the World: Nor can their
Persecutors disprove them, unless they could search Hearts, and that is a
little too far for a Fallible Spirit to reach, and an infallible One they deny:
So that the Apostle makes not the Heretic to lie upon the Side of
misbelieving, or not coming up to his Degree of Faith and Knowledge, but upon
the Side of Wilfully, Turbulently, Obstinately and Self condemnedly maintaining
inconsisting Things with the Faith, Peace and, Prosperity of the Church.

Granting us then not to be obstinate and self condemned Dissenters (and you
cannot reasonably refuse it us) how do you prove us Erroneous in the other
Part? All Parties plead Scripture, and that for the most opposite Principles;
Homousians and Arrians, Calvinists and Arminians, Papists, Jansenists and
Protestants; The Scripture, you see, cannot determine the Sense of it self; it
must have an Interpreter; he must either be Fallible or Infallible; If the
first, we are worse then before; for Men are apt to be more confident, and yet
are still upon as uncertain Grounds; If the last, this must either be an
external or an Internal Judge; If an External, you know where you are without
pointing; for there stands nothing between you and Popery in that Principle; If
an Internal Judge, either it is our selves, or the Spirit of Christ dwelling in
us; Not our selves; for then the Rule is the Thing ruled, which cannot be; and
if it be the Spirit of Christ Jesus (and the Apostle tells us, That unless we
have the Spirit we are none of Christ's) then is the Neck of Imposition broken,
and what have thou to do to judge me? let me stand or fall to my own Master;
And upon this Foot went Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Beza abroad; And Cranmer,
Ridly, Hooper, Jewel, Bradford, Philpot, etc. at home, and as good Men, and
constant Martyrs in Ages before them.

But suppose Conscientious Dissenters as ill Men as the Apostle describes an
Heretic to be; what is the Punishment?

3dly, A Man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonision reject,
that is, deny his Communion, declare he is none of you, condemn his Proceedings
by a public Censure among your selves; what more can be strained by the
fiercest Prosecutors of Men for Religion out of these Words.

But was this the Evangelical Rule and Practice? Yes, that it was; Oh then
whence comes Imposition Force Cruelty, Spoil of Goods, Imprisonments,
Knockings, Beatings, Bruisings, Stockins, Whippings, and Spilling of Blood for
Religion? What Church is that, whose Officers are so far from clothing the
naked, as to strip the clothed, from feeding the hungry, that they take their
Bread from them, and those poor Widows and helpless Orphans too; and so remote
from visiting the sick and imprisoned, that they drag away their Bed from under
them, and cast People into Prison for Conscience sake; Nay they haled away an
Honest Man from a Meeting to Goal at Reading, (but the other Day) not
permitting him to TAKE LEAVE of his poor Wife, newly delivered, and in a DYING
Condition, though she also desired it, and lived but just by the Meeting House
where they took him. In fine, what are they that for no other Cause pass such
dreadful Excommunications, as render the Excommunicants little better then
outlawed Persons, subjecting their Civil and Natural Rights to their Pride,
Passion, Interest or Revenge, unless they will purchase their Enjoyment at the
dear Rate of loosing their own Souls? For what else can be the Conseq^ence of
conforming to that I do not believe? Is not this to destroy sincere Men, and
make and save Hypocrites.

Oh, that such as are concerned would soberly consider, if any Thing is so
Scandalous to True Religion as FORCE; who can think that evidence Good that is
extorted? And what a Church is that, which is made up of such Proselites, or
that employes such Means to make them? O where is that Christian Meekness,
Patience and Forbearance? How many have been ruined, that were never exhorted,
and excomunicated before they were once admonished? This is not to serve God,
but Worldly Interest: its quite contrary to Christ's Counsel and Doctrine: He
came to save, and not to destroy Nature to magnify his Grace. You pretend to
hate J. Calvin's unconditional Reprobation, yet practice it; If you say no,
Conformity is your Condition: I answer, that its as unreasonable to require an
impossibillity, as cruel to damn Men for not doing it; For as you say, his
Doctrine makes God to command them to repent, that cannot repent, and yet damn
them if they repent not; So you enjoin Men to relinquish their present Faith
and Worship, and conform to yours, which is not in their Power to do, yet damn
them in a temporal Respect if they refuse it; For you make such an unavoidable
Dissent, punishable with the Destruction of Men's Liberties and Estates: You had
better leave off valuing your selves upon the Mercy and Well-Natur'dness of
that Tenet of the universal Love of God to Mankind, till you love more then
your selves, and abominate the Church of England's being, such an Elect to the
Civil Government as utterly reprobates the rest, as you pretend to detest the
like Injustice in J. Calvin's Notion of Election and Reprobation.

And the Truth of it is, this helps on Atheism as much as any Enormity in the
Land, when Witty Men, not willing to take Pains to examine after the Truth and
Excellency of Religion, behold Men that call themselves Christ's Ministers, and
the Apostles Successors and Followers, to affect and seek Government, and yet
twice deny it, when they go to receive it, that some others grow Lordly, live
Voluptuously, and watch after the biggest Preferments, not being excited by
most Service for God, but Earthly Power and Wealth for themselves, and at the
same Time persecuting Men of more Self-denial, for Matters of Opinion about
Faith and Worship toward God; so that No Conformity to this Church, No
Protection from the State. Which among Protestants is so much the more
unreasonable, because they by these Courses implicitly own and assume the
highest Infallibility and Perfection, and yet deny any such Thing; for it
supposes that nothing is Truer, nothing Perfecter, or else they both persecute
Men to embrace a Fallible and Imperfect Religion, and with cruel Penalties
provide against any Thing more True or Infallible; the greatest Injury to the
World that can be; for it is a plain Endeavor to frustrate all those excellent
Prophesies and gracious Promises God has given, and the holy Scriptures declare
of the latter Days. To conclude, I shall desire Men of this Unnatural,
Unreasonable and Unchristian Spirit to consider:

1. What Church was that which John saw, riding upon the Powers of the Earth,
employing their Authority to force CONFESSION, TRIBUTE and SUBJECTION to her?

2. What that Church was which dyed her self in the BLOOD of them that believed
not in her, against whom the poor Souls under the Altar (whose Bodies had been
beheaded by her) cried to God?

3. What Church it was that would suffer none to Buy, Sell or Traffic without
having her Mark (CONFORMITY to her) in their Forehead or right Hand, that is,
either those that heartily and openly confessed her, or those that basely
complied for Fear?

4. What Church is that which Trades in the Souls of Men? Read Revelations,
Chap. 13. 18. and 20.

5. Whether this Church reigns not, wherever Men's. LIBERTIES and PROPERTIES,
with all the Comforts of this Life are exposed and sacrificed for Matters of
FAITH and WORSHIP to Almighty* God.

Weigh these Things, you great Churchmen of the Age, in the Fear of that God
who made Heaven and Earth, and think not to make thus cheap of the Lives,
Liberties and Estates of Freeborn English People, and Harmless Christians for
their peaceable Conscience, without being accountable to that Great Lord in the
Terrible Day of his Judgment, that draws on upon the World: No Plea you have
shall be able to justify these things, or fence off the heavy Stroke of that
Just Judge, unless you repent: It Is not Succession in Name, but Nature, that
makes the true Christian Minister and Bishop: And where the Divine Life and
Holy Qualifications of Christ and his Apostles are wanting, there can be no
Succession, but what is as proper to the false Church as the true, the
Counterfeit as the Christian: Be not deceived, God will not be mocked, such as
you Sow, such shall you Reap. Remember Christ's Words; Blessed are the Poor in
Spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of God. Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. Blessed are the Pure in Heart; for they shall see God.
Blessed are the Meek; for they shall inherit the Earth. Blessed are the
MERCIFVL; for they shall obtain Mercy. Therefore Reform, and let your
Moderation be known unto all Men, for the Lord is at hand: Even so come Lord
Jesus.

ERRATA
Page 18. Line 33. for Injustice read Injury. p. 20. l. 11. dele and. p. 20.
31. read Heaven is hereby barred, as much as in Men lies, from. p. 22. l. 22.
for the read though. p. 25. l. 15. read revenged. p. 28. l. 25. read Chains.


