THE WAY TO Peace and Happiness: Proposed in some INSTRUCTIONS, Given formerly
by a PARENT to his CHILDREN.

Which being of Concern to all, (tho of riper Years) are recommended to the
Perusal of All Sorts of People, without respect of Persons or Parties, Age or
Sex.

The Sixth Edition.

Ye shall Teach them your Children, speaking of them when thou sit in thine
House, and when thou walk by the Way, and when thou lie Down, and when
thou risest Up.

Deuteronomy. 11.19. LONDON, Printed 1690. by John Darby, for the Author; and are to
be freely given away.

CHAP. I Dear Children, Hearken diligently to the Counsel and Advice of your
Parents, for they watch over you for your good.
IN the First place, let the Fear of the LORD, who is the Searcher of your
Hearts, be always in your Minds, that in awe of Him, you may for ever stand;
not daring to bring the least Reproach upon His Holy Name, by any Miscarriages
of yours; so shall you be CHILDREN to His Praise, and a Comfort and Blessing to
your Parents.

2ly. See that none of you render Evil for Evil unto any one; but do you ever
follow that which is Good, both amongst your selves, and toward all Men.

3ly. Take heed of letting out your Minds and Affections to visible things; for
they perish in the using, and bring trouble and sorrow to all whose Hearts are
set thereon; but let your Minds always be retired inwards, that you may wait to
feel That, which is not of this World, nor esteemed by it; but only esteemed by
Those who know the Virtue and Excellency of it, and who have been willing to
part with all to purchase it; It is the Or WHITESTONE and NEW NAME, Rev. 2.17.
which no Man knows, nor can know, but he that has it.
PEARL of greatest price; happy are they that have found, or that yet shall
find it.

4ly. Take heed of entering into many words, when you are bid to do any
Business, either by your Parents, Masters, or other Superiors; but with all
readiness of Mind, see you obey all their lawful Commands with diligence and
cheerfulness.

5ly. Beware of mentioning the Name of the LORD in any case, but with Fear and
Reverence; for His Name is hallowed by them that fear Him, but taken in vain by
those that fear Him not. And tho they seem to praise or pray unto Him, yet such
Services, without His Fear, are an Abomination: Wherefore take heed you be not
deceived by Those, who are only in the good Words, and fair Speeches; but let
your Minds be kept single to the LORD, and He will show you, who They are, that
draw nigh to Him with their Lips, when their Hearts are far from Him; and from
Such you are to turn away.

6ly. Let your Words be few; and be always more ready to hear than speak,
especially when the Question is not asked you: but when it is your place to
speak, be sure it be in Mildness, Love, and Gentleness; lest through your
Provocation you cause others to sin, and then you will not be guiltless, for
their Sin will be charged upon you: wherefore let this be always in your
remembrance, and for ever observed by you, (as it has been the Practice and
Experience of your Parents) to give mild and soft Answers, for they do often
turn away Wrath.

7ly. Whatever you see Virtuous in any, be sure to follow That; and what you
see amiss in others, diligently search your own Hearts, lest your selves be
found guilty thereof; for it is an easy matter to see and find fault with
Another, (most can do that) but few love to examine Themselves: be you (my dear
CHILDREN) of that number, lest you perish with the Multitude; for the Way is
broad that leads to Destrustion, and many walk therein: Therefore whilst you
are young, seek after true Wisdom, and it will guide and lead you in that
narrow Way, which all the Holy Men walked in, and in which All must walk,
before they can enter into Eternal Rest.

8ly. Beware of reading foolish and vain Books, which tend only to the
corrupting of Youth, and dishonouring the LORD: Wherefore heed you only Those
that tend to Holiness and Virtue.

9ly. Consider, how the LORD has blessed and prosper'd your Parents,
notwithstanding the Fury and Rage of our Enemies, who have accounted us as the
greatest Transgressors This was the Lot of the Upright in all Ages.
, and judged us as the vilest of Sinners; and all this for no other cause, but
only for the discharge of our Consciences in the Matters of our GOD.

10ly. I warn you; as I did the first, so I do again charge you, that you walk
in Fear and in Humility all the days of your being upon the Earth; then shall
you know, that the LORD has not only blessed and prosper'd your Parents, but
will also bless and prosper You: but if you depart from His Fear, and cast
these my Instructions behind your Backs; then know, that you shall perish in
your own Iniquities, and I shall (thus far) be clear in my Conscience
concerning you.

CHAP II.
1. DEar Children; Beware of a lying, flattering, deceitful Tongue, both in
your selves and others: also beware of Pride, Highmindedness, and an exalted
Spirit; for such the Righteous GOD will judge.

2. But be you adorned with Faithfulness, Meekness, and Patience; and let your
Behavior be Modest, Courteous, and Gentle toward all: and whatever you would
have Others do unto you, be sure you do that unto Them; and heed not so much
their Duties, as your Own.

3. Busy not your Minds with Others concerns, but be you careful and diligent
in the discharge of your Own; and then you need not be troubled, what Reproach
you bear for them.

4. Be sure you waste not the Substance committed to your Trust: yet, let not
That be a Cloak for Covetousness, (that Grand Iniquity, of many Pretenders to
Religion) but when there is, cause for it, part with it freely; lest through
your unfaithfulness therein, you be rejected both of GOD and Good Men; for
know, you are but Stewards of what you possess, and for which you must be
accountable.

5. Be cautious how you enter into a Married Condition; but when in that State
(whatever disappointment you meet withal) see that you faithfully perform your
Relation therein; for another Iniquity and Unkindness to you, will not justify
nor excuse your Iniquity or Unkindness to them.

6. Bear patiently Afflictions, for they are good for you; therefore hasten not
to be delivered from them; but, in the Retiredness of your Minds, consider the
Cause, and being bettered thereby, bless the LORD for His Mercies; for whom He
loves, He chastises,

7. Be careful with whom you associate; and choose none to be your Intimates,
but Such who are exemplary in Virtue and Goodness: so will you avoid much
Contention and Trouble.

8. Be ready to do Good unto All, as Opportunity is offered: and take heed of
wasting any of the good Creatures; for if you be unfaithful in those Things
that are Earthly, who shall commit to you Those that are Heavenly?

9. Be not desirous of Riches or Honor; neither covet That which is another;
but be content with your present Conditions, and learn to be as well satisfied
with Want, as Abundance; then will you follow the Steps of your Parents, who
have learned Contentment, whatever befalls them.

10. Beware of Jeering, or Scoffing at any; neither give abusive or scurrilous
Language, (either by Tongue or Pen) for Than will provoke the LORD's Anger
against you, and bring Reproach and Trouble upon your Parents, who always
disliked, yea abhorred, such Things.

11. Be careful your Hearts and Minds be kept clean within, and then you need
not be advised to have your Words and Actions clean without, for that will
unavoidably follow.

12. Be not hasty in Reproving or Correcting of any; but if called thereto, let
it be in Love, and in Wisdom and if the Offense be Great, let it be with
Severity, yet not in Anger or Passion; for That will harden them against you;
and so instead of bettering them, you will thereby become Transgressors your
selves.

13. Beware that your Wills bear not rule in any case, but let Truth and
Righteousness always be the Sway of your Judgments; then will you be delivered
from that great Iniquity, which has so deeply corrupted many.

14. Be sure you have regard to the Oppressed, and take heed how you make
Advantage of another Necessity, but rather consider how you may be helpful
unto them; always remembering the Parable of the good Samaritan, Luke 10.33.

15. Be Cautious for Whom you are engaged, or unto Whom you are obliged; for
such things do often prove Snares: but be more ready to Give, than to Receive,
and yet be sure to acknowledge the least Kindness; for Ingratitude is hateful.

16. Be not self-ended; neither spend too much upon your own Particulars,
either in Meats, Drinks, Clothing, or any thing else, for That may be a
hindrance to the Good you should do; but rather be sparing in That which
relates to your selve, that you may be in the better capacity to do the Good
you ought to perform to Others.

17. Be not found in many Needless words; neither contend with such as are in
them, for That begets strife: but as They (out of the evil that is in their
Hearts) bring forth Evil things; so do You (out of the Good that is in yours)
bring forth Good things.

18. Be not grasping after Earthly Concerns; for They bring Trouble and Sorrow;
and yet, how many, through their eager desires after such things, have choked
that Good, which once stirred in them: wherefore, take warning, and learn this
as a Truth experienced by Me, that a Little will satisfy a contented Mind.

CHAP. III.
1. BE not desirous after that Knowledge, which will lift and puff up your
Minds; neither be too prying into those Mysteries, that are hid; but if the
LORD should reveal any thing unto you, be sure of leave, When, and to Whom to
impart it, not daring, either to add, or diminish; for That has been (and is,
this Day) a great and sore Evil.

2. Beware of taking up your Rest in any outward Form of Worship, but keep in
subjection to the Fear of the LORD, who may lead into, or out of such Things,
as He pleases, so, let Him be your Guide all your days, tho you should be
hated of All for His sake; for our Eyes have seen the sad Fruits and Effects of
Those, that have gone about to set Limits and Bounds to His Leadings.

3. Beware of Imitating other Men's Words, Gestures, or Actions, that relate to
Religious Performances; for Imitators, as well as Imagemakers, in Worship, are
an Abomination; and yet Thousands do err, and have erred herein: Neither be
Followers of the vain Fashions and Customs of this World; but whatsoever is
virtuous, and of good report, That you may, and ought to follow.

4. Be not hasty in judging other Men's Actions, wherein you have neither
Command nor Certainty; it being not barely the Action, but the Spirit from
whence it proceeds, that makes it either Accepted, or Rejected: therefore take
heed, lest you condemn That, which GOD justifies; for many are guilty herein,
notwithstanding it is written, Judge not according to outward appearance; but if
you do, You must, as well as They, witness Sorrow.

5. But lest, through many Words, your Minds should be drawn forth, and (as but
too too many have been) hurt thereby, it is with me, to conclude with those Two
great and weighty Commandments, viz. the First is, You shall love the LORD with
all your Hearts, with all your Souls, and with all your Strength. And the
Second is like unto it, You shall love your Neighbors as your Selves: For upon
these Two Commandments, depends All that can be Written, or Spoken, concerning
your Duties either to GOD or Men.

6. My Love is sincere to All, that in uprightness of Heart serve the LORD, in
what Profession, or Persuasion of Religion soever; well knowing, that it is
Those, and only Those, that Love, Fear, and Obey HIM, and do the Things that
are Just and Right amongst Men, that are accepted of HIM at this Day.

7. For, What does the LORD require of Thee, O Man, but to do Justly, to love
Mercy, and to walk Humbly before HIM?

CHAP. IV. Hear Me your Father, O Children, and do thereafter, that you may be
safe. Eccles. 3.1.
1. IF you come to serve the LORD, prepare your Souls for Temptation. Set your
Hearts aright, and Constantly endure, and make not haste in time of Trouble.

2. Whatsoever is brought upon you, take cheerfully: For, as Gold is tried in
the Fire, so are Acceptable Men in the Furnace of Adversity.

3. So incline your Ears unto Wisdom, and apply your Hearts to Understanding,
and seek Her as Silver, and search for Her as for hid Treasures: then shall you
understand the Fear of the LORD, and find the Knowledge of GOD.

4. Happy is the Man that finds Wisdom, and the Man that gets
Understanding: But where is Wisdom to be found? and where is the Place of
Understanding? The Fear of the LORD, that is Wisdom and to depart from Evil,
that is Understanding.

5. Wisdom exalts Her Children, and lays hold of them that seek Her; they
that love Her, love Life; and they that seek Her early, shall be filled with
Joy; and wheresoever She enters, the LORD will bless; and if you commit your
selves unto Her, you shall inherit Her.

6. But at the first, She will walk with you by Crooked Ways, and bring Fear
and Dread upon you, and torment you with Her Discipline, until She can trust
your Souls, and try you by her Laws.

7. Then will She return the straight way unto you, and comfort you, and show
you of Her Secrets.

8. But if you go wrong, She will forsake you, and give you over to your own
Ruin.

CHAP. V. POSTSCRIPT.
1. MY dear Children, had you well Heeded, and faithfully Obeyed my former
Instructions, you had not needed any further Advice or Counsel from Me,
touching the Way to Rest, Peace, and endless Happiness.

2. Let a diligent Search be made in each of your Hearts, and there you may see
[by that Heavenly and Divine Principle which GOD has given You to be your
JUDGE, and LAWGIVER] whether you have not been more Remiss, Disregardful, and
Negligent therein, than you might or ought to have been: However, whilst my
Life is spared amongst you, I cannot but have a true Love, Care, and Concern
for you All, that you may not so much seek your Selves, your own Honor,
Pleasure, or Preferment, or whatsoever this Life can afford, as that you may be
Patterns of Virtue, exemplary in Goodness, and Preachers of Righteousness, in
all your Lives and Conversations.

3. This, This, is That will make you happy in all Conditions; This is That
will give you true Peace, Quietness, and Contentedness, in the midst of all the
Hurries, Heats, Disorders, Distractions, and Confusions, that are at this Day.
I say, who are come hither, to this Holy, Heavenly, and Divine Life, and feel
it powerfully reigning in them, Such cannot be afraid of any evil Tidings; and
tho they may be made to oppose and reprove Others, and suffer much Abuse and
Reproach for so doing, yet they cannot but love, and have compassion on their
worst and greatest Enemies, but may not love, nor join to Iniquity in their
Nearest and Dearest Friends: Such cannot but prize, and highly esteem true
Nobility, Virtue, and Goodness in whomsoever, without respect of Persons or
Parties.

4. Now, my dear Children, the occasion of my Writing at this time is, not only
and alone for Your sakes, but for the sake of Many OTHERS, who, I believe, are
hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, and who in secret are crying, and
saying in their Hearts, Who will show us any Good? And seeing the LORD has put
it into my Heart, to write both to You and Them these few Lines, and to reprint
my former INSTRUCTIONS; I hope They will be well weighed, and deeply considered
of by you All, for they are of Moment, being not writ from the wise prying,
fathoming, comprehending Part in Man, but from the same Good Spirit, that the
Holy Men of Old writ and spoke by.

5. Wherefore, upon Your and their receiving, or rejecting the Counsel herein
given you, depends your Blessing, or your Curse; your Weal, or Woe; your
Happiness, or Unhappiness; your Peace and Quietness, or your Trouble and
Discontent; for such as you sow, such will you reap.

6. So that it is with Me to let You and Them know, (as the Servant of the LORD
once said to the Israelites) that LIFE and Death, Good and Evil is here set
before You: And tho the Way that leads to Life be strait and narrow, yet know,
and that for a Truth, that it is both easy, plain, pleasant, and exceeding (yea,
beyond all utterance) delightful to those Sincere Souls, who are resigned, and
resolved to walk in it: Such who know the Virtue and Excellency thereof, have
been willing to part with All that has been near or dear unto them, that they
might be preserved Faithful therein; neither can They leave it, nor forsake it,
for all the Treasures, Pleasures, and Advantages that this World can give.

7. For this Path was the Path of the Just in all Ages, and which all the Holy
Men did cheerfully embrace, and walk in; and that You and I may be Followers of
their Steps, is the hearty desire of,

Your well-wishing, and truly loving Father, J.P.
Dec. 14. 1683.
CHAP. VI. This following is here inserted, for the sake of some People, whom
it nearly concerns.
1. WHen They cast up the Accounts of their Sins, they shall come with Fear:
and their own Iniquities shall convince them to their Face.

2. Then shall the Righteous Man stand in great Boldness before the Face of
such as afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors.

3. When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible Fear, and shall be
amazed at the strangeness of his Salvation, so far beyond all that they looked
for.

4. And They, Repenting and Groaning for anguish of Spirit, shall say within
themselves, This was He, whom we had sometime in Derision, and a Proverb of
Reproach.

5. We Fools counted his Life Madness, and his End to be without Honor. How is
he numbered among the Children of GOD, and his Let among the Saints?

6. If a Man say, I love GOD, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he who
loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love GOD whom he has not
seen?

7. And this Commandment have we from Him, That he who loves GOD, love his
Brother also.

CHAP. VII
THere is a Spirit, which I feel, and am a Witness of, that cannot delight in
doing any Evil, nor in revenging any Wrong; but delights in the Will of its
Heavenly Father: It willingly endures all things, in hopes to meet with its own
in the End; its hope is, to outlive all Strife and Contention, and to weary out
all Exaltation and Cruelty, or whatsoever is of a Nature contrary to it self:
It is conceived in Sorrow, and brought forth through Suffering; for with the
World's Joy it is murdered. I found It, being Alone, and have Fellowship
therein, with Those, who lived in Dens, and Desolate Places of the Earth, of
whom this World was not worthy; who through Faith, Virtue, and a good Life,
obtained this BLESSED and HAPPY STATE.

SHine forth, Great GLORY, shine, that I may see,
Both how to loath my Self, and honor THEE.
O give me Grace, to mind, and use Time so,
That I may do THY Work before I go:
And help, and pardon me, when I transgress,
Through Humane Frailty, or Forgetfulness.
Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright; for the End of that Man is
Peace.

THE END.

