THE Quakers rejected, Which was also Foretold, by a Person once Eminent
amongst them; taken out of his Writings, which were Published some Years ago.
How are the Mighty fallen!

How is the Faithful City become an Harlot! In it was once the Seat of Judgment
and Righteousness; but now Oppressors and Murderers bear Sway and Rule.
Therefore shall they be dashed to Pieces, like a Potters Vessel. And whether
they will Hear, or whether they Forbear, this is Truths Testimony, which
certainly, unerringly, and infallibly, shall, and will come to pass.


J. P.
I Have long seen the Abomination that makes desolate, standing amongst the
Quakers; Wherefore hear the Word of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom and People of
Gomorrah; it is this Spirit that has encompassed your Jerusalem about as with
Armies -- by which we know that the Destruction thereof draws nigh. Finally,
it is that Spirit of Wickedness in the form of Righteousness, that has already
torn your Crown from off your Head, and discovered your secret Parts, so that
the Scab of Contention and Strife is seen, which will never leave nor cease to
divide you till the name of Quaker become an Hiss and a Scorn amongst the
Nations. And you shall leave your Name for a Curse to my Chosen, (whom you have
cursed) says the Lord God Everlasting, who will slay Thee, and call his
Servants by another Name, (it may be Hallelujah) which you have so much defamed.

And You that (for the vast numbers of your Tribes) have seemed to magnify your
selves in your increase of Children, Woe be to You that now give Suck, (and take
so much pains to add to your Sect,) for behold, in one day, loss of Children,
and Widowhood shall come upon You: yea, a Voice (as that in Ramah) shall be
heard among you, Lamenting your Children because they are not.

Of this I am most certain -- that a Bitter, Lying, and Persecuting Proud
Spirit inhabits your Tents; which Babylonish Garment has long been seen to lie
hid amongst that Tribe called the Ministry, the Teachers and Leaders of the
Quakers, even such Spiritual Wickedness; which if practiced amongst the
Presbyterians, Independents, or others, (whom ye disown, and can see in them
nothing that is good) they would abhor themselves therein; which You, as with a
Whores Forehead, boldy maintain and defend. You are in truth those that justify
your selves before Men; but God knows your Hearts, and the day is at hand,
even at your very Door, which will Discover, Reveal and Preach, as upon the
House tops, many and great Abominations, which yet lie hid amongst You; that so
You may be judged according to your deeds. In which day, all your smooth and
gilded words of Light and Love will not hide You; neither yet your flourishing
Profession, and high esteem You have of your selves, and the low esteem You
have of others, will not cover you from being seen. The Golden Head of that
Image, whereof others are the Iron, Lead and Clay; yea, the very Name in which
You have Prayed and Prophesyed (when innocent) and in which You have cast out
Devils, and wrought Wonders, shall now reject You, saying, Depart from me, etc.

I know and have long seen that Offenses must and will be, and that the woe is
to them who are offended with what is just and innocent. For surely this is the
Day of Jacob's Troubles, wherein for the division of Reuben (the first Birth,
which stands in uniformity to Man in the things of God) there will be great
thoughts of Heart. Insomuch, that if any Offense arise, in this Particular,
(the Lord knowing my Innocence therein,) makes me to say, Blessed are ye that
are not offended in me, or rather in what the Spirit of Love works in Man;
for I see the Spirit's leading is that Stone and Rock of Offense, at which many
in Israel have stumbled, and (falling Headlong as Judas did, Acts 1.18.) are
burst asunder, and all their Bowels of Love are gushed out, and naught left
them, save Wrath and Enmity against the Innocent Brethren. This spurning and
stumbling at the Cornerstone (viz.) Gods Spirit in Man, is the only ground of
all these Breakings and Divisions which are at this Day, etc. Yea, the Son and
Heir of Heaven, the Light and Truth in the inward Parts, is become the Gin and
Snare to Israel after the Flesh, who think they do God good service, when they
smite, backbite and devour the Innocent and Upright in Heart.

As if to follow other Men's Light would save the Soul, rather then to follow
the Light and Measure of God in themselves. -- But when Man leaves and forsakes
Gods Grace in himself, (which is sufficient to lead into all Truth) and by his
own industry partakes of the stolen Waters of the Harlot, (viz.) Man's
Inventions and Teachings, he will then with all the bitterness and violence of
Man, endeavor to defend this Idol, (read Ezekiel. 8.12.) as more affecting the
Work of his own Hands, then respecting the Rule which God has given him to
walk by.

And because, I see the Son of Man is coming forth to bruise (as with a Rod of
Iron) the Unrighteous Nations, not to bring Peace, but a Sword; I also, in
obedience to the Father's Commands, have sold my Coat, (made of Good Will to
all, both Persons and Things) that I might purchase a Sword, with which
(contrary to my Nature) I am constrained to plead like a Man of Contention,
against this proud, Pharisaical and perverse Generation, this Leviathan and
crooked Serpent, in whose Nostrils (unless a Hook be put,) would swallow not
only the Rivers, but also the very Sea into himself, viz. receive all, (tho
never so unclean in Heart and Spirit, if outwardly they will but own him,)
receive his Mark and Number of his Name, and walk in outward Observation and
Show conformable to them; who whilst they profess themselves free from sin --
and being the only Children of God, are notwithstanding found bitter
Persecutors of the Truth, and Enemies to the Unction, the Anointed one, in
whomsoever He does appear; thereby rendering themselves guilty of all the
innocent Blood which has been spilt from the Blood of Righteous Abel, even
unto this day; all which Blood cries aloud for Vengeance upon the
well-favour'd Harlot, (Mystery Babylon,) who in the Golden Cups and goodly show
of an outward Profession, has inwardly (with a bitter ravening and devouring
Spirit) made her self drunk with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus.

I have observed, that those that forsake Father and Mother, (the Sect that
nourished and brought them forth) to follow the LORD fully and wholly (as did
Caleb, Joshua and Jesus, etc.) not minding their own Reputation or Fame, nor
loving their Lives unto the Death; such, I say, have been accounted, as in all
Ages, so by this Hypocritical, Proud, Self-righteous Generation, as the worst
of Men, calling them Ranters, Atheists, Blasphemers, Devils, any thing, even
all manner of evil, so they may wound the Truth, and slay the innocent
Desenders thereof, whose harmless Souls I see lying under the Altar of Truth
sorely oppressed for their Testimony thereunto, and crying out, How long, Lord
God, holy and true, e're thou do judge and revenge our Blood! For whose Elect
sake the God of my Salvation will suddenly arise, and then behold Enmity, Lies
and Falsehood, etc. (even all that Spirit of Wickedness) will surely fly, hide
it self, and sink again into the bottomless Pit, from whence it came.

I have been by none so shamefully vilified and abused as by the People called
Quakers, -- Who care not whom they slander, or what lies they tell, so they may
advance, strengthen and increase their Party and Sect. -- By all which it will
evidently appear, that the Spirit of Deceit and Falsehood is crept in, and does
inhabit amongst this People.

I have thus much to signify to the Quakers -- that if they would forbear any
longer to give the Innocent of their Wormwood and Gall to drink, and rather
study Peace and Quietness, and learn to love their Enemies, yea, if possible,
turn (that which some account) Evil unto Good, or at the least, reward Evil
with that which is Good, and not pervert the Words and Actions of others (which
are honestly and innocently intended) to an evil and wrong sense: I dare assure
them that to follow this Way and Spirit of harmless Love and Kindness, will
sooner bring them into the Land of Canaan, viz. into Peace and Rest with that
of God in all His Creation, than their high talk of Infallibility and
Self-perfection shall do, or their saying (with the Pharisees of old) that God
is their Father, whilst they are doing the Devils work, and found smiting,
tearing and devouring the Innocent, etc. Assuredly, these their high Notions
and lofty Imaginations will no longer serve to hide them from the Wrath of the
LAMB, who is now arising to take Vengeance of all that have had a hand in
slaying Him; for a Separation is making between the Precious and the Vile,
between him that serves God in newness of Heart, in the upright Spirit of Love
in well-doing, and those that serve and please themselves, a Sect, a Party, or
an Opinion only.

And were not Persecutors Blind in Heart, and Hardened, they would soon discern
how that Love that thinks none ill, gives no evil wrathful Names, (especially
to those they know no evil by) as Ranters, Whoremongers, Devils, etc. And that
this is not the Spirit of the Lamb, but the Dragon that casts out his Floods of
Enmity after the Manchild (the Son of Love,) who surely must and will take the
Kingdom, and get the Victory over Enmity, the worst and greatest Enemy of
Mankind.

Therefore is He now arising to dash one against another, Brother against
Brother, one against two, and two against three, till the Earth has disclosed
the Blood she has drunk, and the Seed of God be recovered (out of that
Reproach and Shame under which it has layn buried, by the inveterate and
implacable Spirit of a Carnal, Formal Profession,) yea redeemed to walk in Gods
way, which He by his Spirit shall direct in every Heart and Conscience. For
this I know and do declare, that my God will not leave overturning,
overturning, overturning, till He comes who brings along with Him Truth and
Love, to Equity and Righteousness, whose right it is thus to Rule and Reign in
the Hearts and Consciences of His People, whose way shall be prosperous upon
the Earth.

You greatly cry out and call upon others to fear and dread the LORD, yet your
selves are so ignorant of that Lesson, that ye blindly run on to judge the
Innocent, and condemn the Truth, yea to smite the Apple of Gods Eye, and
irreverently reach at the Signet on His right Hand, by condemning and speaking
evil of the things you know not: which sufficiently demonstrate that You are
out of the pure Fear, that keeps the Heart clean from those Abominations into
which You so easily run.

Alas, what are all your smooth words of Light, Love and Truth, whilst they
spring from the Root and Spirit of Falsehood, Envy and Bitterness! and what is
it to speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, to have the Gift of Prophecy, to
open Mysteries, or to have Faith that could remove Mountains, and have not Love
and Charity, what will all this avail you? Are You herein better than Balaam
was? I tell you nay: for he knew as much as You do, and was more Honest and
Sincere; for he knew not only the difference between the two Seeds, (when his
Eyes were opened) which was Blessed and which Accursed; but was also well
acquainted with the Seed of God, its Beginning, Progress and End. Yea and more,
he (did not curse it, but) owned it, and would speak nothing but Truth, and
what the Lord put in his Mouth, that only would he say; but Ye utter Lies and
Falsehood with great confidence against the Innocent, even what the Devil
suggesteth. Thus having lost your first Love, and forsaken the Faith once
delivered to the Saints; you are now like that Evil Spirit cast out, running to
and fro, walking through the dry places of your Elders Traditions, following
the Footsteps of Amalek the first of Nations, those you call Good old Friends,
seeking rest, but never shall find any, so long as Balaak and Balaam, that
bitter Spirit, leads to Curse whom God will surely Bless, and bring over you;
for Ye must fall, and (with Haman, Saul and Herod) be ensnared and taken, even
in the same Pit of cruel Deceit, which you have dug for your Innocent
Brethren: and herein (for some time) will the Faith and Patience of the Saints
be exercised.

Thus am I clear from the Blood of all Men, in that I have not ceased both by
Words and Writing to forewarn of the coming of this Antichrist among the
Quakers, who for more then ten Years last past have been that poor Ass,
speaking as with Man's Voice, reproving and withstanding the madness of this
Lying, Wrathful, Bitter, Persecuting Spirit, knowing right well when it
entered, and you thereby came to reject the LORD, that He should not reign over
you, by His Spirit of Light and Love, but rather chose to your selves a King,
like unto other Sects and Nations, for to judge and rule you; who was not the
Unction, nor the Anointed of the LORD; nor yet the Olive, Fig, nor Vine, that
could heal, rejoice, or bind you up; but the Bramble and King of the bottomless
Pit, that shall so rend, tear, and devour you, till not one Stone shall be left
upon another; which thing tell G. F. that FOX your King.

By what is written, you may see how this High and Luciferian People the
Quakers, who for their Show and Numbers have been as the Stars of Heaven, and
who for their Pride and Enmity are now cast down; behold, what Clouds they are
without Water, even wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever: WHOSE FALL IS THE RICHES OF THE WORLD; insomuch that Carnal
Whoremongers and Adulterers (over whom they have exalted themselves) shall
sooner Repent, find Mercy, and enter Gods Kingdom of Grace, then this
Spiritually Adulterous, Proud Generation, (that account so highly of
themselves, and to be the only Children of the Kingdom) who shall be shut out.
-- So that the first in Profession are now become the last in Possession of the
Kingdom, which stands not in Words, nor yet in outward Appearances, but in
Humility and Love unfeigned, yea in Righteousness, Peace and Joy.

And till I hear of your public Repentance, as you have publicly appeared
against the Truth, and the Innocent Defenders thereof, I shall esteem you no
better then Judas, or as Infidels and Heathens, that have denied the Truth and
Faith once delivered to the Saints; which to maintain, some have hazarded the
loss of all Things, yea suffered great Shame and Reproach amongst you. But
blessed be God, that which Ye intended for evil against me, that has the Lord
my God turned unto good; for which my Soul does bless and magnify His Name, and
for ever give thanks, even whilst I am, and when I am no more.

The foregoing being printed in less room then was expected, the vacancy is
filled up with this following Letter, which was lately sent to one of the said
People.
FRIEND,
YEsterday we received from thee a foul and dirty Letter, both within and
without; loathsome indeed to a clean Mind; wherein thou confirmed what was spoken
the same day at your open Meeting, which was this; That as certainly as ever a
Lying Spirit entered Ahab 's false Prophets; so as certainly, and assuredly,
has a deceitful Lying Spirit entered your Preachers. Can thou have the
boldness to charge your own Iniquities upon us? in that thou mentions our
revelling, and ranting at Merchant-Taylors-Hall; when at the same time, we were
kept in a sober, serious, weighty Spirit; was it not wickedness sufficient in
You, to deny us that Meeting Place wherein we had a just right; but You must
come thither (where we were) in the fury of your Spirits, to make a
disturbance; and when you had done all this, adding sin, unto sin; You have
taken liberty to your Tongues, greatly to belly, and reproach us; saying,
report, and we will report; defame, and we will defame. The truth is, You had
wanted matter exceedingly to have fulfilled your own corrupt wills against us,
(after we were made to provoke you,) had it not been for burning the Paper at
the Exchange, and inviting several Persons to Merchant-Taylors-Hall; things of
no evil in themselves, neither done with an evil Mind; but You seeing your
Kingdom was struck at, and like to lose your outward Glory and Image you had
set up, herein got occasion against us, as Joseph's Mistress did against him,
for leaving his Garment in her Hand; and so have like the false Prophets of
old, heaped up slanders and scandals upon us, from time, to time, to make us
odious in the eyes of all, so far as lay in your power; but the time of
Joseph's imprisonment is at an end; and what You have sowed, You must now reap;
for your selves are become an odious People in the eyes of most sober Persons,
so that the common Proverb with many is, You are as cunning as a Quaker; it may
indeed be matter of grief to us all, that it should be thus; but as
Righteousness establishes a People, or a Nation; so on the contrary,
Unrighteousness throws them down. Alas! is there any matter made amongst You of
telling lies? How many have you told, writ, and printed concerning us? I must
tell thee, my own Mother (tho she never came into any of your outward
Professions,) would punish a lie with severity; which, when I have considered,
and also the little Conscience You make thereof, truly I have admired the
Ground has not opened and swallowed up some of You, for an example and warning
to the rest. There Is many gross evils breaks forth daily amongst You; but
where is your Testimony, Year, after Year, against them for Evil-doing, as has
been against us for Well-doing? some of You (I do believe) keeps clean the
outside, but inwardly You are as ravening Wolves; for if any oppose You and
testify against your Form; You endeavor to ruin them, both Soul and Body, so
far as lies in your Power; so You are far from doing, as You would be done
unto; and so far from rendering Good for Evil, that You daily reward Evil for
Good. I tell thee revelling, and ranting, my Soul ever abhorred; therefore put
those words upon your own, that does so.

I have hitherto been very tender toward thee (for the love I have had to thee
and thy Wife,) but the day of recompense is come; and thou shall know, thou art
not right in His sight who beholds the secrets of all Hearts; therefore be
humbled, and sit in silence, exalt not thy self, lest thou be made an example
to others.

I am thy Friend, M. P.
27. of (the Month called) January. 1676.

We are very guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
Soul when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this trouble come
upoon us.

THE END.

