THE True Primitive State of CIVIL and Ecclesiastical Government Discussed
and Cleared,

Also a Way briefly propounded to reconcile the Saints, by what names (now)
soever distinguished. In Unity of Doctrine and Discipline, according to our
Covenant in a Government nearest to the Word of GOD.

With all lowliness and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another
in love. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond, or free: and have been all made to
drink into one spirit. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Imprimatur

March 12. 1648. Henry Whaley, Advocate



London Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield near the Queens head Tavern,
1649.

TO THE Right Honorable the Great Council in Parliament now Assembled, and
the Council of State.
Right Trusty, and Right Honorable Senators.
I And not I only, but many far more considerable, have been Spectators of
those Intricate Mazes, and indefatigable troubles, which you as our Worthies,
have for above these six years past undergone, not to be paralelled to any
time, save that of Isreal's deliverance from Pharaoh out of the House of
bondage, which you as so many Noble Instruments, by the strength of the Arm of
the Mighty God of Jacob, have performed to the present accomplishment for us,
(as great a deliverance.) For the which blessed be the God most High, as also
for that after so great winnowing, there yet remains so considerable a number
of you found faithful to your trust, and though this may be esteemed by you
Honorable Worthies, a boldness in the presenter (near unto presumption) to
mention your Honors Names in this Epistle, for which I have nothing to plead
for in excuse, but this, namely, that your Honors are nearly and greatly
concerned in the Subject matter of this ensuing Discourse, which if He, that is
the Head of all Principallities and Powers, the Mighty Counselor, by whom
Princes decree just things, shall strengthen and guide you to follow: I, and
not I only, but all Conscientious men, and true Christians, shall therein have
their desires, and you their prayers:

So rests your most humble and devoted Servant, not worthy to be named, as
considerable: D. P.

To the Reader.
I Had a great dispute in my spirit in this very nick of time, whether* I
should speak or keep silence, and that not only because in these evil days
vanity and troth, not truth, is either through prejudice or wilfulness
approved and extolled amongst men; but also through a sense of my stammering
imb^cility, at being unlearned in humane Sciences, I was afraid to show in
public this my opinion: For I said in my thoughts, that days should speak,
and multitude of years should teach wisdom; but since I understood that it
is the inspiration of the Almighty that gives understanding; I durst not
smother that little light under a Bushel, which he has as a Talent given me
to improve for his Glory and the Common good: upon this ground then I have
adventured to cast my Mite into the public Treasury, presenting these ensuing
Lines to thy serious perusal; the principal theme and substance of which is
to show how this our tottering Fabric both in Church and State, may again be
re-setled upon the sure Basis of a true Primitive Institution: And here if in
this transaction I have not so managed it, as a business of so great
importance does require; I hope my former acknowledged weakness will plead
for me a favorable excuse, if not acceptance: And lest a string of reproof by
any over-winded expressions in this my Book may sound harshly in the ears of
some, so as to hinder the melodious harmony of an intended Union by me held
forth; I shall endeavor again to loose it by an ingenuous acknowledgment.

For I profess as in the presence of God, I am no enemy to any man's person,
being sorry to see, much more to use either the name of a Leveller, or
Presbyter, (having in both very loving friends) if I could by any other names
distinguish them to a vulgar understanding, which yet are justly to be blamed
and withstood, because they go not the right way to a civil or Ecclesiastical
Pe^ce. There is only one word that has escaped me, that probably may give
occasion to some to take off^nce; and that is in the 15. Page, toward the end,
where quoting the Prophet Hosea, it is said, That God has justly given up
these men, that is to say, some of our conceived wise Diviners, and pretended
Prophets to folly, and a dog raging madness rather then a rational or Christian
Spirit. And here I could wish I might not say so of some which bite and snarl
at their brethren, not showing yet any true reason wherefore: but God forbid I
should say so of all; and truly because of offense, if it could have been
timely prevented, I would have said so of none: Yet is this a term the holy
Spirit has used in way of reproof of some of the same Function, though in
another case, when he calls them both dumb and greedy dogs* and again for
fear of mistake, because I have desired there might be no imparity of Persons
in the Ministry in reference to humane learning, that therefore I should be
thought an enemy to learning; no certainly, I could wish the Universities might
be kept up and maintained in their former luster, that so as God shall bring
forth by the hand of providence, we may by such a common and comendable gift
still find instruments that in some cases might be more useful then others
either in Church or State.

And lastly, though I have highly commended the Excellency of this outward
Form, which indeed ought to be observed; yet I hope none is so ignorant as to
think that the true glory and beauty of Christ's Church is not more principally
within; but since both are concerned in reference to the outward and inward
man; therefore it was that Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt was a deliverance
in an outward way of Worship for both; upon which ground it is not to be
doubted that through the great power of our Redeemer, we shall at this time
not only have a deliverance in the inward, but also a freedom of the outward
man, else should we have nothing wherewith voluntarily to tender as a
Worship to God: For these Reasons, as also for some occasional faults in the
Printing, I have contrary to my intended purpose presented thee with this
Epistle, wishing a favorable construction of the whole at least, or of my good
intention herein: And so I shall ever rest,

Thine to command in the Lord. D. P.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line 28. for Counties read Countries. p. 3. l. 14: for surplace
surface. p. 20. l. last leave out thirdly. page the last, line the 25. r.
Secta^^^s truly so called.

THE True state and form of Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical discussed and
cleared.
NOt long since there was in public, a little book entitled, A Shrill cry,
for the resolve of 13 Queries, in which, with many other things touching the
Covenant etc. very considerable, there was inserted, the primitive institution
and supreme end, of a Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, in a more full
pursuance then of what was there so briefly presented, I shall endeavor in
this ensuing discourse, to hold forth these 3 particulars, as very necessary
further to be discussed and cleared in these times. First wherein each
particular Government, with their distinct and peculiar interest does a part
consist. 2. In what particulars they may harmoniously accord. 3. Some probable
means propounded tending to settle each in their primitive glory.

To begin then with that Government which is called Civil. First acted upon the
Theater of this world, yet in force, which as touching the form since, has
been very contingent and uncertain. God sometimes deputing one as supreme to
give out Laws, and rule the Nations. Sometimes permitting others by right of
Conquest to impose Laws, upon the subdued multitude, some were elected Kings,
to whose laws the people voluntarily submitted. Others by their
Representatives proposing Laws to these elected Kings, by which they would be
governed. And lastly some few have been elected in several Counties to Govern
and transact for the good and benefit of the whole. These and such like, are
usually distinguished by the names of Monarchy, Aristocrasie, Democrasie, etc.
The reason of which variety, has been the universal corruption of human
flesh. Governors being drawn aside by their own concupiscence, through
ambition, and self-interest, and other causes, to pursue ends destructive to
common-safety. But from the beginning it was not so, for if man had stood, the
most pure and primitive had been that of Monarchy. Adam being entrusted under
Christ to weild the supreme Scepter of this terrestrial Diadem, which
probably might have continued to all succeeding Generations. The subject matter
for which Government, would have been his own Offspring and fellow creatures.
The form most excellent, each Minister under him in their proper place,
orderly and sweetly dispencing an equal distribution, to God, and each
particular being. The rules and bounds for which, was the law of nature,
reason, and morallity.

The discipline was by instruction, exhortation, example, and such like, to draw
forth and exercise daily the intellect of all intelligible creatures in the
things before recited. So as from nonage, to ful-age, each particular
according to their measure and proper place, might become serviceable to the
universal and public good. There being yet this difference in the state of
innocence (though continued) between Adam and his progeny, that as he was
created a perfect man, his internal faculties was acted readily from himself
as several objects and relations were presented in their time and place,
whereas his posterity stood in need of a continual inculcation of instruction
from others, before they could act their inward principle, dexteriously, and
habitually in a way of nature and reason, to which, other parts of discipline
before expressed in this state of corruption, is necessarily to be added,
sharp reproves and severe corrections. The next and last particular
appertaining to this Government, is the supreme end: Namely the preservation of
each man's propriety in name, goods, and other things of this life. And herein
the particular and entire interest of this and all other civil sanctions does
consist. A first Testament and Covenant once in the power of man to keep most
perfectly, which since through weakness of the flesh, fruits and effects of
the fall, is now impossible, precisely to be performed: All men in nature
thereupon by a just sentence, as under the first breach of this Law, becoming
children of the curse, wrath, and death: we need not wonder then at the
revolutions and changes of Government, since every thing else now is restless,
until it return to its primitive and supreme center, from whence there was
suddenly so great an Apostasy, that the whole earth was filled with violence,
insomuch, immediately after, man's commecall scheane of Terestiall glory, became
dissolved into a watery Tragedy, a few inconsiderate persons for number, only
excepted, preserved from being overwhelmed in that universal deluge, which no
sooner by multiplying had again filled the surplase of the earth, but the like
universal corruption appeared: All fixed principles for pure Nature, Reason,
and Morallity, was by it eaten out, and became obliterate; which doubtless was
the cause why God in the next Age did again mind the same through the figure
of circumcision, as also, not long after in that terrible manner upon Mount
Synaia in Judea, the Hemispheare of Nations, give out his Law, to show man once
more, not only from whence he was fallen, but to stir him up thereby to his
former duty, the matter whereof was engraven in Tables of stone, evidently to
be seen and read of all men.

And although here again, the form of this Government then was Monarchical;
yet was it not therein an indisputable president and pattern for other Nations
or succeeding times, for though it should be admitted that this was most
Primitive, and in Gods esteem most Excellent, either in Adam, and those other
Anointed Kings, to whom extraordinary assistance and abilities was given for
performance of such a trust, as particular Types of Christ: Yet experience
tells us through changes; and reason and providence dictates no less; that
where this immediate Divine Assistance is wanting, to guide any single supreme
in evil times of defection, that Government proves dangerous, and those
Governors probably most safest for that people, which shall through providence
be admitted to Rule, after a sensible feeling, and late deliverance with them
from under a yoke of Tyranny: It not to me seeming likely, that such who have
seen justice done upon others, themselves in it being isntrumental, should
through Tyranny by any Law, make heavy yokes for their brethren, and in it
their own Posterity (which if) they would be most inexcusable, because they of
all other, in this latter Age of the world have seen most examples and
presidents of the good, and evil of Government: Thus much then of the first
particular, in which is briefly showed the Ministers, matter, Form, Laws,
discipline, end, and entire Interest of all Civil Government, both at first
and since, which because it was held excellently forth in the Commonwealth of
the Jews: It was called a Sanctuary Heb. 9. v. 1.
yet worldly and fleshly, far different from that, which concerns the inward
and spiritual man, which though the ministration of it be in the flesh; yet it
is not after, nor for the present, little appertaining thereunto: It being
until the day of our bodily redemption, Romans 3. v. 23.
under the discipline of the first Testament; for corrupt flesh, as all now is,
must as grass and the flower of the field, first wither, become dead, and
vanish away in the judgment of those, which are to be fit matter for the
second and new Testament, for the body Romans 8. v. 10.
must be dead because of sin, when the spirit is to live for a better
righteousness sake.

And so I come to the second particular, the Government Ecclesiastical, which
imediately receded the other in the Infancy thereof. The instruments and forms
whereof, has also been various before the time of Christ's fleshly presence;
the reason of which was, the good pleasure of the Fathers will, the divine
mystery of his Grace, since revealed to us in the fulness of time, for the
most part hid in 1 Cor. 2. v. 6, 7.
him, whose dispensations and works always appear most perfect in the end.
During the infancy and minority, of the mystical body of Christ the Church
then begun; it seemed good to him here and there to enlighten, and by a secret
and inward call, to separate and segregate from the Common mass of mankind,
such as should hold forth according to the measure of faith then dispensed, the
word of life: That in diverse ways, manners, Heb. i. v. 1.
and forms of discipline, were made isntrumental in their generations, to
congregate as time and place afforded, the children of truth. Gradually first
preparing, and then through union of affection couching them in their due
place, as so many pollished stones, upon that precious corner, and first
foundation stone of the spiritual Temple Christ Jesus: I purpose not here for
brevity sake, to write severally of the particular Forms in those Ages past;
but rather with the Shrill cry.
Author of that forenamed Pamphlet, I shall fall in with his Method in that
Form since, as a Government for us more practically imitable: It was evident
then according to Scripture, when the full time appointed of the Father, for
the spiritual liberty and age of the Church was come: He sent forth his Son
into the world, clothing him with humane flesh, and in the substance and shape
of man put him under the Law:

That in his pure flesh, in man's stead, and for his benefit, he might actively
and passively perform, what God or man, by any Law could possibly require; and
though he knew no sin, neither was a transgressor of any Law; yet he being
isntrumental in the Creation of man, the first, and supreme Heb. 2. 6. 7. 8.
head of man, by relation a Ver. 13. 14,
brother to man, and by a peculiar right had an interest in man; it was both
just and reasonable, that he only as the fittest person should principally
transact the affairs of man, and for that end, he was by God in the behalf of
all fallen man, imputed a sinner, numbered amongst transgressors, made a curse
by suffering upon the Cross, as a Thief and Murderer, that so thorough this,
Gods peculiar ordinance and acceptance, he might no more remember or punish
eternally the transgressions committed against the first Testament; as also to
give a sure ground of future hope, that the bodies of the faithful one day,
shall be perfectly redeemed from the power of sin, death, and the Devil,
unto which by a righteous sentence, they became with others most miserably
captivated, with all to give good assurance to all such, by the death and
sealing bloodshed of this Son of God, which was appointed to be both the
testator and Mediator of the new Covenant Heb. 9. 15.
eternally stablished upon sure promises, their spirits once cleansed from the
filth and guilt of the old: May now by a new and living way thorough the veil
of his flesh, have a free passage into the most holy Sanctuary and presence of
our heavenly Father, in the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; and for that
end this our great high Priest and Apostle of that faith, which we should
profess during the time of his abode upon earth, he made it his own; because
the Fathers work, to dispense light according to his will in matters of this
Nature, that so by it, he might publicly gather unto himself all those
children of God that were capable Subjects for an audible administration; and
for that cause he was pleased to elect, not only twelve principal, but many
others, to whom he did impart those mysteries, that they might afterward as
good Disciples and Scribes before instructed, communicate the same. Upon whom
after his ascension he poured out his spirit, in the dispensation of
extraordinary gifts; that so by them the foundation begun, and form
prescribed for such a sprituall structure might successively be carried on in
all succeeding times, until the very top stone should be laid, and grace,
grace, cried thereunto: Its easily conceived then by that's past, who were the
Mr. workmen, and what was the matter for this building; but for evincing a
double mistake in our pretended Mr. Builders: Its necessary the matter of it be
a little further considered: It being affirmed by some on the one hand, that
all persons in a Nation; yea infants are fit materials for this Caelestiall
Fabric: The folly of which opinion appears, in that it is not only
contrary to the practice and direct precept; but also the true nature and end
of this institution by Christ: Besides, what benefit can acrew to Infants, and
others almost as incapable to be made Members by any initiating ordinance,
since they are in no capacity (through natural weakness) visibly to do or
receive any good, neither has God at any time, or any where (as is falsely by
them premised, engaged through an unwarrantable use of Baptism, to wash away
original sin, Regenerate, visibly unite to himself, and save Infants; for
why then does not answerable effects follow: Time quickly showing that many
thousands so baptized, become Abominable and Reprobate to every good work:
Strange therefore it is to see how these men have been pusled to evade the
clear light of this Scripture; Go discipline and baptize, and that other
Scripture, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but to these
persons it seems fulfilled, if they injoyne others to profess faith for
them, which visibly have none; as if one man's bare profession, which is not
probably real, were with God meritoriously saving for others, in like manner
are they pusled about Circumcision, which they say Baptism comes in the room
of, when its clear to them which will understand, that Circumcision was no
initiating ordinance for a Church, and Gospel fellowship? It being but a sign
of an external Covenant and stipulation made with Abraham and his Seed, for a
revive of the first Testament, touching a civil and unblameable conversation
in the flesh: For says God, my Covenant shall be in your Genesis 17. ver. 13.
flesh: So that all Israel after the flesh, by the Law gendering to bondage,
were not Israel after the spirit, borne of the free woman, gendering to a
spiritual liberty: And this I am induced verily to believe, for these Reasons,
viz.

First, Because all those that partook of Circumcision, by Scripture proof were
rigedly bound to a personal and perpetual performance of the Moral Law, in
reference to the outward man Gal. 5. 2.
which our Savior yet testifies, none of them did Ioh. 4. 19. 23.
keep, nor indeed could, as they might the Ceremonial and other Laws.

Secondly, From the nature of the law it self, which in Scripture, is compared
to fire, hammer, Sword, etc. whereof circumcision was a figurative sign,
showing it to be no less then a keen cutting instrument, through the penalty,
which by a secret insition was to separate that caul, skin or film spread over
the Spirit, eye, and judgment of reason, at first occasionally entering in by
the senses, and now through custom being so habitually contracted in man's
nature, as it proves to some many times an incureable disease. Colos. 2. v. 11.
12. 13.
Necessary it was then, that from the eight day of the womb, A good note for a
timely instruction of children.
at the first budding of the senses they should be gradually and regularly
disciplined accordingly. And as for time, so for place, this sign was very
significant, it being done there, from whence instrumentally was to be acted,
the strongest and most burning lust of humane and natural concupiscence, the
difficulty in suppressing which, and the danger of neglecting, was secretly
hinted by the pain, sorrow and bloodshed in this ceremonial transaction,
neither is the persons less observable, God showing by such an administration,
that it was the male, not the female that was first entrusted, from whom as the
head and stronger vessel, he chiefly of him required performance, or else his
blood must go, or some others for him must do and suffer, what in Gods account
is a satisfaction equivolent.

Thirdly, Isay 42. ver. 22,
When circumcision and the Law, was most in force, and highly exalted, and
through a sense thereby of man's weakness, though it became isntrumental to
beget as upon Hagars knees faithful children unto Abraham: Yet Gospel and
Evangelical righteousness, as a spring and river of life, sweetly, yet
secretly was then running under allegories, tipes and ceremonies, in a
ministration distinctly differing from the former, for they all drank of the
same spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, and they
all were baptized as well as circumcised, though mistically under a cloud and in
the Sea, where water and not blood, was the material substance of this
ordanicall Sacrament.

Fourthly, From the nature and end of baptism it self, which is not to be
paraleld so, as to come in the room of circumcision. The matter and manner of
which holy institution, presents to our view and serious consideration, these
several things following. First, That it is neither circumcision, nor any
other ceremonial reparation, but an absolute Sacramental dissolution of our
bodily elements, into their first principles, as best suiting with a visible
Gospel administration, From which secondly, was lively represented to the eye
of faith, not sense, by the death of the body, a spiritual freedom from the
imputation of sin, Romans 6. v. 9, 10, 11.
power of the law, curse, death and the devil. The ground of which, is this,
in that God at first gave this Law principally to be binding to the sensitive
and weaker part, the inward man from it being destinct, although united, makes
but one person For want of a true distinguishing of these natures little of the
Scriptures and heavenly mystery of the gospel is understood.
upon which the outward, being first in the transgression, and by occasion an
inlet of sin to the other. It pleased God, to impute that sin, and charge the
punishment upon it, when yet by a decreed union. If faith in an unexpected
promise had not intervened, the inward had also been in the same predicament,
from the neernesse of which union of these two destinct natures, there is a
communion of operations and proprieties, so that what may be affirmed of one
and the same person, at one and the same time, in referrence to one nature, may
be denied of the other, so that by one he may be said to be earthly, dead under
the law, etc. and by the other, he may be said to be yet heavenly, not living
under that Law, holy, blessed, and under the protection of God for ever. And
yet again, where faith in a promise is not, there a person in both natures is
perpetually miserable, but where it is, that person in both Natures, is
eternally happy.

Yet in order, first the one and then the other, this then asserted is cleared,
if we observe that when God came to execute judgment, he progressively past
sentence upon that which was the first occasion of sin, beginning with the
Serpent, then the woman, and last of all, with the earthly man, making good his
former threatening, That in the day it did eat, it should die, For earth it was,
and to earth it should return, which was the substance of the outward, not the
inward For if God had intended to pass a sentence of an eternal death on this
breach, since it was pronounced peremptorily without any condition of faith in
a promise, which if God had been true of his word (a thing not to be disputed)
man necessarily then had in both natures eternally perished. It was the earthly
part then that lay under that temporal sentence, which before one thousand
years, Gods day, it perfectly expired, from which first sentence it was hourly
declining, besides this also appears in that the satisfaction was made in the
flesh of Christ, which through the Union was not without extreme anguish of
spirit, Romans 8. Hebr. 10. and elsewhere.
man. Thus then this exact compounded elementarie substance, at first a fit
instrument for the celestial Spirit, to transact a terrestial service, being
under the sentence of death, it became not only unserviceable through a
declining weakness, but it caused also a spiritual death, dulling the edge
and quenching the sparklings in the Intellect of the divine offspring, for the
cheering and reviving again of which, he was pleased by a promise in a blessed
seed of the same substance, to give hope to the one, by dying, of a better
Resurrection, and through the quickening spirit, for the present to give the
other deliverance from a sinful captivity. Now a figure of this death of the
body was lively held forth by the bodies and blood of Beasts, which were to be
offered up in Sacrifice, as a present atonement for the reprieve of all
sublimary created things of the same elementary substance, until the substance
of that which was chiefly tipified and intended, namely the body of Christ; in
which as a spiritual public person, all the bodies of the Saints was included,
in the offering up of which, the will of God being done, he has consecrated for
ever (through that will) those which by faith in his blood were sanctified.
Thirdly, Baptism was also ordained, that it might be not only a similitude of
that union and communion of the body of Christ with the faithful, but also
that it might hold forth by this union to a visible part in the behalf of the
rest of the members of the invisible body, a community of the same Spirit,
virtue, life, resurrection and glory, of the Head.

And this we find excellently set forth to us; worthy our serious perusal, in
the sixth and seventh Chapters to the Romans, the Apostle in the seventh
showing, That now the first husband the body, to whom the Spirit by union was
married, it was dead to the Law in the body of Christ; so that now the spirit
without being counted an Adulteress, might make choice for a husband him that
is raised from the dead: That by such a union it might bring forth fruit unto
God, for faith he, when we were in the Flesh, the affections of sin which were
by the Law, had force in our members to bring forth fruit unto death, but now
we are delivered from the Law, he being dead, that is to say, the body, in whom
we were holden, that we should serve him in newness of Spirit, and not in the
oldnesse of the Letter. Fourthly and lastly, by the water in Baptism, covering
the earth of man's body, it being plunged therein, was further signified, the
sanctifying and renewing again of the body through that Spirit, which by a
first moving on the surface of the waters, gave being in the creation to all
things of the same Elementary substance, which should be as certainly
performed, as man's body came forth of the waters; a sure testimony of which was
evident in the head, and others the first fruits of the same: by this then as I
conceive, has been confuted the first error, showing that Infants and many
others, upon these grounds, are not fit matter for a visible Church or
Congregation, and though I have in this exceeded an intended brevity, yet in
things so greatly Important; it will I trust be excusable, for this seriously
considered will put an end to those bitter long disputes, and voluminous
Treatises about the Law, and Gospel. Gods seeing, or not seeing sin, in
reference to the one, or the other Covenant, etc. The Error on the other hand
is, in some that conceive them only fit, which for knowledge and practice are
seemingly more eminent, whereas at first a Gospel conviction, and need of a
Christ, and a voluntary submission to his government, for a further
Instruction through doctrine and discipline was a good ground of admission. For
Christ's Kingdom in the Church, is a Kingdom of Grace, long-sufferance, and
meeknes. The Subjects whereof at first are very rough hewed, not polished
stones, weak in knowledge, and many times more in practice. Those Ministers and
strong Christians then entrusted, ought to bear the Infirmities of the more
feeble, carrying these Lambs in the bosom of Love, leading gently, and guiding
these younglings in grace, like good Pastors, so truly knowing the state of
their flock, as to distinguish them by their names, natures, and manners, that
so he might accordingly feed them with knowledge and understanding; Not in
civil contentions, but Evangelicall conclusions, but how rare are such at this
present, and what plenty of those shepherds that God so After the manner of men.
passionately and pathetically reproves in Ezekiels time, that he said, Eat the
fat, and clothed themselves with the fleece of the Sheep, Ezekiel. 34.
but did not care to feed* Zach. 11. chapters worthy to be observed of all such
as are entrusted with the care of Souls.
so as to strengthen the weak, heal the sick, bind up the broken, bring again
that which is driven away, neither sought that which was lost, but with cruelty
and rigor did they rule them. The Lord himself then the great and living
Shepherd, there promises to supply their place, and do that for his Sheep
which was neglected by those evil Shepherds, that is to say, to lead them into
green Gospel pastures, refreshing them with the sweet and pleasant springs of
salvation, strengthening the weak, healing the sick, etc. As it follows
excellently in the same Chapter.

The next thing then to the matter, is the form of this government, which was
first, those Ministerial officers, as to be ordinary and perpetual, were
Pastors, to instruct and teach. Deacons, to collect, keep, and disburse the
public stock. Elders, among themselves to overruled and end all civil and
occasional differences; Seers, to watch over each particular Member, which was
to present, as need required, the true state of things to the Church; there was
also a form of Sacraments, one of Baptism, of which is already spoken. One
other and main end of which was to distinguish all visible members within, from
them without, putting such into a visible capacity thereby of those benefits
before expressed, to which then was added the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
through which, those before baptized were made to drink into that one Spirit,
which spiritually quickened it by faith in the blood of Christ, running through
the veins of the whole body, typically represented by way of Communion in the
Element of wine, to the very senses of the faithful, all those benefits of
Christ's death and resurrection, which upon frequent meeting they were publicly
to hold forth in remembrance of the same.

After these, next in order was the form of doctrine, that is to say, first,
To acknowledge God even that Father of whom originally and effentially were all
things either temporal or spiritual, according to whose supreme will, all the
distinct families in heaven and earth was both ordered and named; As also that
Jesus Christ his first begotten son, was that person by whom all things was
made, is now preserved, redeemed, and shall again, what belongs to him, be
restored; for which cause he descended, suffered, ascended according to the
Scripture, sitting now at the right hand of God, until all enemies are made
his footstool, which once performed, he shall then deliver up the kingdom to
God the Father, which then shall be all in all to the whole body, filling every
part according to their measure with his own fullnes; as he now does the head,
for the effecting of all which glorious promises, in the behalf of the holy
visible, invisible, militant, and at last triumphant Church. That there is one
infinite, invisible, incomprehensible, most omnipotent Spirit, which is that of
the Fathers, communicated to the Son and from him, as head, to the whole body.
The fifth was the form of discipline, which was this, every Officer in their
proper place, through meeknes and love, by exhortation, instruction, reproof,
and if need require, with consent of the Church, through excommunication, to
use their utmost endeavor to present such, who have voluntarily submitted unto
their Government, blameless in the day of Christ; And then the last of all is
the supreme end, namely, the preservation of each Saints propriety in their
spiritual names, privileges and benefits of an eternal life, so as each
member in their proper place, may according to the effectual working and
power, which is in the measure of every part, receive the increase of the body
unto the edifying it self in love, until we all meet together in the unity of
Faith, and that acknowledging of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Thus as briefly as I could, has
been showed also the Governors, Government, matter, form, of doctrine and
discipline, with the distinct and supreme end, of this Ecclesiastical
Government of Christ.

The third thing promised to be considered was this, In what respect these two
Governments, so diametrically opposite, as heaven and earth, may yet agree and
dwell together in a Nation, City, Family or person. First, they may agree in
this, that the son of God is constituted, and by public inauguration, is
Crowned and anointed King and Head of both these principallities and powers,
with their several Instruments, and weapons, whither Carnal or Spiritual.
Secondly they may accord in this, that the spiritual deserves the right hand
of fellowship, since all sublimary things had a being with the external, for
ends subservient to this, which when it shall perfectly be accomplished in the
Nations. This exterior Government shall be dissolved and cease. The Kings and
Rulers of the Gentiles rejoicing to bring their glory to it; casting their
Crowns at the feet thereof, as a due hommage to this eternal Excellency. Isay
60 to the end.
Thirdly, they may sweetly ecco in this, to pray for, rejoye in, and wishing
well, to the prosperity and peace of each other. And Fourthly, They may be
unanimous in this, namely to assist and preserve each other, in their distinct
sphere and equipage, so that God as supreme may have his due, and man as
subordinate his. Fifthly and lastly, That they may and ought to assent in this,
that each person in respect of his outward man, is under the command,
approbation, and punishment of a Civil state, as it shall act publicly for
the good, or to the apparent prejudice of the same, when at the same time the
inward, in matters of faith, as they concern another life, is under the
command, approbation, or punishment of the Church, whereof he is a Member, As
it shall publicly act for the good or the apparent prejudice thereof. Thus
having past the second, I come to the third.

Well then, as for the lawful authority of those Governors, that through the
over ruling hand of the most high, we are at this present under, I dispute not.
Of which, those that are doubtful and desire to be informed, may do well to
read that forementioned Shrill Cry.
sheet or two, which perfectly speaks my judgment therein. This premised, I
proceed to the third and last general head of this discourse, namely first to
present by way of proposal to our Honorable Worthies, some probable means
whereby their Government may be comfortable to themselves, and prosperous to
the people. And here with the beloved Disciple John, I shall mind them of that
which was from the beginning, according to that which has already been in
part, showed, that is to say, First, that they would aim at the same end, in
all transactions, which God did in the Primitive Institution of a Civil
Government, which briefly was this, that they would be ten Commandment
Magistrates, giving God and man his due, after the two Tables, according to
nature and reason.

Secondly, for pursuing of which, because not ubiquitarie, Jethroes counsel
might be taken, to choose out in the Nation men fearing God, hating
covetousness, which in their places may judge and determine lesser matters.

Thirdly that accordingly as at first, there may be a Government, not only
Magisticall, but sympatheticall, and impartial. That so it be not endangered
to split upon the Rock either of a just calumny, or a pusillanimious contempt.

Fourthly, That for the protection and praise of them that do well, they would
take notice of evil doers, disturbers of public peace, to make them exemplary
for the same, which principally now are the Despise^s of authority.
irreverent impatient restless Levellers Not considerable.
, or pretended Reverend Ministerial More considerable in respect of place.
Presbyters. The first of which, upon what male contented ground, or tumor I
know not, endeavor machevile and Jesuit like, to divide and distract, and as
much as in them lies to confound the Counsels of our experienced grave and
honorable Sennators, out of a pretended Jealousy before trial made, after
all their winnowing, may probably betray their trust, which to me, certainly
neither the law of Nature, God or Nations, ever gave private persons such a
power, to anticipate and prejudge, the transactions in dubious matters of their
supreme Governor, which doubtless must needs have more knowledge (through
experience) in the affairs of State then the most extraordinary private spirit
amongst the giddy multitud. And as for those other, which pretend to be Sacred,
calling themselves Ambassadors of Christ, which if they were indeed: They would
never speak reproachfully evil of the rulers of the people, as they do in
Pulpits, and did in their late Letter to the General and Officers of the Army,
a Paper, in it self most salfe and scandalous, since those that they asperse
are public persons; And themselves (though presumed public) are in civil
things private, which if no more were said, it was a sufficient answer to their
Letter. Again, if it should be admitted, that the supreme Governors, and
those under them entrusted The General.
now in being, were an usurped power, and not agreeing with the law of the
Land, as they falsely insert, yet Gods bare permission of such a power, were
ground enough not only of submission, but their prayers also. If the precept of
the Apostle Paul be by them thought imitably practical.

But these men presume (doubtless of a more extraordinary spirit) like the
Prophets of old, taking upon them to reprove Magistrates, which they by
visions, many times confirmed by miracles, they had an immediate Mission. Those
being the Gods, to whom peculiarly the word of God then was sent. Which if they
can prove such a calling, they shall be no more private but public persons,
To whom not only Magistrates, but all others in doubtful exigences should
repair as to the divine Oracles of God.

But seeing they cannot, It is not a groundless, or doubtful title of an
Ambassador, or Gospel-minister, that in case of a public civil breach of
conscience toward men, that should free them from punishment, when yet liberty
of conscience, in doubtful matters of faith toward God, remain still as a
Rock unmovable? Therefore I verily think, the day of Gods just visitation,
Hosea 9.
spoken of in Hosea, is come upon these men, in that he has given up these
deviners and spiritual persons, More like then a ra^ionall or Christian spirit
to a dog-raging * madness, each pretended Prophet, like fools, not knowing the
seasons and interchangeable workings of the Almighty. But I spare them, as
objects for our pity and Prayers, rather then envy, since through their words
already, which every where frets like a Gangreen, this their madness is in a
manner seen and known of all men.

Fifthly and lastly, the way to promote a blessed settlement in the Civil
State* is for our Honorable Rulers not as Magistrates, by any coercive power
to settle an Ecclesiastical A thing hateful to God as derogatory to his word
and spirit, he standing in no need at all of man, much less a forced obedience
especially in spiritual matters.
government, But as Christians eminent in their places, through a prudent and
godly example to improve their utmost abilities, to restore the Church to her
former beauty, and then shall they be indeed the Repairers of the Antichristian
breach, and restorers of the ancient paths for Saints to walk in; so shall God
bless their government with Potiphar for a Joseph's sake, and as he did the
house of Obed Edom for the Arks sake. But it will be demanded, what is the
government nearest to the word of God, since one says, here it is, others
there, and some that there is none at all? I have already showed that God in
all ages has had a visible Church, and that cannot be without a goverement,
although it has not been alike always in form, nor visibility, but as for
that visibility of a National Church, it having neither matter nor form
according to the Primitive Institution; its a government more in name then in
reallity, the times of the Apostles being then our pattern. I shall therefore
in this last Series of my discourse, as a second branch of the last particular,
First, sum up all that has been said touching this Primitive Ecclesiastical
constitution of government, in a compendious form, as it was then held forth.
And then secondly, the grounds and reasons of the first defection and Apostacle
from the same. And lastly, propound some means to re-estate the same in its
former pureness. As for the first, I think I cannot do better then only word
for word to circumscribe what that Author has set down touching the same, in
the Shrill cry, where after he had showed that the Covenant did not require
conformity to a National Church, because the word of God acknowledges no
other, but that one visible Catholic Church, which is in all Nations dispersed
into congregations and families, that Congregation then, says he, or family
wheresoever it is, that in matter, form, doctrine, or discipline, shall conform
to theprimitive institution, that must needs be the purest Church, which we are
bound by Covenant to hold forth in these Nations, and that is conceived to be
this: when at the first, by the preaching the sincere word of the Gospel, so
many as heard it that were convinced of their lost estate, by reason of sin,
were incited thereby publicly to profess repentance from dead works, and faith
toward God through the Lord Jesus, desiring thereupon to be baptized into the
visible Church, and under his Government, to obey both in doctrine and
discipline, what they shall clearly be persuaded to be his will, and for that
end frequently to meet in their several Assemblies, and there orderly and
decently exercise each others gifts, for the edification one of another, in
their most holy faith, that so upon very good experience had upon such gifts,
they might out of themselves, and for themselves successively choose, as they
stood in need, Pastors and other Officers as they conceived necessary to the
well-being and governing those who had voluntarily submitted themselves
thereunto, So that then doubtless this constitution, would have continued as a
pattern to all succeeding Congregations Those extraordinary Messengers only
excepted, that by their Miracles showed their authority from God, to lay this
foundation, and prescribe the form for this spiritual building, Thus far the
Shrill Cry. But for the second, touching the first grounds of apostasy, its
evident, that from those very times this defection began, the Apostle John
testifying, that there was then many Antichrists, which by their carriages,
doctrines, and cunning practices, did deny the coming of Christ in the flesh,
which was in truth no less then to deny both the Father and the Son, for he
that does deny the end of Christ's coming, which was to redeem, inlighten,
fanctifie, rule and govern his Church after his own mind: does in effect deny
his very coming, as also both father and son, and is a very Antichrist. To
this also the Apostle Paul gives testimony, that then this mystery of iniquity
began to work, which first appeared in the defection and apostasy of some of
those instruments, that were first entrusted, and furnished with ability to
preach the word, which afterward through a Satanicall pride, and corruption in
judgment began to fall off from the true Apostles, usurping authority, not
only over them, but to reign as Kings over the consciences of the Brethren,
whom then they did in the next place, Secondly seduce from the sincerity of the
Gospel, pretending yet to be the Apostles of Christ, which Paul calls
notwithstanding, false Apostles, Ministers of Satan, transformed into the
appearance of Angels of light, because indeed they had a zeal for God, after
the righteousness of the law, but not according to knowledge, in that they
could not distinguish between that active and passive righteousness of the Law
and Gospel, the one requiring and exacting obedience, when it gives no power
to perform, the other freely giving a power to perform more than it at all
times requires an exact performance to.

Besides from the womb of this error proceeded many more, for as in the Law so
in the Gospel, there is such a concatination of Gospel truths, that an error
in one foundation truth causes the like in others. So that by falling off to
the Law though they did profess faith in Christ. They had no benefit thereby,
through the neglect of the Gospel, either of an effectual vocation,
justification, true Sanctification, or glorificaon, which was only in this as
Gods way to be found. The Apostle to the Gallatians testifying, that
notwithstanding their profession of faith in Christ, in that they preferred
man's righteousness before Gods, they were yet in their sins, Christ's death was
in vain to them. And that all his benefits should profit them nothing, which
is as was said, all one to them as if they had denied Christ's coming in the
flesh. And then thirdly having lost the purity of the Gospel, they fell also
from the form and discipline of the same, preferring circumcision, before
baptism, not assembling themselves as formerly, refusing communion and
fellowship, with those purer Churches, dispising and contemning those
Sacraments, which presented the benefits of Christ's body and blood, insomuch as
the Apostle said in way of reproof, that if a temporal death followed the
breach of one of Moses Laws, how much shall he be guilty of a sorer
punishment, which by the neglect of Gospel truths, and Ordinances, trample
under foot the blood of the Son of God. Finally, After this, corruption in
doctrine, there was so great a departure from the faith, that there followed as
universal a corruption in manners, and then the man of Sin, the Antichrist
not long after came indeed to be revealed) whose only work was, to set
himself against and above Christ, in all his gospell-ministrations, confounding
all primitive order, and form both of doctrine and discipline, admitting none
but himself and his corrupt Clergy to be sole Judges in matters of faith,
which did assume to themselves only the name of the holy Church, that so he
might the better sit in the consciences of those he calls the Laiety, as if it
belonged not to them, either to know or receive any benefit by Christ, through
a faith of their own, over which he did so lord it, that he compelled them
contrary to their own light implicitly to believe and obey, many times those
things that were both contrary to nature, Law, and Gospel. Which together with
many more horrid abominations, that for brevity sake is here remitted.

So then by this, such a thick, and close darkness covered the eyes of the
people, that very few had in those days any true understanding in the mystery
of the Gospel; the Gospel then being turned into the Law, and other humane
traditions, And when that darkness began a little to be expeld about Luthers
time, yet by and by after, there was again such a confused mixture, of the Law
and Gospel, that it was hard to say which was either: Which In Com. on Gal.
page 201. and elsewhere.
Luther indeed prophetically foretold should come to pass, through the
ignorance of Ministers after his time, which since by woeful experience we
have found too true, that covering Cherub of Antichristian darkness, still in
a great part remaining.

Thus having showed in the second place, the rise, grows, and cause, of
continuance of this first defection, It remains now that some means be
propounded, according to the third particular, for the re-instating the same
unto its primitive pureness, which now might more generally and easily be
effected, if God shall be pleased to give first to our Magistrates and then
more generally to others, a heart to follow the council of our Lord and head
Christ Jesus, given to the Church of Ephesus in another case, which consists
in three things. First to remember from whence we are fallen, that is to say,
from the primitive constitution. Secondly to repent of all contrary ways and
abominable apostacies. Thirdly, to do our first works that is, to conform in
all things to the mind of Christ, which was from the beginning, for we ought in
this Ecclesiastical Government, as in the other, to make Gods aim and end, in
such a spiritual constitution our own, which if we would do, we must
subscribe to his wisdom, accounting it ours, to follow his direction in the
same. We read that Moses in building the Tabernacle, a figure of the Jewish
Church he should do all things according to the pattern. Even so now, if we
would build this spiritual Tabernacle that is fallen down, so as that the
residue of men might seek after God, It must be according to the plat-forme
laid down by Christ, and his Apostles, who was faithful in all things as a
Son, over his own house: and truly it were well, if after the same manner,
and way of defection and apostasy we so hastily declined downwards, we might
now more liesurely step by step ascend up again into this holy Mountain.

And here then is first to be considered according to that which has been
formerly hinted, that is to say, the foundation being laid and confirmed by
miracles, there was afterward no need of a succession of extraordinary
Messengers or Miracles, which was at first to confirm the truth of the Gospel
among Heathens and Infidels, that then, which was to continne to posterity,
unto which if we will conform it is necessary.

First, that all distinctions brought in by Antichrist, of persons, in
reference to humane learning, so as to make an imparity touching the office of
the Ministry, be laid aside, renounced, and repented of. As also that custom
of laying on of hands, for the formal constitution of any Gospel Minister, as
if he were thereby better enabled to preach the truth, be also omited, since the
Apostles in their laying on of hands did convey not ordinary, but extraordinary
gifts.

Secondly, That in regard of our late confusion there might be appointed a
certain number, that for their abilities in the knowledge of the mystery of
the Gospel, as also reputed to be of an holy and unblamable conversation, ^
Tim. 3. 1. etc.
every way quallified according to the rule of the Apostle

Thirdly that these with the assistance of Godly Magistrates and other
Christians might make choice in all parts, without respect of persons, so many
as they have good experience of their abilities, * In reference to humane
learning.
agreeing not only in doctrine and discipline, but with boldness and other
parts for an Intelligible utterance, that they might be sent forth into all
places where there is need, to preach the sincere word of the Gospel, and to
perform other offices of the Ministry without the intermedling with the civil
Government.

Fourthly, that all Christians which shall live within the compass of their
Ministry, being convinced of the truth of Baptism, might by initiation, be
first congregated into a Church fellowship. And then that all others, as the
Ministry of the Gospel shall be made effectual, might after profession of
repentance, etc. be still added to each particular visible Congregation, * And
now if yet Baptism shall not be thought fit to be an initia^ion into the
Church, which doubtlebe is the ordinance of Christ, of which no Christian ought
to be ashamed, for if he had commanded a greater thing, should it not have been
obeyed, much more then wash and be clean, however let such as are convinced be
permitted their Liberty, and let a public profession at least of repentance
from dead works etc. be a note of distinction from the multitude, that so there
being an agreement iu all things else* there may be an harmonious Communion in
this Nation, in all the Churches of the Saints.
according to the several divisions, either of Parishes or places equally
divided by authority of Magistracy, All others, without such a profession and
way of admittance, to be accounted as without.

Fifthly that besides the public Directory for worship, and ordinance of
public preaching for converting of men, some other day might be permitted, or
weekly allowed, answerable to the first practice for the meeting of the Saints
in the participation of Ordinances, as also for an orderly and decent exercise
of each others gifts, that so by frequent custom their wits through exercise
might discern things that differ, that so upon very good experience had of the
manifold wisdom of God seen in the Saints, they might not hastily (as they do
now in some Churches otherwise commendable) choose out their Officers,
especially the Pastors, publicly to preach, which might successively supply
the place of those that should decease, or otherwise be employed.

Sixthly, that all doubtful points about the Trinity or others, might by fair
and meek disputes especially writing be endeavored to be cleared to vulgar
understandings, as things not to be i^posed without a clear conviction, for
writing is more advantageous in that many times for want of boldness,
quickness of wit, strength of memory, distempered passions, or present
assistance, the truth has been suspended, and the contrary error retained,
when by writing such defaults in nature by deliberation may be prevented, and
as for enforcing, it ought not to be for these reasons, in that all Intelects
are not created of one size, all have not one and the same outward means, not
the same exercise, not the same impediments to hinder, not the same internal
divine Assistance, not alike in darkness through negligence, prejudice,
willfulness. Lastly, all are not by reason thereof given up to ajudiciary Upon
which ground it were to be wished the civil State first secured, liberty of
conscience in matters of faith may be no more bought and sold either in England
or Ireland. This I speak not out of love to Popery, hateful to God and good
men, but out of love to this truth that gives Christ this honor to destroy the
man of sin, by the word of his mouth, and brightness of his glory, it is
permission then not a toleration is desired, as the best way also to a civil
peace.
blindness.

Seventhly, that such Ministers that are employed for the publication of the
Gospel, out of some public Stock, might have an equal and considerable
allowance, that so they may give themselves wholly to the work of the ministry.
These and other things seriously pondred and put in practice, it would I
believe suddenly put an end to all our differences, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, it being according to our Covenant, a government indeed the
nearest to the word of God, and the best Reformed Churches, wherein all the
faithful by what nicknames soever distinguished, ought thereunto unanimously
to accord; and as for all those persons that hold Tenants destructive to known
principles, or a common profession of faith, that in every thing should be
clear not doubtful, are not at first (in any Congregation to be admitted) or if
corrupted after by Excommunication cast out* where they remain til
manifestation of repentance, (as Heathens and Publicans) which yet still had a
propriety in what was theirs in outward things, but if any such persons shall
yet pertinaciously maintain such opinions, contrary to the light of nature,
reason, and the plain letter of the Scripture, to the disturbance of the
public peace, they are under the power of the Magistrate to punish.

But to conclude, these things being of so great importance, although for
brevity sake, I can but touch each particular here inserted. Let us every one
now in our several places and callings lay aside all envy and bitterness,
superfluity of naughtiness, that so through meekness and love, we may promote
the good of Church and State, so shall God be our King and dwell amongst us,
and bless us, so that we need not to fear if the whole earth were gathered
together against us, since he is an all-sufficient refuge to his people, as by
good experience we have already found, but if we still go on perversely, and
oppose him in making factions to carry on private Interests, against his
peculiar Interest, which is the good and welfare of this Church and State, in
the behalf of his Saints, he will certainly break us to pieces, so as we shall
be a scorn and by word to Nations. O then that our governors would act their
part herein, for who knows but they might be distinguished and separated thus
unexpectedly from their brethren, and exalted to the high place of judicature
for such a time, and season, and work as this, which if they shall not now as
wise and godly men improve, they and their houses shall certainly perish: when
yet deliverance shall come to Gods people some other way.

Secondly, I wish also that all Royallists which has seen the hand of God
lifted up against them and their King, not withstanding all fair glosses on
foul matters, would now sit down and consider these are the days of Christ's
exaltation in his Saints, to whom belongs, not only the Kingdom, but the
greatness of the Kingdom, for ever and ever.

Thirdly, I desire that all Levellers, which in most of their requests has
been already satisfied, that they would not now go about to destroy, what
formerly they have endeavored to That is to say the Council of State, and the
Parliament, which if dissolved before security of a new election, may be
dangerous.
build; but rather quietly sit down and see what gradually God will do amongst
us.

Fourthly, That all Presbyters that are so violent for a Government, as indeed
one there ought to be, would comply in this, which is conceived to be nearest
to the Word of God, which in many particulars agrees with that by them held
forth. And then

Fifthly, By this, I suppose, our Brethren of Scotland, that cry up the
Covenant, as a thing not in any humane power to dissolve, will be satisfied,
since Sectaries, by them so spoken against, are in the right way suppressed,
yet is that which they call through ignorance, heresy, the true way of worshipping
the God of our Fathers,

But I wish they had alike performed the Convenant with us, the letter of which
is either conditional in referrence to the King or other Delinquents, or with
restrictions, touching Reformation in the Church, etc. besides, why not in man
to dissolve? Since that which is not in his lawful power to do: namely rashly
to mix sacred things with profane, must needs be in his power upon more
serious thoughts to undo, neither is there any condition to make this Covenant
perpetual as I read in the fame. But surely Scotland will no: through their
sense of the Covenant pick a quarrel, and ungratefully invade their brethren in
England, which if, the Lord who has showed himself on our side, will again I
doubt nor decide the controversy. Lastly, By such Government the civil State
will be settled, Antichrist destroyed, profane converted, the Gentiles
fullness accomplished, the Jews through emulation thereat restored, and so
then Christ's second coming will be hastened. Even so come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

FINIS

