TENDER Counsel and Advice, By Way of EPISTLE To all those who are Sensible of
their DAY of VISITATION, And who have Received the Call of the Lord By the
Light and Spirit of his SON in their Hearts, to partake of the Great Salvation,
wherever scattered throughout the World; Faith, Hope and Charity, which
overcome the World; be multiplied among you.

By William Penn.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street: 1695.

TENDER Counsel and Advice By Way of EPISTLE To all those who are sensible of
the DAY of their Visitation, etc.
My Dearly Beloved Friends,
WHO are sensible of the Day of your Visitation, by the Light of the Lord Jesus
in your Hearts, and who have gladly received the holy Testimony thereof, by
which you have beheld the great Apostasy, that is in the World, from the Life,
Power and Spirit of God, and the gross Degeneracy, that is amongst those called
Christians, from the Purity, Self-denial, and holy Example of Christ Jesus, and
his Primitive Followers; and how Pride, Lust, and Vanity reign, and how
Christendom is become a Cage of Unclean Birds: Who have mourned under the sense
thereof, and have cried in your Souls, How long, how long, how long, O Lord God
holy and true, will it be, ere thou take to thy self thy great power and
reignest! To whom the World is become a burden, and the Vanities and Glory of
it but vexation of Spirit: Who despise the things that are seen, which are
Temporal, for the sake of the things that are not seen, which are Eternal:
Whose Eyes look through and beyond Time and Mortality, to that Eternal City,
whose Builder and Maker is God: Whose daily Cries and Travails are to follow
Jesus in the way of Regeneration; to live as Pilgrims in this World, for the
sake of that Glory, which shall hereafter be revealed, that can never fade
away, that you may attain unto the Eternal Rest of God: To you, my dear
Friends, to you it is, that the God and Father of him that was dead, and is
alive, and lives for evermore, Christ Jesus, the faithful and true Witness,
who has loved and visited my Soul, has now moved upon my Spirit to write, and
visit you with this Epistle. Receive it then, and with it the endeared
Salutation of that Love and Life which are not of this World, but overcome the
World. Great and frequent are my Travails for you, that you may persevere, and
not faint, but endure to the end; that you may obtain that glorious Salvation
and Redemption, that is in Christ Jesus. Yea, for this are my Knees bended
before the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, that you may be entirely kept, that
you may so run, as you may obtain, and so fight as you may overcome; that an
Immortal Crown and Kingdom may be your Portion, when all Sins and Sorrows shall
be done away.

And that this you may do, hear my Exhortation to you in the Spirit of Truth.
Dwell in the sense, that God has begotten in your Hearts by the Light and
Spirit of his Son, who is now in his Son, in you, reconciling you unto himself.
Watch, that this blessed sense be preserved in you, and it will preserve you.
For where the holy sense is lost, Profession, even of the highest Truths,
cannot preserve against the Enemies Assaults; but the Gates of Hell will
prevail against them, and the Enemy's Darts will wound them, and they will be
carried again Captive by the Power of his Temptations. Wherefore, I say again,
live and abide in that Light and Life which has visited you, and begotten an
holy sense in your Hearts, and which has made Sin exceeding sinful to you, and
you weary and heavy-laden under the burden of it: And has raised in you a
Spiritual Travail, Hunger and Thirst after your Savior, that he might deliver
you; that ye might be filled with the Righteousness of his Kingdom, that is
without end.

Dear Friends, God has breathed the Breath of Life in you, and in measure you
live; for dead Men and Women do not Hear, or Hunger, or Thirst; neither do they
feel Weights and Burdens as you do. The Day of the Lord is dawned upon you, and
it burns as an Oven; you know it; and all Works of Iniquity are as Stubble
before it: You feel it so, they cannot stand before the Lord: His Judgments
take hold of them, and consume them. O love his Judgments! that with those of
Old you may say, In the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee,
the desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. With our
Souls have we desired thee in the Night, yea with our Spirits within us will we
seek thee early: For when thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of
the World will learn righteousness. Part, part with all, My dear Friends, that
is for Judgment, let him arise in your Hearts, that his and your Enemies may be
scattered: That you may witness Him to be stronger in you, then he that is in
the World. If the desire of your Soul be to his Name, and the remembrance of
him, you will love his Judgments and abide there, the days he allows for your
purification. Behold his blessed Visitation is upon you: His Angel has Saluted
you, and his holy Spirit has overshadowed you; he has begotten holy desires
in you, I pray that they may never be extinguished, and that you may never
faint. Wherefore look to Jesus that is the Author, that he may be the Finisher.
I Testify for God, he has appeared to you; yea, he has said to you as to
Andrew, Philip, etc. follow me: And I say unto you, follow him: Come and see
where he dwells; do not lose Sight of him, let him be lifted up in you, and
your Eye be to him: Who, wherever he is lifted up, draws all such after him.
And this is the reason, why People are not now drawn after Christ, because he
is not lifted up in their Hearts, he is not exalted in their Souls; he is
Rejected, Oppressed, Crucified, and Buried; yea they have Rolled a Stone upon
him, and set Guards, that he should not rise in them to Judge them.

But blessed are you, whose Eyes have seen one of the days of the Son of Man:
Blessed are you, at whose Doors he has knocked, to whose Heart he has
appeared, who have received his holy Visitation, who believe it is he, and not
another; and therefore have said in your Hearts, with Nathaniel of old, thou
art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel; and with Thomas, my Lord and
my God. O what have you, my dear Friends, to do, but to keep with him for ever!
For whither should you go, the words of Eternal Life dwell with him? He is full
of Grace, and full of Truth, and of his Fullness ye have received Grace for
Grace. And this is that Grace which brings Salvation to all that receive it,
embrace it, and will be led by it. For it teaches such, as it did the Ancient
Christians, to deny all ungodliness, and the world's lusts, and to live soberly
and godlikely in this present evil world, looking for that blessed hope, and
glorious appearing of the great God, and their Savior Jesus Christ, who has
given himself for them to deliver them from all sin, and to redeem them from
all iniquity. You know that you are bought with a price, now you feel it, and
in measure discern the preciousness of that Price which has bought you,
namely, the Life of the Dear Son of God. Grieve not his Spirit that is ready to
Seal you to the Day of your perfect Redemption: But give up your Bodies, Souls
and Spirits to his service, whose they are, that they may be ordered by him to
his Glory.

I write not to you as to the World, for you are called out of the World, by
him that has overcome the World; that as he is not of this World, so you may
not be of this World. Come then out of it more and more, out of the Nature, out
of the Spirit, out of the Fruits, and out of the Fashions of the World! They
are all for the Fire. Christ said, the World loves its own. Search with the
Light of the Lord Jesus, what there is in you, that the World owneth and
loves? For that is its own? And consider what it is, that the World is
offended with? Not that that comes from it self, of its own making and
inventing, but that which crosses its Inventions, that is of another Nature,
and springs from another Root. O be not conformed to the Fashions of this
World, that please the Lust, which grieveth the Spirit of God; but be ye
renewed in your Minds; and being so within, you will be as a new People without.

They that have been truly with Christ, are quickly discovered, they cannot be
hid. So it was of old; the Jews said of the Disciples, these men have been with
Jesus; their Speech and Carriage bewrayed them; their outsides were not like
the outsides of other Men; they were not current with the Fashions and Customs
of that time. Nor can they that have been with Jesus, conform to the vain
Fashions and Customs of this World; wherefore be not you, in any sort, of this
World, but give diligence to make your holy high Calling and Election sure: For
many are called, and few are chosen; and the reason is, they are slothful
Servants, they hide their Talent in a Napkin, neglect the Day of their
Visitation, and work not out their Salvation with fear and trembling: And then
the Night overtaketh them, in which they can never work the works of
Repentance; and the things that belong to their peace are hid from their Eyes
for ever.

But the Lord forbid, that it should be so with any of you! No, no, I hope,
yea, I believe better things of you. And I am assured, that as you keep your
Hearts chastely to the Light and Grace; that with which you have been visited of
the Lord; you shall be kept to Eternal Salvation. For they are saved, that walk
in the Light: Into the Light the Enemy cannot come; for the Light is Christ
Jesus, and the Enemy has no part or place in him; he is driven out from the
holy place by transgression, and he is now a fugitive from Heaven; but he goes
up and down the Earth, seeking whom he may devour, whom he can catch and carry
away with his baits and Snares.

Wherefore Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, that is, the earthly
Inhabitants, such as love and live in the earthly Nature; for all such shall be
a prey to him, he shall have power over them, and keep up his Kingdom in them.
But those that receive and abide in Christ Jesus, the Light, Life and Truth,
are out of his reach; they are in the munition of Rocks, under the pavilion of
the Lord, and in the safe Ark of the most High God. However, he is permitted to
tempt and try, till the time shall come, that he is not only trodden under
Foot, but also bound and cast into the Lake, that burns with Fire and
Brimston. And he is the greatest Enemy to those that turn their back upon him;
wherefore he watches to surprise them, that he might take them at unawares,
and triumph over their failings. And for that reason Christ Jesus preached the
Watch earnestly, and with repetition to his Disciples.

Now my dear Friends, there be several things (or, the Enemy in several
Appearances) will attend you in this holy march, you are making to the Eternal
Land of rest; of which I would caution you, that you may none of you make
Shipwreck of any of those holy beginnings, you have experienced by the Light
and Spirit of the Lord. Beware of vain thoughts, for they oppress and
extinguish the true sense. These vain thoughts arise from the Enemy's
presentations of objects to the mind, and the Mind's looking upon them, till
they have made their impressions upon the mind, and influenced the mind into a
love of them. This is a false liberty, a dangerous, ye a destructive liberty to
the holy Sense, that God has begotten in any. For, as that is not received but
hindered by such thoughts, so it is not improved, but destroyed by them: The
divine Sense in the Soul is begotten by the Lord: It Is his Life and Spirit, his
holy Breath and Power, that quickneth the Soul, and makes it sensible of its
own state and of God's will; and that raises fervent desires in it to be
Eternally blessed. This is that which Satan rages at; he fears his Kingdom,
he finds that he is come that will cast him out of his possessions. He cries
out, Why art thou come to torment me before my time? He is the Father of vain
thoughts, he begets them in the mind, on purpose to draw off the mind from
that Sense, and to exercise it in variety of conceptions, in a self-liberty of
thinking and imagining concerning Persons and things. Here he offers his
Baits, and lays his Snares, and never fails to Catch and defile the
unwatchful Soul.

Now, if you should say, what are these vain thoughts? I tell you my Friends,
All those thoughts and conceptions, that either bring not Real Profit to the
Soul, or that Grieve, Hurt or Oppress that holy Sense, which is begotten of God
in the Soul. And that by which Thoughts are to be examined is the Light of
Christ Jesus: For as whatever may be known of God is manifested within man, for
there God has shown it him, as says the Apostle Paul to the Romans; So what
ever is reproved, is made manifest by the light; for whatever makes manifest,
is light, says he to the Ephesians. By this Light of Christ Jesus examine your
own Thoughts; see whence they rise, from whence they come, and what they tend
to. O Friends, here is a Mystery; and the Evil One works here in a Mystery!
For where he cannot prevail to draw out the Mind from its sensible Habitation
to embrace his Representations of old Lusts and Pleasures, that are wicked in
themselves, he will present you with lawful Objects, your outward Enjoyments,
Business, and Calling, and steal in upon your Minds in the Crowd of these
Lawful things, and there lay his Snares, hid and covered, and at unawares catch
you.

My Dear Friends, Blessed are they that see Jesus their Captain, going before
them, and counselling and leading them in all their outward and lawful
Concerns, that they offend not. For, my Friends, this know, you may unlawfully
think of lawful things, either in thinking on them unseasonably, mark that,
when your Souls should be wholly retired, and exercised in the Lord's Light, to
feel his presence, in which is Heavenly Life: Or in thinking on lawful things
carelessly, not with regard to your Guide; he that has bought you throughout
with his own precious Blood, that he might have the Government of your Bodies,
Souls and Spirits; that is, of your Bodily concerns, as well as of the things
relating to your Souls and Spirits. This prevents much harm and mischief in
Business and Families, and preserves the Divine Sense that God has begotten,
and the Creature in it: So that its Fellowship and Peace with the Lord runs
as a River, it is not stopped or hindered by the designs of the Enemy. Or lastly,
in thinking on lawful things excessively, too much, more than is needful,
without limits, thereby gratifying the fleshly Mind, which is Enmity with God,
and that Sense which he begets in the Soul. O the Mountains that are raised,
by such vain Thoughts, betwixt God and the Soul! How does the Soul come under
an Eclipse, lose sight, and at last all Sense of the Living God, like Men
drowned in great Waters? And thus many have lost their Condition, and grown
unsensible; and then questioned all former Experiences, if they were not mere
Imaginations; till at last they arrived at Atheism, denying and deriding God
and his Work, and those that kept their Integrity: For whom is reserved the
Blackness of Darkness for ever, unless they timely and truly Repent.

But when this subtle Enemy of Man's Salvation sees that he cannot make you
bow to the Glory of this World, that all his Snares that he lays in the
things that are seen, which are Temporal, are discovered and broken; and that
your Eyes are directed to those things that are Eternal, then will he turn
Accuser. He will aggravate your Sins, and plead the impossibility of their
Remission: He will seem to act the Advocate for the Justice of God, that he
might cast you into Despondency, that you may doubt of Deliverance and
Salvation. Many are the Thoughts, with which he perplexeth the Sons and
Daughters of Men: But this know, that he was a Liar from the beginning. For the
Lord does not visit the Souls of any to destroy them, but to save them. For
this end has he sent his Son a Light into the World; and they that bring their
Deeds to it, are not of the Devil, who hates the Light. Neither does the Lord
cause People to Hunger and Thirst after him, and not fill them with his good
things. Be assured, my Friends, where ever the Lord has begotten Desires after
him, and where ever Sin is become exceeding sinful, yea a burden to the Soul,
the Devil's Kingdom is shaken, the Prince of this World is begun to be Judged,
and God is at Work for the Redemption of that Soul. Hearken not to the Voice of
the Serpent, for that lost your first Parents their blessed Paradise: And with
the same Subtle and Lying Spirit he would hinder you from returning into
Paradise. But when he is herein disappointed, he shifteth his temptation, and
presents another temptation, viz. that though you have begun well, yet ye
will never be able to hold out to the end. That the Temptations are so many,
and the Enemies so strong, they are not to be overcome by you; and that it were
better, never to profess such high things, than to fall short of them; this
will but bring Reproach to the way, and the People of it. Again, that it is
Curiosity, and Spiritual Pride, and Conceitedness, for you to be thought better
then others, with the like Suggestions, on purpose to stagger your Resolutions,
and weaken your Faith. Ah! he is a Devil still, a Liar and a Destroyer: Look
not to him, but to Jesus, who has called you. Keep but your Eye to him, of
whom the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness was a Figure, and he shall Cure you
of all Diseases, of all Wounds and Stingings of Serpents and Scorpions, etc.
that may attend you in the Wilderness-travail, which is the hour of your
Temptation. God is exalting him, in you, a Savior; therefore is he manifested,
viz. to destroy Sin. Yea, stronger is he that is in you, than he that is in the
World: He is able to bind the strong Man, and cast him out; do but believe
truly in him, and cleave to him. Remember there were evil Spies of old, those
that brought false nitelegence, that Canaan was a pleasant Land, but the Way
impassible; but the Faithful Entered and Inherited. Keep therefore in the
righteous Life of Jesus, and walk in his holy Light, and you shall be preserved
through all exercises and difficulties unto the Eternal Canaan, the Land of
rest. Neither Wonder at these things, that temptations attend you, or that the
Lord tries and proves you, it is the way of all that are gone to God. For
even Jesus was tempted and tried, and is therefore become our Captain, because
he overcame. Neither be ye cast down, because the Lord sometimes seems to
hide his Face from you, that you feel not allways that Joy and Refreshment,
that you sometimes enjoy. I know what work the Enemy makes of these
withdrawings of the Lord. Perhaps he will insinuate, that God has deserted you
in his displeasure, that you must never expect to see him, that he will never
come again: And by these and the like strategems, he will endeavor to shake
your Faith and Hope, and distract you with Fear, and to beget great jealousies
and doubts in you; and by impatience and infidelity, Frustrate your good
beginnings. But though David said of Old, in the distress of his Soul, One day
shall I fall by the Hand of Saul, yet he overcame him, and had the Crown. Yea,
the Lord Jesus himself cried out in the agony of the Cross, my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me! Nevertheless he gloriously Triumphed over all, and lead
Captivity Captive, for the joy that was set before him: Which joy is bebore
you; it is the mark of the price of your great and holy calling. Wherefore
faint not, neither murmur, if your Spiritual Moses seem to withdraw a while
from you. Do not you make Images in his absence, neither wax Wanton; but
possess your Souls in holy fear and patience, waiting with holy Reverence and
Diligence for his appearance, who is your victorious Leader.

All these things are for your good, that proud Flesh may be debased, and that
the Soul may be redeemed. Wherefore bear the hand of the Lord; whom he loves,
he Chastneth; his Anger lasts not for ever, but his Mercys endure for ever.
Shrink not from the pure operations of his holy word, let it divide asunder
between the Soul and Spirit, the Joints and Marrow in you; suffer your right
Hands to be Cut off, and your right Eyes to be plucked out, that do offend, let
not the pain scare you. O bear the pure searchings of this Heavenly word! Yea,
if your minds be stayed in it, you will find it to be a word of Patience, which
will keep you; for all Virtue is in it. Keep it, and be still: It is good, said
one of Old, that a Man should both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of
God. Yea it it is good for a Man that he bear the Yoke in his youth (this is
your youth) and such an one sits alone, and keeps Silence, because he has
born it upon him. Ah blessed are they that bear this holy Yoke, who are come to
this Silence, who Dye daily; that not they, but Christ may Live and Rule in
them; therefore hear him, and take up his Cross, and follow him. Follow him,
keep him Company, he has beaten the Path, and trod the Way, start not aside
at his Cup, neither shun his Baptism: Go with him to Caiaphas, to Pilate, and
to the Cross; dye with him to the World, and you shall rise with him unto Life
Eternal. Honor, Glory and Immortality are at the end of this Holy Race! O that
you may run it with Cheerfulness and Perseverance!

But this is not the utmost Strategem of the Enemy; he has yet a more
plausible, and a more dangerous Device wherewith to destroy the holy Sense that
God has quickened, where he sees these Temptations resisted, and that he
cannot hinder a Religious Work in the Soul, by any of his Baits taken from the
things that are seen; and that is, his drawing you into Imaginations of God,
and Christ, and Religion; and into Religious Duties, not in God's way or time;
nor with Christ's Spirit. Here he is transformed into the Appearance of an
Angel of Light, and would seem Religious now, a Saint, yea, a Leader into
Religion, so that he may but keep him out of his Office, whose right it is to
teach, prepare, enable, and lead his Children with his holy Power and Spirit.
Yea, if he can but keep the Creature's Will alive, he knows there is a ground
for him to work upon; a place that he can enter, and in which his Seed will
grow. If this Will of Man standing, he knows that the Will of God cannot be
done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. O this Will is God's Enemy, yea, the
Soul's Enemy; and all Will Worship arises hence: Yea, it is the Offspring of
the Serpent and of the Will of Man; and it can never please God. Let all beware
of this; God is a Spirit, and he will be Worshipped in his own Spirit, in his
own Life. The Worship of God stands in the Will of God; and is not brought
forth of the Will of the Flesh, or of the Will of Man. Remember that the Word
came not to Esau, the First-birth, the Hunter that stayed not at Home; but to
Jacob, the plain Man, he that dwelt in Tents; to him came the Word of the Lord,
that dwelt in a still and quiet Habitation. For in the true silence is God's
Word heard, into which the Hunting Nature of Esau, the First-birth, can never
come. It can never stand still, and therefore it can never see the Salvation of
God. Against this Nature watch, and know Jacob, that inherits the Birthright;
the Election of God (though now a Worm) to wrestle and prevail. Then Worm
Jacob, is Israel a Prince, to whom belongs the Statutes and the Ordinances. The
Word came to Jacob, and the Statutes to Israel: Here is Dominion, Government,
Exaltation: This is the Lot of Worm Jacob. Wait therefore, till the Angel move
upon the Waters, before you step one step. Are ye Followers of the Lamb, that
has visited you, the Captain of your Salvation? Run not in your own Wills,
wait for his Word of Command, do nothing of thy own Head and Contriving, yet do
all with diligence that he requires. Remember what became of them of Old, that
offered false Fire: O stay, till a Coal from his Holy Altar touch your Hearts
and your Lips. Jesus told his Mother at the Marriage in Cana in Galilee, his
time was not come: He rejected the Will in her, and staid, till his time was
come, that is, his Father's time, in whose Hands are the Times and Seasons:
Whose Will he came to do, and not his own: Leaving us therein a Blessed
Example, that we should also follow his steps, that is, not to attempt to
perform even things of God in our own Wills, nor out of God's Season and Time,
which is the best: For in his Seasons, he is with us; but in our own Seasons
and Wills he withdraws himself from us. And this is the Cause, that the
Nations Worshippers have little sense of God in their Hearts, and that their
Priests cry out against inward Sense; Lest the People should go alone, and come
to a more acceptible Worship.

My dear Friends, as you would enjoy God's Presence, Love and Life, and be
acceptable with him, wait in his holy Light and Spirit that has visited you,
against these strategems of Satan, and Wake not your Beloved before his time:
Watch against the will, that Instrument of Satan, and Enemy of God's Glory, and
your own Comfort. Let it be Bridled, Subjected and kept under Christ's Yoke,
yea, subdued, that the will of God may be done in you and by you, which
brings glory to the Lord, and Eternal peace to the Soul. One Sigh, rightly
begotten, out-weigheth a whole Volume of self-made Prayers: For that which is
born of Flesh, is Flesh, and reaches not God's Kingdom, he regards it not;
and all that is not born of the Spirit is Flesh. But a Sigh, or a Groan,
arising from a living Sense of God's work in the Heart, it Pearceth the Clouds,
it enters the Heavens; yea, the Living God hears it, his regard is to it,
and his Spirit helps the Infirmity. He loves that which is of himself, and
has care over it, though as Poor, as worm Jacob. For the Cries of the Poor, and
the Sighings of the Needy will I arise, says the Lord: The Poor in Spirit,
that has parted with all, that they may win Christ; that need him only, and
Seek him above all: Who have no helper in the Earth, but have denied all
earthly helps, that he might bring and work their Salvation for them. And as
you are not to run in your own wills, nor to offer up Sacrifices of your own
preparing, so have a care how you touch with those that do; how you bow to
their wills, and join with their Sacrifices. For all these things greatly help
to extinguish the Divine sense begotten in your Hearts by the word of Life. And
as you are faithful to the Light and Spirit of Christ, which gives you to
discern and relish between that which stands in your own will, and the will
and motion of the Spirit of God in your selves; so will you by the same Light
discern and savor between that which proceeds from the will of Man, and the
will and motions of the Spirit of God in others; and accordingly either to have
or not to have fellowship with them: For what has Light to do with Darkness?
Or what has Spirit to do with Flesh? Or what has Life to do with Death? For
the Grave cannot Praise thee, O Lord; Death cannot celebrate thee: They that go
down into the Pit cannot hope for thy Truth. The Living, the Living, he shall
praise thee, as does my Soul this day. This was the Testimony of the blessed
Prophet Esaiah, and it stands true for ever. According to the Prophet, Thou
have ordained peace for us, for thou have wrought all our works in us.

Wherefore I exhort you in the Spirit of Truth, and in the Counsel of the God
of Truth, keep in the Divine Sense and Watch, if you would endure to the end in
the will of God. And I say again, Touch not with Man-made Ministrys, nor
Man-made Worships, let their words be never so true: It Is but Man, it is but
Flesh, it is but the Will; and it shall have no acceptance with God, O this is
the Golden Cup of the Whore, that is gone from the leadings of the Spirit, with
which the Nations are defiled; have nothing to do with it. Keep to Christ
Jesus, God's great Light, follow him, as he shines in your Hearts, and ye will
not walk in Darkness, but have the Light of Life; not of death to Condemnation,
as in the World; but unto Life, which is Justification and Peace. And remember
that nothing brings to Christ, that comes not from Christ. Wherefore all
Ministry that comes not from Christ, God's great Prophet and High Priest to
all true-born Christians, cannot bring People to Christ. Man only gathers to
Man, to hear and believe in Man, and depend on Man: And if the Church of
Corinth sought a proof of Christ's speaking in Paul, that had begotten them,
and had wrought the Signs and Works of an Apostle in them: how much more reason
have you to demand a proof of Christ's speaking in the Priests and Ministers of
this World, who have not wrought the Signs and Works of Apostles or true
Ministers? And by what should you try them, but by the Light and Spirit of
Christ in you? Yea, it is Christ Jesus, in you, that gives you to savor, if
others speak from Christ in them. And this the Apostle refers the
Corinthians to, for a proof of Christ's speaking in him: For nothing leads to
God, but that which came from God, even Christ Jesus the Son of God. O let him
be your Vine, and know him to be your Fig Tree: Sit under his holy Teachings,
whose Doctrine shall drop as Myrrh upon your Souls: He will feed you with the
Bread of God, that comes from Heaven, that feeds and leads them thither
that feed upon it: And He is that Bread.

Therefore wait and watch unto his daily and hourly Visitations to your Souls,
and against all the Approaches of the Enemy, that so he may not take you at
unawares; but that you may be preserved from the power of his Darts, and the
force of his Temptations by the Holy Armor of Light, the defense of the
faithful Ancients: If you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of
the Land. Now is your Day, now is your Time; work while the light is with you;
for the Night comes, in which none can work. Not only the Night of Eternal
Darkness to the Wicked; but the Night of Death unto all: For in the Grave there
is no Repentance, neither can any Man there, work the Works of God. You know
the Foundation: Is he Elect? Is he Precious to you? Have ye chosen him? Yea, I
am satisfied you have: See what you build upon him. Have a care of Hay, Straw
and Stubble! Have a care of your own Wills and Spirits! Labor not for the
Bread that perishes, as all the Bread of Man's-making does: But labor you in
the Light and Strength of the Lord for the Bread that never perishes, that
Bread that comes from Heaven, that nourishes the Soul in that Life that is
heavenly, that is hid with Christ in God, the Root and Father of all Life; that
of this Fountain you may drink, that is clear and pure, that comes from the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb, and not of the muddy Puddle of Man's Invention.
There is a Bread that perishes, and there is a Drink that perishes, and Woe to
them that feed thereon, for their Souls shall perish also, if they Repent not.
But there is a Bread that never perishes, and there is a Fountain that
springs up unto Eternal Life, and Blessed are they that Feed and Drink
thereof; for they shall have Eternal Life with God. This is that which only
satisfies what is Born of God; it will feed on no other Bread, nor drink of no
other Water. I cannot but warn you all that are come to the Lord's Day, that
you cease from all other Food, from Man and Man's Will and Invention; for that
stifleth the Divine Sense, that overlayeth and kills this Heavenly Birth.
There are no Grapes to be gathered of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles: Keep to
your own Vine and Fig Tree Christ Jesus; sit under him, that you may eat of his
Fruit, which is the fruit of Life, the hidden Manna; hid from the Nature and
Spirit of this World, a Mystery thereunto. Two things consider; first, you must
wait till the Manna comes; and then you are not to be idle; you are to work;
and next, as it daily comes, so it must be daily gathered and fed upon: For
the Manna that was gathered yesterday, will not be Food for to day; it will not
keep for that use. As it was outwardly, so it is inwardly. Time past is none of
thine: It Is not what thou were, but what thou art; God will be daily looked
unto. Did thou eat yesterday? That feeds thee not to day: Therefore Jesus
taught his Disciples, and us in them, to pray for our daily Bread, for the
present sustenance, and to look no farther, but depend upon the Lord, and live
by Faith in him, that raised up Jesus from the Dead; so that the time to come
is no more ours, than the time past can be recalled.

Wherefore, Blessed are they, that fear the Lord, and confide in him, they
shall never be confounded: They shall lack no good thing; for the Lord loves
Israel, he is good unto Israel, and all that are of an upright Heart; whose
Hearts look up to Heaven, and not down to the Earth; neither love nor live in
the vain Lusts of the World. Such shall abide in his holy Tabernacle, such
shall dwell in his holy Hill, even they that walk uprightly, that work
righteousness, and speak the truth in their hearts; in whose sight a vile
person is contemned, but who honor them that fear the Lord.

O my dear Friends, I know experimentally, that this is hard to Flesh and
Blood; that which is Born of the Corruptible Seed; but that can never enter
into the Kingdom of God: That must be Crucified by Christ that has Crucified
Christ: Blood requires Blood. Wherefore give that which is for the Famine, to
the Famine: For the Fire, to the Fire: And for the Sword, to the Sword. Let all
the sinful Lusts be famisht, let the Stubble be burnt, and the Corrupt, yea,
and the Fruitless Tree that cumbereth the Ground, be cut down and cast into the
Fire. Let the work of the Lord be done in you; let him purge his Floor, and
that thoroughly; that you may come out as pure as Gold Seven times tried, fitted
for his use that has chosen you; that you may bear his Mark, and wear his
Inscription, Holiness to the Lord; so you will be Vessels of Honor, in his
House. Therefore I say, let your Houses be swept by the Judgments of the Lord,
and the little Leaven of the Kingdom leaven you in Body, Soul and Spirit, that
holy Temples you may be to his Glory. This I know, is your desire, that are on
your Travail to this Blessed Enjoyment.

Well, you believe in God, believe also in Christ the Light that has visited
you: And if you truly believe, you will not make haste: You will not make haste
out of the Hour of Judgment; you will stay the Time of your Trial and
Cleansing, that you may be as I said, as pure as Gold Seven times tried; and so
receive the Lord's Mark and Stamp, his Image and Approbation; that you may be
his throughout, in Body, Soul, and Spirit; sealed to him in an Eternal Covenant.

Dear Friends, gird up the Loins of your Minds, watch and hope to the end; be
not slothful, neither strive; despond not, nor be presumptuous: Be as little
Children; for of such is the Kingdom of God. Dispute not, neither consult with
Flesh and Blood: Let not the Prudence of this World draw you from the
simplicity, that is in Christ Jesus. Love and obey the Truth; hide his Living
Word in your Hearts, though it be as an Hammer, a Fire, a Sword, yet it
reconcileth and brings you to God, and will be sweeter to you that love it,
than is the Honey, and the Honeycomb. Fear not, but bear the Cross; yea,
without the Camp, the Camp of this World's Lusts, Glory, and False Worships.
But this know, when the Enemy cannot prevail by none of these Stratagems, if
you resist him, as the God of the World's Glory, the Prince of the Air, and the
False Prophet, then he turns Dragon; then he declares open War; then you
are Heretics, Fanatics, Enthusiasts, Seducers, Blasphemers, unworthy to live
upon the Earth. But in all these things rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for
great shall be your reward in the Kingdom of the Father. What, if your Parents
rise up against you; if your Brethren betray you; if your Companions desert and
deride you? If you become the Song of the Drunkard, and the Scorn and Merriment
of the Vile Person? Yea, though the Powers of the Earth should combine to
devour you, let not your Hearts be troubled. Shun not the Cross, but despise
the Shame, and cast your Care upon the Lord, who will be afflicted with you in
all your Afflictions: In the Fire he will be with you, and in the Water he will
not forsake you. O let your Eye be to him, whose Name is as a strong Tower, the
Sanctuary of the Righteous in all Ages; that you may be able to say in your
Hearts with David of old, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I
fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Though an
Host should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear; though War should rise
against me, in this will I be confident. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my Life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. For
in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his Pavilion, he shall set me upon a
Rock. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. I
had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land
of the Living. Wait on the Lord, be of good Courage, and he shall strengthen
thine Heart: Wait I say on the Lord.

O my dear Friends, let it be your daily and hourly work to wait upon God. How
often does David speak of waiting upon God? he felt the sweetness of it;
therefore retire into your holy Chamber: Be still, and the Lord will speak
comfortably unto you. Blessed are they, that wait upon him! whose Expectations
are only from him: For though the youth shall faint and be weary, and the young
men shall utterly fall, They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their
strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint. I waited, says David, patiently upon the
Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry. And this was his Testimony,
Behold, the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, to deliver their Soul
from Death, and to keep them alive in Famine: For the Lord is nigh unto them
that are of a broken heart, and saves such, as be of a contrite Spirit: David
knew it, therefore, he could speak it.

O my dear Friends, who are compassed about with many Tribulations; the Lord
God, your Staff and Strength is near you to sustain you. Have ye born the holy
reproach of Jesus, and despised the Shame of his Cross, and did he ever desert
you? Be not cast down, though to the Eye of Reason there seems none to help,
no, not one to save: Though Enemies within, and Enemies without, Encamp
themselves about you; though Pharaoh and his Host pursue you, and great
difficulties be on each hand of you, and the dismal Red Sea be before you;
stand still, make no Bargains for your selves, let all Flesh be silent before
the Lord, and his Arm shall bring you Salvation. Yea, when you are ready to go
down into the Pit, that your Throat is dry with crying, and your Eyes seem to
fail with waiting, his Salvation shall spring as the Morning; because his
Mercies are to all Generations, and that the Seed of Jacob never sought his
face in vain. The poor Man cries, says David; What poor Man was this? He that
is poor in his own Eyes; that has no Helper in the Earth, but God. This poor
Man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his Troubles. Our
Souls, said the Righteous of old, waited for the Lord, for he is our Help, and
our Shield for ever.

Wherefore, my dear Friends, be not you discomforted, for there is no new thing
happens unto you: It Is the Ancient Path of the Righteous: For thy sake, says
David, have I born reproach; I am become a stranger to my Brethren, and an
Alien unto my Mother's Children: When I wept, and chastned my Soul with
fasting, that was to my reproach. I made Sackcloth also my Garment, and I
became a proverb to them. They that sat in the Gate, spoke against me; and I
was the Song of the Drunkards. Save me O God, for the Waters are come in unto
my Soul: And the Water Floods are ready to swallow me up. They persecute him,
whom thou have smitten; and they grieve those, whom thou have wounded. Do you
not know this, Dear Friends, are not your Tears become a Reproach, Your Fasts a
Wonder, your Paleness a Derision, your Plainness a Proverb, and your Serious
and Retired Conversation a byword? Yea, when the Lord has Wounded, have not
they also grieved? And when the Lord has smitten you, have not they mocked?
But this was David's joy, the Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want: He
restores my Soul, he leads me in the paths of righteousness for his Name's
sake; he makes me to lie down in green Pastures: He leads me beside the
Still waters. Yea, though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of death, I
will fear no Evil; for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff they Comfort me:
Who was the Comforter and preserver of Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, that
refused to obey the King's Command against the Commandment of God: They would
not bow to his Image; but rather chose the Fiery Furnace, then to commit
Idolatry, or bow to another thing, then to the Living God. Did not we cast
Three Men into the midst of the Fire? said Nebuchadnezzar, Lo I see Four Men
loose, walking in the midst of the Fire, and they have no hurt: And the form of
the Fourth is like the Son of God. O my Friends, the Fire obeys him, as well
as the Winds and Seas: All Power is given to the Son of God, who is given to
you for your Salvation. Well, Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, the King calls
out of the Fire, and they have no harm; though the Mighty Men, that cast them
into the Fiery Furnace, were consumed. The God of Shadrach, Mesach, and
Abednego, is magnified by the King's decree, and Shadrach, Mesach, and
Abednego, are by the King highly Preferred. Here is the end of faithfulness;
here is the blessing of perseverance God will bring honor to his Name, through
the Patience and Integrity of his People.

And it was this Son of God that preserved Daniel in the Lions Den; it was his
Voice, that David said divides the Flames of Fire; he rides upon the Winds,
he sits upon the Floods. The Voice of the Lord is Powerful, the Voice of the
Lord is full of Majesty: They that trust in him, shall never be confounded.
Blessed are they whose God is the Lord: For he is a present help in the Needful
time of trouble. The angel of the Lord Encampeth round about them that fear
him, and he delivers them. O taste, and see, that the Lord is good: Blessed
is the Man that trusts in him. O fear the Lord, for there is no want to them
that fear him. The Young Lions shall lack, and the Old Lions suffer Hunger; but
they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. Many are the
Afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all; for
the Lord redeemeth the Souls of his Servants, and none of them that trust in
him, shall be made desolate.

For which Cause, my dear Friends, cast away every Weight, and every Burden,
and the Sin that does so easily beset you. Neither look at the Enemies strength,
nor at your own weakness; but look unto Jesus the blessed Author of your
Convincement and Faith: The mighty One, on whom God has laid help, for all
those that believe in his Name, receive his Testimony, and live in his
Doctrine; who said to his dear followers of Old; Be of good Cheer, I have
overcome the World. Fear not little Flock; it is the Father's good pleasure, to
give you a Kingdom: And they that endure to the end, shall be saved. I will not
leave you Comfortless, said he, I will come to you; he that is with you, shall
be in you. This was the Hope of their glory, the Foundation of their building,
which stands sure. And though sorrow comes Overnight, yet joy shall come in
the Morning. Ye shall Weep and Lament, said Jesus, but the World shall rejoice;
and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, and their
rejoicing into howling. And Lo I am with you to the end of the World. Be ye
therefore encouraged in the holy Way of the Lord; wait diligently for his daily
Manifestations unto your Souls, that you may be strengthened in your inward Man,
with Might and Power, to do the Will of God on Earth, as it is done in Heaven.
O watch, that you enter not into temptation: Yea, watch unto Prayer, that you
enter not into temptation, and that you fall not by the temptation. Christ said
to Peter, Can not thou watch one hour? Every one has an Hour of Temptation
to go through; and this is the Hour, that every one is to watch. Jesus the
Captain of our Salvation was under great Temptations; he was sad unto Death; he
did sweat drops of Blood; but he watched, he prayed, he groaned, yea, he cried
with strong cries: But through Suffering overcame: And remember how in the
Wilderness he was tempted, but the Angels of the Lord ministered to him. So they
that follow him in the way of the Tribulations and Patience of his Kingdom,
God's Angel shall minister unto them all: Yea, he will keep them in the Hour of
Temptation: He will carry their Heads above the Waves, and deliver them from
the devouring Floods.

Wherefore finally, my Friends, I say unto you, in the Name of the Lord, Be of
good cheer! Look to Jesus, and fear not Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils:
But be Valiant for the Truth on Earth, Love not your Lives unto the Death, and
you shall receive a Crown of Life and Glory; which the God of the Fathers, the
God of the Prophets, the God of the Apostles, and the God of the Martyrs and
true Confessors of Jesus; yea, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
shall give unto all those that keep the pure Testimony of his Son in their
Hearts, and patiently and faithfully endure to the end.

Now to him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless
before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy: To the only Wise God, our
Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and ever, Amen.

I am your Friend that sincerely Loves you, and earnestly Travails for your
Redemption, William Penn.


FINIS.

