Penotus (...) OR THE Alchymists Enchiridion. In Two Parts. The First,
Containing excellent experienced Chemical Receipts and Balsoms for healing and
curing most Diseases incident to the Body of Man, etc. The Second Part,
Containing the Practica Mirabilis for the accomplishing and obtaining [from the
Beginning to the End] the White and Red Elixir, which whosoever understands,
need not read any other Book. As also several Chemical Axioms. Together with a
small Treatise by way of Dialogue, written by that very ancient Philosopher
Arislaus, concerning the Philosophers Stone. To which Second Part is prefixed
an Apologetick Introduction, written in Answer to a Scurrilous Libel, published
in Latin in Germany by D. Nicholaus Guibertus, in which Answer is maintained
both by Reason and Authority against the said Libel, the possibility of making
an Elixir for Transmutation of Lead, and all other imperfect Metals into pure
Gold and Silver.

The whole written in Latin long since by that Famous Helvetian Bernardus
Penotus a Portu Sanctae Mariae Aquitani, and now faithfully Englished and
Claused By B. P. Philalethes.

London, Printed for John Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1692.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE Intelligent READER.
Courteous Reader,
YOU have here Englished the Quintessence of a Book, which, [were I not to
mention the Worth, Learning and Fame of its Author] will (or I am much
mistaken) sufficiently commend its self.

A Book long since published in an Elegant Latin Style at Helvetia, and which
has ever since its Publication been famous for its Excellency amongst Wise and
Judicious Men.

The Author of which (Bernardus Penotus a Portu Sanctae Mariae Aquitani) I
question not but very few Students in this Noble Art are ignorant of: A Man who
after Academick Education, spent the best part of his Life in Traveling, by
which he not only learned the Customs of Nations, but also [he having the
Happiness of Converse with several Adepti] Learned by Experience and other
ways, many excellent and rare Receipts, and (which is the Secret of Secrets)
the Knowledge of the great Elixir, as may be understood by reading the Book.

I say no more of the Author, peruse his Works diligently, and you will taste his
Wisdom and Parts.

I have divided this Treatise into two Parts, the first whereof contains
Receipts and Balsoms of excellent Virtues for preservation of Life, and curing
Diseases, all which our Author says he experienced: (And sure it is below a Man
of Parts and Learning, much more a Man of Integrity and Honesty, to lie, and
commit them to Posterity.)

As for the Second Part, therein you have his Practica Mirabilis for the
accomplishing both Elixirs, as also several Chemical Axioms on the same of no
small Value: Besides a Dialogue composed by Arislaus a very ancient Philosopher
betwixt the Master and Scholar concerning this Work.

Prefixed to which is an Apology in Answer to D. Guibertus his Scurrilous
Libel, in which Apology is maintained the certainty and possibility of
attaining both the White and Red Elixir for transmutation of all imperfect
Metals into pure Gold and Silver, by Reason and Authority. An Apology well
worth the reading.

I have divided the whole into Clauses, for the Benefit of the Judicious and
observant Reader, and endeavored the faithful Translation of the whole; yet so
as to suit it (as well as my mean Capacity would permit) to our English Idiom.

But I remember I called it the Quintessence: Yet let no one think I for that
expect or hope for Scorn or Laughter. There may be a Quintessence extracted
from Gold, the purest of Metals. -- I endeavored to please my self in
publishing this part first, which, if kindly accepted, I may present the World
with the whole. Mean while, Reader, be contented with this, as the most
requisite for thee, and refrain Praise and Censure till I ask them of thee,

who am Yours, B. P. Philalethes.

The Authors Preface Dedicatory to the most Excellent (and adorned with
Heavenly Gifts) Gentleman Dr. Andrew Libavus, M. D. and Poet Laureat, Bernardus
Penotus a Portu Sanctae Mariae Aquitani, wishes Supreme Felicity.
I Present you, most Learned Sir, with an Enchyridion of Balsoms and Receipts
for several Distempers incident to Mankind, which I thought none more worthy of
than your self, Learned Libavus. The Beauty of Literature, in whom, as in a
Mirror, all Arts, Virtues and Discipline cohere; Famous throughout all
Germany, both for the Goods of Fortune, and Endowments of Mind, for Nobleness
of Birth, and Knowledge of all Arts and Sciences -- But why should I pretend to
illuminate Splendid Phoebus by my Rush Light? Accept then of this my Labor,
which if, you do, I persuade my self, that being by your Humanity, Fidelity and
Fame, defended as 'twere by Miltiades's Shield, I shall be Proof against the
sharpest Blows of my Adversaries, and that every one who but understands you
are mine and my Labors Defender, shall be, as I may say, charmed to Silence.
-- But here it may be you may exclaim -- What! Are you the Man that desires my
Defense? You he that thus interrupts me with your Studies, as you call them?
Where was you born? What was your Original? To which I answer, most Learned
Libavus, by applying what Virgil wrote of Ulysses to my own use. Qui mores
hominum multorum vidit and urbes.

I was born in Aquitain, a most Noble Province of France; but leaving my Native
Country, I traveled round Europe and the Continent Islands, spending the
greatest part of my Life in Travels, to obtain the perfect Knowledge of the
Chemical Science: I am now an Old Man of Threescore and Ten Years of Age, worn
out by Years and Labors, after very many Dangers incident to Travelers, am at
length arrived at Yverdunum [a strong City in Helvetia] where now I live. I am
that Bernardus a portu Sanctae Mariae, whose Name you have been pleased to make
so honorable a mention of so often in your Divine Writings.

Proceed then, most illustrious Libavus, and accept of these my last Labors,
rude and unpolished indeed, yet Monuments and eternal Witnesses of the
Reverence and Affection I have for you, and esteem them as your Wisdom thinks
fit.

Farewell thou Beauty of Literature, the Ornament of all Germany -- Only love
him who is ready to serve you, which if you do, you will not only for ever
oblige me [already indebted to you] for your extraordinary Kindnesses, but also
rouse me up as one from Sleep to perform greater Enterprises.

Farewell heartily once again my Pride and Safeguard.

Yverduni, the Calends of January, 1608.
Penotus (...): OR THE Alchymists Enchiridion.
PART I.
I. An excellent admirable Balsam of singular Virtues.
MIrrh, Aloes, Spicknard, Sanguis Drachonis, Francumcense, Mummia Opopanac,
Bdelium, the Juice of the Balsamum Tree, the Juice or Gum of the Tree
Agasillis, of Sarcocolla, of Saffron, Mastick, Gum Arabic, Liquid Stirax, ana
ij, Lambd. Elect, Juice of a Beaver, or Succi Castorei, ana ij, Musk ss,
Therebinthin the weight of altogether, Pulverize them, and mix them well with
the Therebinthin; put the whole Composition into an Alimbeck, and Distill
Philosophically: Then take out the Distilled Liquor, and lay it up carefully
for use.

VERTVES.
If Dead Bodies be anointed therewith, they will not Putrisie. If with this
Balsom you would strengthen weak Bodies, mix it with Rose Water, and anoint the
Belly and Reins therewith. If you put a little of this Balsam upon a Linen
Cloth, and being a little warm before the Fire, apply it to the Backbone of
the Afflicted with an Ague, there letting it remain for some Hours; it takes
away the rigor thereof: Yea, it wonderfully relieves the Quartan Ague. It helps
Swoundings, if the Spine of the Back be anointed therewith. A little of this
being put under the Tongue of a Person Speechless, it Restores it; and count it
no mean Remedy, if Necessity compel thee to use it in Suffocations of the Womb,
Falling Sicknesses, and many other Diseases, Drinking Three Drops of this in a
Glass of Odoriferous Wine. It wonderfully comforts the Heart and Animal
Spirits. Mixed with Oil of Roses, and Bathing the Members and Backbone, is very
good to expel Melancholy, and trouble of Mind, helping decayed Strength, and
good in Hectic Fevers. It has many other wonderful Properties with it; for the
Spine of the Backbone being anointed therewith, it has strange Operations,
comforting [by the permission of Almighty God,] the Reins and parts
thereabouts. It procures long Life, so powerful is this Balsom, preserving the
Causes thereof. The N.B.
Nuca is the Principium of the Nerves and Bones, and is generated from the
Brain, therefore by Bathing that part, you will comfort the Spiritual
Substance, and all the Bones; being a Remedy against the Palsy: Comforting and
being good against the Trembling of the Heart and Looseness. [ Et est omnium
Medicamentorum in celeri cordis comfortatione.]

II. An Artificial Balsam for all sorts of Wounds and Swellings, Gunshot not
excepted.
Oil Olive, Flax, ana iv, Viridis Aeris, or Green Brass i, Roman Vitriol ss;
put the Powders into the Oil, and upon warm Embers Dissolve them: This done,
take them from the Fire: Then add to it clear Therebinthin. Let it Ferment
together for the space of Eight Days in a warm place. Now when you would use
it, apply it warm to the Wound, and Bind it up. For a Gunshot, etc. dip a Tent
in this Balsam, and stop the Wound therewith, and 'twill answer Expectation.

III. An Experienced Balsam to Heal all Desperate Wounds in the space of Twenty
Four Hours time; a very great Secret.
Gather a sufficient quantity of that Red Herb springing out of the Ground
about the latter end of September, called Wood-bine, on which the Hony-suckle
grows, [to be had in Woods,] put it into a Cucurbit, [ sive Botiam,] then stop
the Mouth of it very close, that the Virtue of it may not respire; then put it
in warm Horse-Dung for the space of Eight Days, afterward in Baln. Mariae
extract its Water. Which being come over, put back again upon its Faeces. And
then as before, put it again in Horse-Dung for Twenty Four Hours space; which
being done, Distill again; then will come over a Water and Oil, which separate
per Bal. Mar. the Water appears first, the Oil lying at the bottom of the
Vessel. This is that admirable Balsam whose Virtues are so much extolled in our
Chemical Antidotes, with many others.

IV. To cure the Frenzy and Delirium.
Musk gr. 12, Camphir gr. 20, of Red Rose Water, impregnated with the tincture
of Sandal, xv, mix well, shave the Crown of the Diseased's Head, and dipping a
Linen Cloth double into this Liquor, apply it warm: When it has been on so long
as the Moistness is dried up out of the Linen, dip it in the aforesaid
Composition again, and continue the Application for the space of Twenty Four
Hours. Afterward having Slept some time, you will perceive the Afflicted to be
marvellously composed, unless the Substance of the Brain be corrupt, then you
must apply oftener with very great care: It also cures the Palpitation of the
Heart if applied thereto.

V. For Foolishness, occasioned by want of Sleep.
Laudanum prepared according to our Description, gr. 4 or 6, Oil of Musk Nuts,
3 Drops, put a little of this on a Linen Tent up the Nostrils. It wonderfully
provokes Rest. If you think the Sick Person sleeps overmuch, take out the Tent.

VI. For Convulsion Fits.
Oil of Amber ss, Mucilage of Bryony q 5, to the consistency of an Ointment,
Oil of Clove Gilly-flowers, 6 Drops, anoint the Place afflicted about the Roots
of the Nerves, then it is done. -- If the Fits are not mitigated at the first
Anointing, Repeat again, and wrap the Afflicted Members in the Hide of a new
killed Weather, and you will have no need to take care for any other Remedy.

VII. For the Cramp or Contraction of the Sinews.
Distilled Oil of Cammomil i, Therebin of Amber, ana ss, anoint the Roots of
the Nerves on the contrary sides, and 'twill have good Success.

VIII. An excellent Remedy for Itching Pimples, Blemishes and Wrinkles in the
Face.
Most clear Fountain or River Water, lb5, the Seeds of White Poppy well bruised
lb ss, make an Emulsion of it in a Glass Vessel; then in a great Glass, put i
of Mercury Sublimate, very often Cleansed or Washed, with the White of one Egg
well shaken together with all ones might for the space of an Hour; then add to
it one Spoonful of your Emulsion of White Poppy-Seeds; then shake it again with
all your might, for one Hour more; then Two Spoonfuls, and shake for Two Hours;
then Three, Four or Five Spoonfuls, and shake it as is aforesaid for the space
of Three or Four Hours, till a White Pin or Needle lying in it Twenty Four
Hours is not tinged: Then add of very white Zaccharum and Borax very finely
powdered, ana i, then shake as aforesaid again for Two Hours. By often washing
the Face therewith, it makes it of an incomparable White and Red Color, it
does no hurt to the Skin, as other Mercurial Waters do; but it Cleanses and
Heals Burning Ulcers, Dries up Boils and Running Soars, and very friendly cures
them. This is a Secret not rashly to be Revealed.

IX. A most approved Remedy for inflamed Eyes, both Running and Dry, as also
for Eyes that are Blood-shot, and for Itching of the Eyelids; a singular
Remedy.
Praeparat. of Tutty, i ss, Camphir i, as much of Red Rose Water, of
GreenBrass, gr. 12, well rubbed with Camphire in a Mortar, but the Brass by it
self. Let all be brought to a Powder; then May Butter i, let it Boil some time
in the Rose Water: Then taking it from the Fire, first put in the Tutty and
Camphire, then the (...) Viride or Green Brass; mix them w^ (...), and lay it
up in a Glass (...) an Ointment of it, and pu^ (...) upon a small Piece of
Silk (...) ^nt the inner sides of the Eye (...) ^ut especially the Corners, and
you will soon be Cured.

X. Another most Noble Medicine for the same.
the Distilled Water of Whites of of Eggs, lb2, Aqua Faenicula Enfrasia,
Belendine Valerian, ana ii, Red Roses, iij, Water of Human Blood i, Tutty well
prepared and ground, Camphir, Roach Alome, ana ss, Red Coral, Pearls, ana i,
mix and circulate for a Month, often well shaking them together. Drop a little
of this into either Dim or Inflamed, or Running and Disordered Eyes, or those
having thin Skins growing over them. If this Remedy be continued, it will
certainly cure them.

XI. To heal a Wound in a small space.
Well Purged and Clarified Honey lbi, Juice of Pillitary of the Wall, qs,
Incorporate and make an Ointment, with which anoint, and presently bind up; it
cures soon.

XII. A Secret to cure the Dropsy.
Distill Oil of Salt by a Retort, feed Flowers of Sulpher with this Oil, till it
be of the consistency of a Pultis; Distill this through a Retort, and it will
come into the Receiver like Milk. This is a great Secret for the Dropsy: Its
good also against Poisons and Ulcers of the Lungs.

XIII. A long experienced Emplaster for Old and Stinking Ulcers and Fistoloes,
separating the corrupt from the incorrupt.
Common Liquid Pitch lb2, unsalted Butter lbi, of the best Honey vj,
Therebinthin iij, Sheeps-Fat or Grease iiij, Rosin ij ss, let all melt over a
gentle Fire, and then strew in the following Powder. Aloes iij, Flowers of
Sulpher ij ss, Francanscense ij, Mastick i ss, and when all is melted, add
common Salt Decripitated Mj, Alum ij ss, white Vitriol ii, Calx vive i ss,
these being all in fine Powder, mix well together, and with the former Powders,
Reduce the whole Composition into an Emplaister. Now if so be it happens to be
too Dry, by adding Liquid Pitch to it, it will become more Liquid. Apply it to
the Ulcer, etc. On which let it remain Twenty Four Hours, wipe it off, and
apply it again. It has been often experienced.

XIV. An other Emplaster for all bitter Maladies and Tumors.
Black Pitch, Colophoni, Rosin of Pine, Wax, ana iij, Bdellium, the Juice of
the Herb All-heal, ana ij, Opium ij, Saffron ij, Stiracis Calamitae, Camphire
ana ij. Sperma Caeti vi, Sanguis Drachonis, Mercury praecipitate, ana i ss,
Crocus Martis ss, Gum Elinus and Henbane, ana i ss, Dissolve the Gums in
Vinegar; then dissolve Pix Colophoni, Rosin of Therebinthi together. Then add
Mastick and Mhirr; make an Emplaster, and make use of it in all Tumors and
Maladies whatsoever. I have many other Emplasters by me; but these are the most
excellent.

XV. An admirable preparation of Camphire to cure Cankered and Corrosive
Ulcers; containing many other rare Properties.
Camphire, Virgins Wax, White Lead, Oil of Lillies ana, bring all into Crumbs;
then put the Oil into a little Kettle over the Fire, which being hot, put in
the Virgins Wax, and which being Melted, put in the purified Camphire, by
stirring it gradually, afterward the Ceruse, casting it in by little and
little, till the whole is incorporated; then take it off the Fire, and when
cold, put upon this Composition lbi, of thrice Rectified Spirit of Wine; then
mix all very well together, in a Glazen Vessel, till [without the help of the
Fire,] the whole becomes very Red. Put then this Ointment in a Glass Alimbeck,
and lute very close, Bury it for Eight Days in Horse-Dung, Distill with Ashes on
a slow Fire. The Water being come over, remit it back on the Faeces again.
Repeat this for Eight times at least, N. B. that the Camphire will be Sublimed;
but his Wings should be clipped, and be mingled with the rest. Break the
Vessel, and take out the matter which you shall find at the Bottom in a
Metal-like form; stamp it to Crumbs; then incorporate and keep it for use,
[close in pixide;] its Virtues follow.

XVI. To cure the Canker.
Both Plantains Mj, make a Decoction, with which wash the Canker or Wound;
afterward dry it with a clean Linen Rag; then the aforementioned Ointment, and
spread some of it on a Linen Cloth, etc. and apply it to the Wound or Canker;
so that the aforementioned Ointment may cover the whole Wound, etc.

XVII. For a Dissentery and desperate Looseness; a singular Remedy.
the Bark of Guajacum well bruised, ij, boil them in so much Water as may a
little more than cover them; to which put of Red Roses, Balanstior and Plantain
ij: Let them boil together for an Hour; then take them from the Fire, and
strain them through a Linen Cloth; to which add Powder of Rhubarb ij, of the
principal Preparation iij, let it be Drunk by the Diseased.

XVIII. One only excellent Remedy for the Plague.
Of Thrice Rectified Aqua Vitae, one Measure, (or Spoonful I suppose) the very
best Venice Treakle vi, the choicest Mirrh ij, the Roots of Butter-Bur. iij,
Sperma Caeti, Terrae Sigillatae, ana j, great Celandine i, Dictam albi pimpin.
Garden Valerian, ana ij, Camphire j, all these being cut small and Bruised, mix
them together; afterward soak them in good White Wind; then being Dried up and
Bruised, put them into a Glass Retort well Luted with a great Receiver; cause
Distillation by an open Fire; but gently at first, and so on by degrees; in
doing which, you will see white Fumes come over into the Receiver with great
force; therefore you must take great care, lest your Glass breaks. Distillation
being over, you will find a Black Oil and Water, which Oil you must separate from
the aforesaid Water; put the Water into a little Cucurbit, and distill twice or
thrice in Ashes, of which take one part to two parts of the Reserved Oil
aforementioned. If you have lb4, of the above named Composition, mingle it with
lb2, of the Tartarous Water, and leave the Liquor on its Faeces.

Use is, That every Twenty Four Hours, one of this be Supped up in a Glass of
Odorifick Wine, and let the Distempered Sweat Two Hours after it (at least) and
abstain from Food some few Hours after and before. It Is a great Preservative
against this miserable Mortality, for if the Infected do but take one Spoonful
of this in Three of White Wine, as aforesaid, and Sweat Three Hours after,
abstaining Three Hours before, and Three or Four after, it will cure him, [ Deo
Juvante.] If the Diseased be very much infected, perhaps it may not operate so
effectually the first time, as to Radically Cure; then Reiterate. But if by the
Inflammation of the Liver [Prunella gigneretur,] then Cancror. Fluvialum
Vivorum, of the greater House-Leek j, Sengreen M j, Bruise all well together,
and mix with a few Spoonfuls of Vinegar of Roses, squeeze out the Juice of them
altogether through a Linen-Cloth. Exhibit of this sometimes a Spoonful a Day,
apply it warm to the Head and Forehead by warm Clothes. If the Party be broke
out in Botches, apply an Emplaster made of the Juice of Allheal, with Oil
Laterino. This, if soon applied, will draw out the Poison.

You have here a Divine Water, healing all Obstructions, and effecting such
Wonders as I cease to speak of; it is your Duty to honor God, and resign your
self to him.

XIX. For all Imposthumes, Plurisies, or any such like Distempers, to break
them soon.
Sorrel [sub cineribus coctae] Mij. Beam-somer iij, Fat Figs Niiij, Rue ij, of
precipitated and dulcified -- by washings ij, make an Emplaster.

XX. For the Shingles [and Formicas] a most experienced Remedy.
Rock Allom, (Flowers) of Sulphur, Bole Armoniack subtly searched, ana ij,
common Salt p i, the Herb Celendine fresh and new gathered, shred well Miii, to
which put of good potable White Wind so much as will overtop it 4 or 5 Fingers
Breadth; put all into an Earthen Pot with a narrow Mouth, and when in warm
water the matter shall boil, besprinkle the affected place with the Dew thereof
for 2 hours space twice a Day; which Dew being dried in, anoint the said
Shingles with Oil of Eggs. It likewise cures St. Anthonies Fire.

XXI. Aqua Mirabilis for curing and expelling the Stone and Gravel in the Reins.
the Roots of Marshmallows well cleansed in White Wind vj, the Roots of great
Burr and of Grass ana iiij, the Roots of the Herb Folefoot, or wild Spicknard,
of Parsley, Valerian and Foeniculi all well bruised ana ij: of the Herb Capilli
Veneris, Saxifrage, Pimpin, Virgae Aurae, and Betony ana Miiij, of the Seed of
Gentian, the great Burr, Cardus Benedictus, of the Mountain Osier of Nut
Kernels, Medlars and Peaches ana j, Grom-well ij, Lapidis Lincii Judaici ana j,
the Preparation of Goats Blood ij ss, Crocus ij, Venetian Therebin, bruise them
all together, and with the Therebinthin mingle them in White Wind lbiiij, mix
all well together, and let them stand 24 Hours; then distill them by Bal.
Mariae. Let the Afflicted drink of this Water ij, and after he has drunk that,
immediately let him drink iiij of VVhite-wine full three Hours before he eats.

XXII. For an inveterate Megrim.
Aloetick Balsam iij, Magisterii Peralrum gr. 12. Salt of Wormwood i. with
Syrup of Betony q 5. Bring it into a Mass, in a Glass accurately closed: Let
the Diseased for a Month together take every Morning one Pill made of this, it
is an excellent Purger of the Belly and Midriff; Extracting the obnoxious
Humor or Matter from the Brain.

XXIII. For Ulcers in the Lights.
Flowers of Sulphur sublimed to whiteness, q. u. with Oil of Zacchari [known
but to a few] mix well this Oil of Zacchari with Pectoral Waters, very well
distilled. It has wonderful Virtues. It takes away the Causes of Coughs.

XXIV. For Suffocations of the Womb.
Extract of Crocus j, Castor ij, 6 Drops of Oil of Angelica mix: The Dose i or
ii. This, if taken when an Ague is approaching, cures it. If at the approach of
each term a measure of this be taken, the Disease will not return.

XXV. CATHOLICVM CATHARTICVM Minerale.
Mineral Stilium or Antimony in Powder (very small) being mingled well with
Oximel Simplex, so that it is Metallic Form be quite lost; which done, pour on
it Vinegar. Let it remain in a Vessel in a warm place for a Months time,
afterward distill the Vinegar in a gentle Heat, and it will remain at the
Bottom of the Consistency of a Pultis, which must be distilled by a mighty
strong Fire, and there will ascend a red Oil, sweeter than Zaccharum, which use
in purging Bodies. Dose, is according to the Constitution of the Person to take
it; for all are not strong alike; therefore a certain Dose cannot be
prescribed; yet I have given from ss to j, with some other Syrup. It draws the
Humors together and evacuates them.

N. B. This is that that is now (with some) kept so secret, and so much made
use of.

XXVI. For the Epilypsie.
Exsiccated Vitriol lbj, of Stibium lb ss, bring them into a very fine Powder,
reduce to an Oil, like Oil of Vitriol, and this [by the Sun] distill often.
Rectify also [ super calvariam contusam alicujus suspensi.] Dose, from ss to
i, in any Syrup, as of Piony, Bethony, etc. and count it not a mean Remedy.

The End of the First Part.
Penotus (...): OR THE Alchymists Enchiridion.
PART II.
The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the most Learned and Famous D. Joachimo Tanchio, Dr. of Physic and
Philosophy, and Professor of the same at the University of Lipzick, Bernardus
Penotus a Portu Sanctae Mariae Aquitain wishes long Health and Happiness.
VEnerable Antiquity (most Learned Tanchius) had so honorable an Estimation for
the first Inventers of Arts and Sciences, that some they Canonized as Gods: To
the Honors of others they erected Statues as a perpetual Memorandum of their
Great Ingenuity. Nor undeservedly. For whereas our great Grandfather Adam by
his Sin was reduced from the most happy to the most miserable Condition, the
Omnipotent himself thundering against him and all Mankind this Resolution, viz.
In the Sweat of thy Face shall thou eat thy Bread. The Inventions of Arts and
Disciplines were then very necessary. Quibus isti morbo and malo afferetur.
Therefore it may seem one great Reason, (if not the only) why the Fathers
before the Flood lived so long, was, Because they might fully understand and
learn Arts and Sciences. Now if such great Honors were conferred on them, who
being greatly helped by Longevity, found out Arts and Sciences; deserve not
they Commendation, who not having the advantage of such long Life, raise them
(and that with augmentation too) from the Dead to Life again? (For what do they
otherwise, who restore lost Arts to Light again?) 'Twas great indeed to find
out Arts, but very great to restore and augment them. I shall mention only the
Spagyrick; and who knows not that that so Useful, so Divine, and so Necessary
an Art has for many Ages lain, as 'twere (almost) in a dead Sleep? And who but
a blind Man cannot perceive it now restored to its former, nay, far greater
Glory? But by whom I pray? If I, learned Tanchius, mention you amongst it is
particular Favorites, who will contradict me? Deservedly then do Learned Men
reverence you. For my part, I Am bound to it for two no little Reasons. The
First, For the same Reason all wise Men do, viz. For your great Parts and
Learning. The other, Because you were pleased to count my Name worthy the
mention in your Book De Lapide Philosophorum. I should be ungrateful then, were
I not, in token of the Estimation I I have for your self, to present you with
part of my Labors. Accept then this following Dialogue concerning the true
matter of the Great Elixir, written by one Arislaus a very old Philosopher, as
also its Preparation, far more precious than common Gold or Silver. This is the
Aurum Vivum of the Philosophers, vivifying other Dead Bodies; yet the matter of
this our Stone is but one Ingredient, containing in its self the Power of all
forcible Waters, [as appears more plainly in the Apologetic Introduction]
containing whatsoever is necessary for Nature in, from, and by its self, as in
the Dialogue and following Pages you may see; which Dialogue I devote, Dedicate
and Present to your self, ut sit Antidorum illius quod ad te accepi, etc.

Learned Sir, Vale.
An Apologetick Introduction of Bernardi Penoti a Portu S. Mariae Aq. in which
is Evinced both by Reason and Authority the Error and Opinion of Dr. Nicholas
Guibertus Lotharingi, concerning Alchymy, etc.
1. NO Art or Science is so Sacred, but has Haters and Contradicters of all
degrees.

2. Amongst which Arts, this of Chemistry need not assume the lowest place,
than which Theology excepted, there is none more worthy.

3. This is the Captain of Philosophy, by which Secrets of Nature, etc. may be
pryed into, and Arcana's easily embraced.

4. This Art has been sought after by Emperors, Kings and Princes; nay, many of
all sorts of Men, Good Men, Wise Men, and Learned Men, have labored after it.

5. All affirming it to be an honest pleasure, an Exercise becoming the
greatest Men on Earth.

6. Yet since in this our Iron Age of Impiety, etc. there being such a numerous
Parcel of Impostors and Sophisticators, that a right Honest Man is very
difficult to be found. This Spagyrical Art is become a very hatred.

7. Nay, counted so ignoble, as how many would have it Banished to Silence?

8. Yea, and even those too, who have any liking to it, or would defend it, are
reckoned at least Madmen.

9. How does D. Guibertus Lotharingus labor to prove, that this Chemical
Science is of no moment, denying besides, that neither the Books supposed to be
Thomas Aquinas's, Raymund Lully's, or Arnold's De villa nova, ever wrote
concerning the Philosophers Stone.

10. But it is well all these Books of the aforesaid Authors are Extant, [wrote
by their own Hands] in the Libraries of many Learned Persons, with whom they
are esteemed.

11. Yea, there is a few in mine too.

12. Let then Guibertus the Rhetorician proceed with his Babbling; by which
there can be no profit (save the benefit of the Latin in which he very much
delights) be gotten.

13. Nor does he by those Elegant Rhetorical Flourishes of Oratory Teach, but
Deceive, (like Whores by their fine Dresses and Painted Faces, allure Fools to
their Eternal Prejudice.) Feed the Understanding with solid Fruit of Learning;
but causes to smile by his Ignorant Discourse, which you may perceive anon.

14. I cannot persuade my self Master Guibertus, that that may be rashly
contemned or abolished, that has been so long in fashion, and for so many Ages
accounted firm.

15. But this Science is glorious for its Antiquity and Stability.

16. It Is not likely therefore, that this Noble Science should ever fail by
your Arguments or Disputes.

17. When as before Aesculapius's, long before Hippocrates's Days, this Art was
well approved of, and firmly rooted for Eternity amongst the Wise and Thinking
World.

18. Your pretending then to extirpate that which has remained firm for so many
Ages together, (I think will) never conduce to your Applause.

19. And that only by a little Latin Babble, which yet for All -- you see, you
by all your Skill and Thoughts cannot do.

20. Give then every one leave quietly to enjoy his own Opinion.

21. As for me, it is the least of my intention to consume much time in
refelling your trifling Arguments.

22. Therefore for Brevity sake, I refer you D. Guibertus, to the Proeme
published by the Learned Master Theobald de Hochelande Mittelburgen, De
Alchemiae Difficultatibus, where whatsoever can be objected against this Noble
Science, etc. [ ut Nemo amplius addere aliquid possit ad Quaestionem
solvendam,] is fully answered.

22. I say therefore with that very Learned Gentleman, that the Writings of
those most Learned and Good Men, Dr. Thomas Aquinas, Hermes Trismegistus,
Raymund Lully, Marsillius Ficinus, Arnold de villa Nova, [whom Johannes
Andreas, the most Wise Counselor styles, The Divine, the most Experienced
Physician and Alchymist,] and others who are beyond Exceptions, show them
Masters of Underderstanding, and Lovers of Mother Nature.

23. And why should we believe the VVritings of a few Self-conceited Raylers,
before the Solid VVritings of such Learned and Famous Men? who out of Malice
cavil with those Works they understand not; affirming their Aenigmatical and
Obscure VVritings were intended only to make work for the Idle.

24. But God forbid that we should think those Venerable Philosophers wrote
advisedly upon any such account.

25. Those that have inquired studiously into their Works, always have
affirmed, that they procured Fame not by trifling and mad Assertions, but by
high and sublime, grounded on a true and stable Foundation.

26. Here may be mentioned the joint Opinion of diverse Nations concerning the
transmutation of Metals.

27. Not of the Latins alone, but of the the Greeks, Egyptians, Arabians,
Caldeans, French, German, Spanish and English; [ Monumenta quotidie studiosorum
Hominum manibus teruntur.]

28. All which affirm, as it were with one Mouth, (though with diverse Tongues)
that it is a very true Art, than which there is no Art more Magnificent or
Sublime in the whole World, [the Study of the Scriptures excepted, that
bringing, as was said before, Health to the Soul] to understand which is the
gift of God: To be Masters of which Art [of Chemistry is meant] there is
required no little Study, Watchfulness and Pains.

29. Perhaps in this following point, they are mistaken who deny the Excellency
of this Art, viz. because since Infinite Chemists are ignorant of this grand
matter. Neminem videant qui se Scientiam adeptum esse glorietur.

30. To which I answer, There Is nothing can cause a true Philosophers wonder,
[being already skilled in the Nature and Causes of all things.]

31 It Is Ignorance alone is the cause of Admiration.

32. For what One amongst a Thousand works upon the due Matter? Scarcely any.
What wonder then is it, if many be frustrated with a Deserved End?

33. Therefore Avicen says not impertinently, He which takes what he ought to
take, and mingles it, and works as he ought, then he proceeds as he ought to
proceed.

34. There is truly many Illiterate Persons, which understand not so much as
common Sense; how then is it likely for such as those to understand the
Metaphors and Analogies of Philosophers?

35. Others there are who though they are Learned and Quick-witted, yet have
not Books; either because [for Covetousness sake] they will not Buy or Pay for
them, or else are so Poor, as they cannot compass the Price of them; or else
because they cannot find Examples in those Places in which they abide
immediately; and so through Impatience and Despair desist, when it may be they
were e'ne lighting on the true method to effect.

36. But for those who study Books and Art uncessantly and with Patience, let
them remember the Saying of Solomon, Sapiens abscondit Scientiam; Os autem
Stulti Confusioni proximum est. A Wise Man lays up, (or conceals) Knowledge;
but the Mouth of a Fool is next to Confusion.

37. Nor wants there a Reason why those that have this grand Elixir, keep
themselves private, not signifying their Happiness to any one. -- Why, pray
the Reason? -- I answer in one word, Foelix quem faciunt, aliena pericula
cautum. Blessed is that Man who can beware betimes. By's Friends Misfortunes.

38. How many in our Age have miserably Died, who wore known to have skill in
this Art, by reason of their Princes Fear and Envy? Nor could they possibly
escape from their Power: -- But of them by and by.

39. Why could they not believe what Thomas Aquinas says? That the use of no
Art ought to be prohibited, which produces Natural and True Effects by only
Natural Causes.

40. Marsilius Ficinus says, (they are in the right on it, which affirms,) that
all things may be multiplied as well Plants as Animals, by a certain Spirit,
but that that Spirit is detained in grosser Metals with the Matter, which if a
little rightly separated, and the Secret preserved in its connatural Habitation
or Throne, will certainly generate its like.

41. There are some who will not Believe, though it is consented to by so many
Men, and by so many diverse Nations; nay, that will not by Experience and
Reason it self, grant themselves overcome. But rather (such an Age do we live
in,) affirm the Metal transmuted into Gold and Silver by the help of the Devil
and Hands of a Subtle Magician, than ascribe the effect to the power of God
and Nature.

42. But pray by whom especially is this Art despised? even of those most who
have Read Chemical Books, in (as it were) great haste, without premeditation,
etc. Like the Dogs of Nile, just take a Lick at the Waters, and run away again.

43. Who when they understand not the Bosom Secrets of Nature, Art and the
Philosophers, blame them not themselves.

44. But what more unjust than for a Man to hate that he understands not?

45. What more silly and contemptible, than the Judgment of an Unskilful Man?

46. The late Exclamation of a Comaedian, I think was not for nothing, viz.
That there is nothing in the whole World more unreasonable, than the Censure of
an Ignorant Person, who thinks nothing well done, in which he himself had not a
Hand.

47. As if he had said, Scientia non habet Inimicum prater Ignorantem: Arts and
Sciences have no Enemies except the Illiterate, who understand them not.

48. But to answer the Question, viz. Whether this Art can be proved true, by
Authority, Reason and Experience?

49. To which I answer, I can, to prove the Truth of this noble Art, bring the
Testimonies, Authority and Experience of many Wise and Learned Men.

50. Not long since, I received a Letter from a very Famous Gentleman, whom,
you Guibertus, know very well, and whose Father you sometime since used very
courteously, (which with some other Letters God willing, I intend shortly to
publish.)

51. In which He Learned Man told me of a certain honest Chemist which he
Entertained, furnishing him with iv ss of Lead. He (the Chemist) casting in on
the aforesaid Lead a Grain of a certain Red Powder, (the Lead being running
hot,) the whole Lead was turned into most true and pure Gold, without any
Diminution.

52. The Man that did this I am very well acquainted with, being
Fellow-Boarders together for some time in England; and blessed be God he is yet
Living. --

53. I heard of another some time since at Lutetia, by a very worthy Person,
that had Gold made by the Chemical Art.

54. Nor was he ashamed to own it, for selling it about, he was at last took
into Custody, (being supposed to have stolen it,) having sold so great a
Quantity, and so much lying by him.

55. Where he happned to meet with a Goldsmiths, whom he asked whether he would
Buy Five Marks of most purely Refined Gold? I had it (said he) from Edward
Kelley, at Prague, where at the House of Dr. Aggesius Thaddeus, I saw a whole
Pound of Argent-vive, by one little Drop of a very Red Liquor transmuted into
most pure Gold.

56. He is still safe in custody there, that by his Example the Incredulous may
be persuaded.

57. I had of this very often in my Hands.

58. But which is the greatest wonder, you may plainly see some little of this
Red matter sticking upon the Gold, converted from Mercury, more Red than the
rest, and with that more Argent-vive, may be converted.

59. I am silent concerning Bohemia and Saxony; Time will discover all things.

60. There is many Books of this Subject Published, amongst which, Read that
little Book of Petri Roberti Valonsis, of the Truth and Antiquity of the
Chemical Art, and that of Petri Boni Ferrariensis, concerning the certainty
thereof.

61. Who amongst other Words, says, let the Ignorant (then) be silent, and let
them not contemn what they understand not. -- No right Wise Man will deny this
Art its Excellency.

62. Consider if it be an Art, by what means it is an Art, and if it is not, why
it is not; and let there be a time expected, when God shall raise up some one
or other to set forth this Art in its Glory and Excellency.

63. But attend my Words a little, Guibertus, since it has been that many great
Secrets has hitherto been hid from true and worthy Philosophers. I shall give
the Reason for your sake, and to confute your Arguments, why this Art was
traduced Aenigmatically, and by Obscure Words.

64. Know then, that in every Science it is primatively necessary to have a
Subject about or upon which to Build.

65. But this Science has Universal Nature for its Subject; therefore they say,
the Stone is in all things, yet not that its Matter is to be called out of
every thing.

66. This Spirit is as well in Animals and Vegetables, as Minerals.

67. Therefore the Stone is called Animal, Vegetable and Mineral. But this not
because it should be (the more) gathered from Animals and Vegetables.

68. For as a Philosopher says, si vis mederi metallis, etc. If you would make
Metals more excellent, let the Original of your excelling cause, proceed from
Metals.

69. But this Spirit is over much Sealed in Metals; they have sought in
Minerals, but not in all, only in those where Nature has hid it.

70. By what one Name then is this Matter Famous? I Will tell you. But first I Would
ask you, D. Guibertus, and answer me if you think good, what you mean to do?

71. For the Principium of a Work or Business, results from the End of the
Intention.

72. If you answer to gainsay your Intention of getting Gold by that, etc. I
answer, 'twas never the Design of the Ancient Philosophers, by that only to
heap up to themselves Gold and Silver; no, the result and scope of their Desire
was, ut Men's sana in Corpore Sano, etc. That they might preserve a Healthy Soul
in a Healthy Body, till God's appointed time for their Dissolution was fully
expired.

73. For so many great Virtues are contained in this Powder, that a little
being taken into the Body, it disperses the Humors in a Moment, bringing the
Body into so good a Disposition, that not one ill Humor is permitted to reside
therein.

74. Which Powder with its use, Raymund Lully very well knew, Living One
Hundred and Fifty Years; and had God seen sit, might (had not the Saracens
Barbarously Slain him,) had Lived to the Age of Two Hundred.

75. These Great Virtues the Philosophers observing in the Elixir, would for
Curiosity sake, try it upon imperfect Metals. Thus Disputing, If this Medicine
cures the Leprosy, Dropsy, etc. and preserves Human Bodies, what effects will
it have on Imperfect Metals? They projected, and found its admirable Virtues.

76. Perceiving it to be so Efficacious a Secret, they bound themselves by an
Oath never openly to Declare the Modus of its Preparation. Nay, at last they
began to hide the Art by Obscure Phrases, lest it should be Seized on by the
Unworthy.

77. But to speak fully on this Argument, would require too much time and room
either for me, or this little Book to allow of: But more of this elsewhere.

78. We will return now to our intended Discourse, concerning of what, it is
made; i. e. the Matter of the Stone, at which almost all Chemists stumble.

79. For the Philosophers have almost as many Names for it, as there is variety
of colors in the Work; which is as many as can be imagined before it comes to
its perfect Redness.

80. For they name it by that Name of which the Color is.

81. No wonder then that so many are Deluded by the Literal Signification of
the Words.

82. It Is the hidden Spirit of the Words must only be taken notice of.

83. The Praxis therefore of this hidden Work excels the greatest Secret of
Nature, which unless revealed by God, or one who has worked it, or by seeing it
done one's self, it is impossible to obtain it.

84. All Books without which signifying nothing, unless you have the knowledge
of the matter to work upon; then indeed one Book opens another, but not before.

85. We say therefore that Sulphur and Argent-vive is the matter of our Stone;
therefore the knowledge of them is necessary, that the matter may the more
artificially be culled out of them, that the Stone may the sooner be perfected.

86. A certain prepared matter lies hid in a certain Body, which is for the
Work, without other Preparation.

87. And a difficult matter it is to find it out, than which, as Raymundus
says, there is no greater Secret in the whole World, which so consists in
Saturno of the Philosophers, that they which most narrowly seek into its
Virtues and Nature, oblige themselves by an Oath never to reveal those Secrets.

88. Being so many, as expelling not only the Diseases and corrupt Humors
incident to the Body, but also converting [as has been experienced] imperfect
Metals into pure Gold.

89. Now I [ Pietate motus] being moved by Brotherly Affection, will disclose
the proper Name of this matter, and declare it with Arnold of retarding Old Age.

90. For he calls it Chiffor Minerale, that is, the Animal Stone, the
Preparation of which the Ancients have concealed.

91. There is also another Name for it, especially for the Mineral Stone, the
Preparation of which they have also kept secret; some calling it Abissini
Bistumi, others the Mineral Chaos, in which is contained a very great mineral
Power.

92. In which all Metals lie glistering in obscurity.

93. Some affirm, that the matter of this Stone is nothing else than a
corporeal Spirit of the World, formed in the Matrix of the Earth, from which it
receives all its animal, vegetable and mineral Faculties (as was aforesaid.)

94. As Wax receives the Impression of any Shape and Form, so does Argent Vive
lurking in the matter of the Stone, receive the Properties or Proprieties of
all things.

95. Do but see then D. Guibertus, what mavelous things it performs, being
drawn out of, and freed from its Chaos, purified from its Feces, and being made
a Quintessence.

96. The Stone (says a Learned Man) of the wise Men, is perfected in its self,
and by its self. The Roots, Branches, Leaves, Flowers and Fruit.

97. It Is then like a Tree; now what a many Boughs there is belonging to one
Tree? And then, what a multitude of Seeds?

98. In like manner is this our Philosophic fruitful Tree, containing in its
self the Seed of Gold and Silver.

99. Which Seed, if sown in its proper Earth, brings forth Sols and Luna's ad
infinitum, as other Seeds sown in the Ground.

100. For Nature naturally acts and operates perpetually on things of its own
Nature, and not of a diverse Species, much less then in a diverse kind.

101. For by how much the greater the Diversity of things is, by so much the
greater also is the Unity of things.

102. For Nature disposes all things in Potentia, for as much as that Art
should and does perfect Actu.

103. For Example, Nature has and does produce matter whereof Glass is made;
but in no place Glass its self. In like manner it has also created Iron lying
in a rude matter, committing it to us in a rough, unfashion'd and confused
Form, that therewith we make Horse-shoes, Sickles, Lances, or whatsoever we
please.

104. Thus Nature has also created Herbs, Trees, Gems, Corals, Gold, and every
thing the Eye can see; yet as they are, they cannot be called Medicines, but
rude and unrefined Substances, which by Chimistry are so ordered into
Medicines, as to purge, dissolve and separate the Heterogene from the Homogene
Qualities; otherwise the putrid would commix with the putrid, and the corrupt
with the corruptible.

105. Thus God the Author of Nature has created an only certain simple matter,
by which the Stone may be made, which wise Men have called the Root of Metals.

106. Which matter, if not disposed by Chemical Philosophy a potentia ad
actum, from its power of performing, to Performance its self, it will always
remain in the same state, of which the matter whereof Glass is formed is in,
which is not Glass its self, till means be used by an Artist to make it so.

107. The matter of this Stone is one only thing, as I have often said before,
which, as being but one thing, is not numbered or divided.

108. Which, if numbered, it is no more one thing; and if divided, it then
begins to be composed.

109. If therefore you would profit by Philosophy, remember to take one only
thing, [simple] whosoever does otherwise, will never find an end or perfection.

110. Whereas Nature from one thing produces all, and thus in one both agree
together.

111. For Nature is the Mother, and Art her Daughter.

112. Now where Nature ceases, Art begins; and this and no other ways is the
Order and Rule of Truth.

113. When therefore you have found that one matter which contains all things
in its self, exhibit not other extraneous matters to this, with an intention to
bring it to perfection; they will not bring it to perfection, but corruption;
and you will grievously deceive your self.

114. For the matter of our Stone is one only thing; yet not so very simple,
but it contains the Four Elements, as other Elementary Bodies do.

115. For as a Tree planted in the Ground brings forth Fruit in its proper
Season, in, through, and by its self: Thus out matter, if transplanted, and
bedewed with its own Matter, will bring forth [as the Tree] it is Fruit, which,
if sown upon impure Metals, will undoubtedly transmute them into pure Gold.

116. For this Philosophic Tree contains in its self whatsoever is necessary
for its self, without any Man's Assistance, as in the following Dialogue and
Pages (God willing) we may see.

117. As for you then D. Guibertus, do you be advised by those wise Men who
affirm,

118. That those Men are unable and unfit to judge of those things, which
things they do not understand.

119. And that every Man which must or will give Judgment on those things, that
(through Ignorance) seem to him dubious, must and ought to give that his
Judgment in the best and mildest Sense.

120. It Is therefore the part of a wise Man, rather to suspend his Judgment
concerning those things he knows not, or at most, he has but a very small
apprehension of, than to rail at and abuse those things he understands not.

121. But since there is no Remedy against abuses -- every Artist is not worthy
of the same Commendation, nor are all equally ingenious or commendable.

122. For one Artist excels another in Ingenuity and Skill.

123. For the Art depends not on the Artist, but the Artist on the Art.

124. Therefore before we go any further, this Question must be resolved, viz.
Whether any Art may be acknowledged and granted allowable?

125. Whether this Art is prohibited by any Divine or Human Law? For lawful and
unlawful Arts are thus discerned.

126. I find no Prohibition of Alchimy or Confection of Gold in the Scripture,
amongst those many Vices and Crimes that the Divine Lawgiver Moses exclaimed
against, and forbid in Duteronomy and Leviticus.

127. Nor can I persuade my self that Distillations, Alimbecks, and the
Confection of Gold and Silver, deserves more to be prohibited, than the melting
down of Jewels, Gold Rings, and many such like Ornaments.

128. Of what Great use Plates and thin Pieces, etc. of Gold and Silver were to
the People of God among the Jews, etc. I think none is ignorant of.

129. Yea, Esdras seems plainly to give his Suffrage for this great Art, where
Chap. 8. Book 2. Verse 2. And he answered me, saying, The most High has made
this World for many, but the World to come for few.

I tell thee a Similitude, Esdras: As when thou ask the Earth, it shall say
unto thee, that it gives much Mould whereof earthen Vessels are made, but
little Powder that Gold comes of; even so is the course of this present World.

130. Now as for Human Laws, surely there is not a word mentioning the
prohibition of Alchimy amongst the German Laws, etc. or in Digestis, Cod. Just.
vel Novel.

131. Nay, but the Art of Multiplication is rather approved of and commended.

132. But it may be objected, There Is Cheats amongst the Chemists.

133. Answer. And amongst Christians what a many Heretics? Amongst Physicians,
what a many Quacks and Impostors? And amongst Counselors, Judges and Lawyers,
what a pretending Rabble? Surely the Piety and Honesty of these Disputations,
etc. are to be praised. --

134. But I Would ask whether the Crimes of an Artist are to be, or should rightly
or justly be imputed to his Art?

135. Well says that wise Counselor, That the punishment of another Crimes
should be removed from those whom no Fault can lay hold of. But --

136. In Summa, Every one loves not that he understands not.

137. Nay, some fly from, contemn and disdain those Arts they are ignorant of.

138. But as the Knowledge and Understanding of any thing increases, so does
the Love toward it also.

139. Guibertus indeed is skilled in the Latin and Rhetoric. It Is no wonder
then that he contemns this Art he is ignorant of in so Scholastic a Style, [He
has nothing else to do] intending to annihilate, if he could, that Noble Art,
unknown to him, by such kind of Paint.

140. As for us, weemploy our selves about our Furnaces, endeavoring to defend
and maintain the TRUTH in smoaky Latin and simple Oratory. Nor need we
Rhetorical Flourishes, our Cause being good enough without.

141. But, Benevolent Readers, as for you, labor and pray, and be willing to
maintain Truth; and that GOD and Author of Truth and Mysteries shall be with
you.

Farewell once more, And meditate on what I have wrote.
The End of the Apologetick Introduction.
THE Practica Mirabilis FOR THE Accomplishing and obtaining from the Beginning
to the End the White and Red Elixir.
Which whosoever understands, need not read any other Book.
1. IN the first place, Love God the Searcher of all Hearts; walk holily before
him, and keep thy Feet from the Paths of wickedness.

2. For the Knowledge of this Art is the Gift of God.

3. Nor let any Mortal glory that he can perform any thing of himself, without
his Divine Assistance.

4. Pray and Labor.

5. The work is light, and requires not much expense, only much patience and
waiting for.

6. If you but once untie the Knot on it, the work may then be well styled
VVomens work, and Childrens play.

7. If you but rightly understand the Radixes of Numerals, you know enough.

8. Be satisfied with this little Tractate, and Christ Jesus will furnish you
with more

Be happy Reader, and so farewell.

9. Now in the Name of God will I declare the Practick and Method of
Philosophical working, how the great Elixir is brought to perfection.

10. Or the white and red Tincture, composed only of the Mercury of the
Philosophers.

11. Bringing Crude Mercury and Antimony to perfect Perfection, converting all
imperfect Bodies into pure Sol and Lune, far excelling that produced by Nature.

12. From therefore the Mercury of the Phiolosophers, which they call their
Prima Materia, or First Matter: Their Aqueous, Frigid and Humid Element: Their
Aqua Permanens, their Spiritus Corporis, Vapor unctuosus, Aqua Benedicta, their
Aqua Venosa, Aqua Sapientum, Acetum Philosophorum, Aqua Mineralis, their Ros
Coelestis, Gratiae, their Lac Virginis, their Mercurius Corporis Magnesia,
Radix Philosophica, and by infinite more Names, which you may find in
Philosophic Books.

13. Which matter, tho going by diverse Names, yet always signify one and the
same thing, as being of the wise Men, from which only and alone is made the red
and white Tincture.

14. Therefore, says Geber, that Prince of Philosophers, Our Art is not
perfected in a multitude of things; but it is one thing alone, it is one Stone,
one Medicine, in which consists the Magistery. To which we do not add any
Foreign thing, unless in its Preparation, by removing Superfluities: For in and
by it are all things necessary for the Work, to which we add not (I say) any
extraneous things, because of Gold and Silver; for They are not extraneous to
the Stone its self, if fermented therewith, they then being both Coadjutors to
the same, by which the Physical Work is finished.

15. Another Philosopher says we make use of venerable Nature -- For Nature
cannot be mended or made better but by things of its own Nature.

16. Therefore we must not introduce any thing of an Allen Nature as a Helper
to this Work; nor Powder, nor Water, nor any thing of an extraneous Nature.

17. For diverse things do not better our Physical Stone; therefore it is only
perfected by the Mercury of the Philosophers.

18. All other things, as Salts, Aloms, Vitriols, Borax's, Aqua Fortis's, etc.
being unprofitable and good for nothing.

19. Therefore the aforementioned Mercury is the only Radix Physica, the Arbor
Alta from which infinite Boughs are multiplied: And this is called that Stone
which is mentioned so often in the Books of Philosophers, and which they had.

20. But the first Operation of the Stone is called Sublimation.

21. Now how this Mercury of the Philosophers ought to be sublimed and brought
to Perfection, shall be plainly laid open in the following Lines, without any
Dissimulation or Obscurity.

22. Observe then that this Sublimation is not vulgar, but Physical.

23. Our Sublimation being nothing else but a Subtiliation of a thing.

24. So that Physical Sublimation is an Elevation of the Non-fixed Parts from
the Fixed.

25. For the subtle non-fixed parts are elevated by Fumes from the Fixed parts.

26. I would that they be not separated one from another, but remain together
inmutual Conjunction.

27. And now know that he which conjoyns our Physical, rightly, sublimes it, (
i. e. subtiliates it) in which depends the virtue of our Stone, that makes and
finishes our whole Elixir.

28. For as Geber says the whole Perfection of the Art consists only in the
right Sublimation, right manner of Vessel, and Regimen of Fire.

29. Because in this Sublimation, every thing of this are made and do consist,
viz. Sublimation, Distillation, Ascension, Descension, Coagulation,
Putrefaction, Calcination, Fixation, etc.

30. Concerning which the Philosophers have much capitulated, that by so doing
they might make their Writings the more difficult to be understood, to the end
that the unwise should by no means apprehend them.

CHAP. I. Of the First Preparation.
TAke, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the vendible prepared Mercury, the
Water of Philosophers, the Primum Hyle of the wise Men, put it into its clean,
bright, lucid and round Vessel.

2. Close its Mouth very well with Hermes's Seal, and let it suffocate in its
temperate and warm little Bed for a Philosophers Month.

3. Never in that Month's time permitting it to cool, (for then all is undone.)

4. Till you have sublimed so long, that it will sweat no longer, (i. e. till
there is nothing remaining either to ascend or descend.)

5. And till that matter within begins to putrify, be choked, coagulated and
fixed by virtue of the continual maintenance of its due Heat, that nothing will
ascend (any longer) in any Airy fumous Substance, but remain fixed on the
bottom.

6. Its Moistness being all drawn up, putrifyed and coagulated, and turned into
a Black Earth, which is called the Crows Head, the Black and Dry Element, etc.
Then is the true Sublimation of the Philosophers expedited.

7. In which Sublimation all the forementioned manners of Doings exist, viz.
Solution, Distillation, Coagulation, Putrefaction, Calcination and Fixation in
one only Vessel, and on one only Furnace, as was spoke of before.

8. For when our Stone is in its Vessel, and when it shall ascend by Fumes to
the top of the same, it is then called Sublimation and Ascension.

9. But when it precipitates from the top of the Vessel to the bottom and its
neither ends, then it is called Distillation and Descension.

10. And when by its very much Ascension it begins to putresie, then it begins
to be coagulated also, and is called Putrefaction and Coagulation.

11. But when at length [the Humidity of its radical Moisture being exhausted]
it begins to be calcined and fixed; It is called Calcination and Fixation.

12. And all this uno Actu, by decocting them at one time altogether in one
Vessel, and on one Furnace, (as has been often said before.)

13. And thus Sublimation being made a true Separation of the Elements is made
also.

14. For, as the Philosophers say, the Operation of the Stone is nothing else
than the Separation of the Elements and their Conjunction.

15. Whereas in our Sublimation the aqueous, frigid and humid Elements are
transmuted into earthly, dry and warm Elements.

16. From which may be observed that the Separation of the Four Elements in the
Stone, is not vulgar but Physical.

17. Because our Sublimation being finished, the Elements (as was told you
before) are perfectly separated.

18. Yet in our Stone there are only two formal Elements, viz. Earth and Water.

19. Earth, which virtually contains Fire in its self by reason of its dryness,
as Water contains in like manner Air in its self, by reason of its Humidity or
Moistness.

20. It may further be observed then, that in our Stone there are but two
formal Elements, though there be four virtually.

21. Therefore there is not a Separation of Four Elements, as Fools and Idiots
conceive.

22. There is a certain hidden Secret in our matter, whose Work and Virtue is
perceived, viz. Earth and Water. But the other two, viz. Air and Fire, are not
perceived; [ nec quicquam largiuntur] nor can their residing place be seen no
more than their Virtue, as in the other two Elements of Earth and Water.

23. Because in their Decoction the Fire changes the Colors. Lo! By the Grace
of God thou have the second Element in the Philosophers Stone, which is Black
Earth, the Crows Head, the Mother, Heart and Root of them, upon which Earth, as
upon the Ground, all other are poured.

24. Which earthly and dry Element, tho in the Books of the Philosophers going
by many Names, [as being by some called Laton, the Bull, Faex nigra, our Brass
or Aes, our Money, Black Sulphur, Masculine, Man, and infinite many others] yet
is one and the same thing, having its Original from one and the same thing.

25. By such a Privation therefore of Humidity, which is caused by Sublimation,
the Volatile is made Fixed, the Soft Hard, and the Water Earth.

26. And as Geber says, The Mutation of Nature into Nature, also a change of
Complexions is made; for the cold and moist Complexion is converted into
Choleric and dry, becoming also Spiritual, Corporeal and Liquid, Thick, and so
on the contrary.

27. Therefore the Philosophers say wisely, when they say, the Operation of our
Stone is nothing else but the permutation of Nature and Revolution of Elements.

28. For by such an Incorporation we change the moist and volatile into fixed,
the spiritual into corporeal, and the liquid into thick, the watery into fiery,
and the aerie into earthly.

CHAP. II. Of the Second Preparation.
1. NOw therefore by the Blessing of God, we having finished the First
Preparation, I will plainly declare the manner to bring the Black into
Whiteness.

2. therefore that fixed Black Earth which is called the Crows Head, and grind
it small (in porphyrio mundissimo,) into Two parts.

3. To which add part of the Reserved Philosophic Water which you know.

4. Conjoyn these Three into One Matrimonially, upon the clean Stone, by
stirring them very well together, that they may be perfectly conjoined; so that
all may return into one confused Chaos, as into One Body inseparably.

5. Then put it wisely into its adopted Viol, and lay it up in its Bed, that it
may be coagnlated and fixed, and become one entire white Body.

6. Which being done, take the white Stone out again, and bring it into a
small Powder, and again with a Third part of its Water, imbibe often, that its
Drought may be took away.

7. And again put it in its clear and clean Vessel, in its warm and temperate
Bed, that it may begin again to Sweat.

8. Its Water being again dried up, put more to it, and reiterate, so doing
many times, until this white Stone becomes by Reiteration after this manner,
most excellent, fixed, standing and piercing through the most simple Body.

9. Most swiftly flowing, and perfectly tinging all imperfect Bodies into purer
Gold and Silver than is naturally made.

10. And observe, that the oftener you repeat its Solutions, Coagulations,
Contritions and Assations, of the greater virtue and force will the Medicine be.

11. For by how much the oftener you apply its reserved proper excellency upon
the Stone, by so much the Richer you make it, for Projecting on all Imperfect
Bodies.

12. For at the first going over of this Medicine, One part of it will convert
an Hundred parts of any imperfect Body into pure Silver.

13. At the Second Reiteration, it will transmute a 1000, at the Third, 10000,
at the Fourth a Thousand Thousand, and so usque ad infinitum.

14. Therefore Wise Men do not Foolishly in commending Reiteration.

CHAP. III. Of the White King.
THerefore thus order this glorious Stone, this white King, (who transforms and
transmutes, and, all other imperfect Metals into Silver;) if of it you would
make the Red Elixer, which transmutes and and every Body into most Pure Gold.

2. That White Stone, and divide it into Two Part, one part you shall augment
for the Elixir White, as was said before, with its reserved White Water, which
will never lose its tincture and virtue.

3. The other part put in another Philosophic, Clean, Bright and shining Bed,
in a Digesting Furnace, and it will be converted into a Red Powder, which the
Philosophers call their Blood-colour, Powder, their Purple Gold, their Red
Corral, and their Red Sulphur, with which you may project on, and any other
Metal, as the Praxis will teach you.

CHEMICAL AXIOMS.
I.
ALchymy is one of the Sublimest Sciences which imitates Universal Nature; nay,
which in some things excels Nature. -- Nature indeed furnishes with Matter, but
Art operates in such a manner upon that Matter, as is impossible for Nature.

II.
Nature has disposed a certain Matter, containing in its self whatsoever is
necessary for the converting all imperfect Metals into pure Gold and Silver. If
that said Matter be Decocted and Fermented according to Art, which its
impossible for Nature to do; Nature therefore has brought forth nothing
impossible to be equaled.

III.
But there is in that Matter a Masculine and Feminine, viz. Gold and Silver, a
light and easy work to whom the Almighty God is pleased to reveal it.
Transmutation is possible and easy; for all things that are and increase, can
be Multiplied, as Men, Trees, Grain, and such like.

IV.
For as from one Grain, a Thousand are generated, so from Adam the First Man on
Earth, is the World increased to what it is, etc. Therefore it is possible to
increase Matter to infinity.

V.
The Philosophers affirm, that the Stone consists of a Body, Soul and Spirit;
they comparing an imperfect Body to a Body Perfoct, and call its Water a
Spirit, and that rightly, because, by that Water is the Dead Body vivified and
made alive, which before it was not, and brought into a far better form.

For first by our Magistery, we make Gross Slender, ( i. e. the Body a Spirit,)
Humid we make Dry; Water, Earth. And thus we change Nature, and make Superior
Inferior; which is effected when the Spirit is made a Body, and vice versa.

VI.
Our Stone is made from one only thing, in one only Vessel, for our whole
Magistery is made with, from and by our Water, which Water is so powerful, as
to bring Bodies into (cineres,) Ashes, Coals or Cinders, and then Whitens them.

VII.
Azot and Fire (says Morienus,) purge Laton, for Laton is a very pure Body, but
Azot is Argent-vive, that is our Secret Water, our Water is our Fire, and
Quintescence, or the form of our Matter. Now Matter is the principium of
Perpession, but Form of Action; therefore by how much the more formal any thing
is, by so much the more efficacious it is; and by how much the more material
any thing is, by so much the more unfit to be worked upon.

But Incorporeal Forms are not like Spiritual ones; it is no wonder then that a
Spirit, a little Moles should be so strong and efficacious. Thus Angels by how
much the more immaterial, by so much the more efficacious. As a great Vegetable
amongst other things, abounds with that Spirit or Quintessence, so our Mineral
Chaos abounds with the Form of all Minerals and Metals.

VIII.
Which Form thus drawn forth from the Chemical Chaos, is endowed with so great
strength and virtue, that it presently dissolves like Ice in Hot Water, Gold,
Silver, Corral and Jewels. Nay, of such great virtue is it, preserving the
Radical moisture of the Body so wonderfully, that Raymund Lully by the use
thereof, when he was Slain by the Sarracens, (being full One Hundred and Fifty
Years of Age,) was as Nimble and able to perform any thing as a Young Man; it
being took inwardly every Day without intermission.

IX.
Aros the Philosopher says, that the Water or Spirit of the Stone is all in
all, and is the only thing sought after, and requisite for this Work; for in it
is the flying and fixed, the tinging and tinged, the white and red, Masculine
and Feminine composed together by an inseparable Composition. Lully says, the
Spirit is the first principal Secret, the Water the next, from which Two things
every thing receives its Nutriment, and every Tree, Sprout and Herb its
Vegetation, and every Light its Illumination.

X.
This Water carries Life, Light and Spirit with it; but why does Lully call the
Water the Second principal Secret, etc. whom the other Philosophers call the
Oil? The reason is, because it is drawn in the Second place after the Spirit;
the Oil is nothing else than the Radical, Pure and incombustible humidity of
Metals, in which does most especially consist the Metallic Essence and Form,
(and nisi totum compositum aqua fiat, pulvis non erit fusibilis, nec ingressum
habebit,) to which Water the whole is reduced, by a moderate and continual
Humid Heat.

XI.
Know then, that the Elements are not divided in our Stone in Substance, but
well in Virtue; for no pure and simple Element is conspicuous but in its own
Sphere: Know then, that unless you sublime the Body, until it becomes Water,
it cannot be congealed, unless by Fire; for Fire congeals the commixion of our
Stone.

XII.
We Dissolve the Bodies, that Heat may cleave to the depth of them, and so
Fire alone changes Water and Earth from their Nature and Color. I knew a Man
who could with Three Simples, make an equal Fire to last for Seven Years,
without once going out, and this without any Addition of Fuel. This is very
necessary for you in this Art.

XIII.
We want therefore such a Fire for our work, for by that we might fully
perfect the work; our Water is our Vessel, and our Fire it is our Mercury-vive,
and Argent-vive of the Philosophers: But the principal Matter of all Metals in
their Mines from which they themselves are generated and caused, is Aqua sicca,
Dry Water, which we call Aquavive, or And others Spiritus Foetens, which we
call Sulphur.
Argent-vive; yet they are not procreated in their Nature, as in their
Minerals: For in their Places where they are generated, no Metal is to be
found. But that Matter is a certain substance produced from Nature naturally,
having in it self the substance of them both; and from such a substance is
produced or generated a certain Subtle substance, smoaky, in the Bowels of the
Earth, and Veins of Minerals, where it is congregated and detained. Now that
first Matter from which that aforesaid fumous or smoaky Matter is generated and
proceeds, is a certain Body, and those Fumes generated from it, is a certain
Spirit; and thus Nature makes a Spirit of a Body, and causes to ascend from
Earth to Heaven; i. e. it makes a Corporeal thing, a Spiritual substance. There
is a certain proper substance or matter of Argent-vive and Sulphur, very
subtle and fumous from the nature of the aforesaid things, of a very bright
and clear substance, generated by our ingenuity like Tears, in which lurks our
Quintessence. Some say our Stone is made of Argent-vive alone, without the
admixion of Sulphur; they say right, and understand Art, for in Distillation
the Sulphur ascends and mingles it self with the Argent-vive, and in
Putrefaction the Water becomes red and tingent, and is condensed by a little
heat, and the Earth again becomes Oil, from which Oil, Alcohol, etc.

XIV.
It Is to be noted, that the Philosophers call that Argent-vive and Sulphur, on
which Nature pours out its action and operation. The Stone is one thing, one
Medicine, in which consists the whole Magistery. Heat is the Agent and Mover to
Corruption, and there is no other Agent in the World; the Radical Fundaments
or Principiums of this Famous Science, upon which they themselves are founded,
are these that follow, viz. a certain proper Matter or Substance of Argent-vive
and Sulphur, generated by our Magistery, very pure and bright, in which lies
hid the Quintessential Spirit.

XV.
Every Individual multiplies the form of its own Species, and not of another;
and therefore the first form of its Body being Dissolved, it is converted into
Argent-vive; by Elementation, in Color Blackish, in Smell Faetid, and in Touch
Subtle and Discontinuing.

XVI.
In such a Matter then are contained Four Compounded, Separable and Resoluble
Elements, in Water of Argent-vive after Putrefaction; therefore Mercurial Water
is the first Matter of all Metals; and with it we Dissolve all Metals which
cannot be Dissolved into other things. Now if so be the Metals were not
Dissolved into their first Matter, you would not gain what you expect by that
Mercurial Water.

XVII.
By Heat all the Elements in the Work are discerned; for whereas there are (as
'twas said before,) but two formal Elements, perceived in the Art, yet there
are virtually four; for in the Water is contained Air, and in the Earth Fire.

XVIII.
The Qualities of the Sulphur are commixed by Digression with this Argent-vive,
and therefore it is to be altered as Nature requires; it is converted and
congealed into Sulphur, and by virtue of its own Heat, and by the conversion of
its own nature.

XIX.
Whatsoever truth is consistent in the Chemical Art, is to join and conjoyn the
Moist with the Dry, and this is approved by all the Philosophers: But
understand by the Moist, the Spirit well cleansed from all Dross; by the Dry,
understand the perfect, pure, calcined Body; and believe me, the Operation
consists in the Dissolution and Coagulation of these Two Parts. Now to
Dissolve, is to convert the Body into the Nature of a Spirit. But to Coagulate,
is so to operate on the Corporeal Spirit, as to make the Fixed Volatile, and
the Volatile Fixed; by doing of which, you will obtain the Magistery; but
diligently take care, lest you mingle the Impure Mercurial Water with the pure
Body. Azot, that is, the Mercurial Water, together with the Fire wash clean;
and Mundify the Laton, that is, the Black Earth, for the preparation of the
Earth is always with the Water. Therefore let not your often repeated
Contritions and Assations weary you, for it is a natural action which h^ (...)
motion'd and determined time; for sometimes it is finished in ^ lesser time,
sometimes it requires more time, because in Putrefaction there can be no
certain determined time, being according as the Artificer labors thereon. A
Philosopher says, that in Decoction a Fourth part of the Body is Diminished,
and we have experienced it to be true. Note, that you ought to have a great
care, lest in the imposition of the Imbibition of Black Earth with the Mercury,
the Vessel break or crack not; from which Caution you may observe, that the
Water ought to be warm, and so ought the matter; i. e. the Earth, which when
put together in the Vessel, should be well shaken together in your Hand, for
otherwise the Matter will stick to the Sides of the Vessel; therefore do as
aforesaid, till the Matter being well mixed, becomes of the consistency of Mud,
etc. and then the Vessel ought to be well closed up, and put in warm Ashes,
that the Water therein put, may be Dried up again into it; on which warm Ashes
let it remain, till it become a Dry Powder, which will be in Twenty Five or
Thirty Days Natural.

XX.
Now having this Dry Earth or Powder, put upon it Six or Seven parts of
Mercury, that therein the Powder may be Dissolved; then close the Mouth of the
Glass very well Hermetically; then Dry and Congeal on Ashes with a gentle Heat;
which Congelation and Solution reiterate Four times, and you will have this
Earth fixed and black; which being broke in Two, the Fractures will glitter. If
you will take the Mineral Elements, take not of the First, nor Last, but
Middle. To make the Stone, having the Matter by you, Dissolve it in its own
proper Vessel, by a moist Heat; which being done, the Earth will be Converted
into clear Water, and then into Earth again; the Earth will be turned into Oil,
and the Oil will become an incombustible, fusible Powder, and all this by one
only Regimen; which is called Women's Work and Children's Play.

OF FERMENTATION.
NOthing can be made from a perfect Body, because it is already perfect. As for
instance, Fermented or Levened and Baked Bread is perfect in its state, being
come to its full period of Perfection, nor can you any more Leven it.

2. Thus it is in Gold: The White and Red proceed from one only Radix, no other
thing of a Diverse Genus intervening.

3. We take therefore that matter from whence Gold is produced; which by the
help of an Artist, is brought into the true ferment of Philosophers.

4. Therefore mingle not the White Water with the Red, or vice versa.

5. Yet the White and Red both proceed from one and the same Radix, nothing of
an other kind intervening.

6. Therefore our Stone is by the Philosophers deservedly called every thing,
because it has in it self, and by it self, every thing necessary for its own
Perfection; and by whatsoever Name it is called, is always one and the same
thing.

7. Put it in the Vessel, and firmly close, until you have completed the whole
Magistery.

8. When you see the Water congeal it self, then be satisfied that the Science
is true.

9. If you can but hit at the right Degree of Heat, the Water and Fire will be
sufficient for you.

10. For its White and Red Effects, consists in the Regimen of Fire.

Here ends the Chemical Axioms; though we have omitted various things, to
hinder Prolixity.

The Dialogue of Arislaus, a very ancient Philosopher, concerning the
Philosophers Stone; (a Work never before Published).
1. IN the Name of God, Amen. Know my Dear Son, that before the Creation of the
World, the Spirit of the Lord rested upon the Waters.

2. Afterward all things were created from Water.

3. This Water did God divide when he commanded part of the Water to become
Dry, which he called Land; the other part not converted to Land, called he
Water still.

4. Which he preserved in the same Estate it was at first, that it might be
serviceable to the Dry Land in Watering it, etc. For the Earth cannot or will
not yield its Fruits, unless moistened by the Waters of its Rivers.

5. Now in this Discourse of mine, will I manifest to thee the natural
condition of the Stone of Philosophers, apparel'd with a Triple Garment, even
this Stone of Riches and Charity, the Stone of Relief from Languishment.

6. In which is contained every Secret, being called a Divine Mystery and Gift
of God, than which there is nothing in this World more sublime.

7. Therefore diligently observe what I say, viz. That it is apparel'd with a
triple Garment, that is to say, with a Body, Soul and Spirit. Now that this
Body may be revived, give it its Soul, and it will live.

8. Schol. Good Master, I cannot understand your Expressions, being too obscure
for me to comprehend -- For whereas at first you told me of but one Stone, now
you tell me there is three, viz. a Corporeal, Animal and Spiritual. Now if there
is but one Stone, how can there be three?

9. Mast. O my Son, remove that Cloud of Ignorance from you, and understand the
Truth -- You are to understand that when I said there was but one Stone, I
meaned, that there is but one thing of which it is made: Now when this Body is
reduced into its first matter, viz. into a Water full of Waves, then it is
called one thing, and a Physical Root, from which infinite Boughs are produced.

10. It is also called a Stone, known to the principal Philosophers who have
it; therefore from that Stone, viz. White and Red Earth, its Soul is extracted
by Separation and Sublimation, that is, Subtiliation.

11. Schol. Is then Sublimation, which is Subtiliation, absolutely necessary in
this Work?

12. Mast. Know my Son, that our Sublimation is not common Sublimation, but
Philosophic; for our Sublimation is no other than Subtiliation, after such a
manner, that the Superfluities of our Stone in Sublimation are removed,
separating the non-fixed parts, and converting them into Fume and Smoke from
the Fixed. But this must be done with Wisdom.

13. He then that rightly Sublimes Subtilizes, and so his Work is ended.

14. Schol. But, Sir, I have often heard you say, that the Elements must be
separated per modum separationis, after the manner of Separation.

15. Mast. Know, my Son, that all this is done in this our Sublimation, for it
perfectly separates the Elements, becoming then a certain white Stone of three
Elements, viz. of Earth, Water that is Mercury, and of a Soul.

16. And know that Faex, that is Earth, is the Root and true Ferment, and is
called the Nurse of all the Elements. Aer, that is the Soul, is penetrating.
The Spirit, that is Mercury, is portans. And so you may reckon our Sublimation,
which is Subtiliation, and they are called Elements.

17. But that you may better understand me, our Earth fixes the Spirit, that is
its Ferment the Mercury; Air, that is its Soul, penetrates. It Is Spirit, that
is Mercury, cleanses and washes it from its Impurity. v. g.

18. When Water rains from Heaven upon Earth, then begins the matter to change
Black, which from the decoction of its Sun ( that is, its Fire) that Water
(that is, its Spirit) is dried up, and so it becomes white Earth. Thus it is in
our Work.

19. But there are but very few, my Son, that understand that Subtilation;
therefore they labor in vain who understand it not.

20. Schol. Tell me, most Learned Sir, can this Work be done from beginning to
the End, on one Furnace, and in one Glass?

21. Mast. As for that, my Son, its according to the Quantity of matter you
have at Work; if you have much matter, then it cannot be contained in one
Vessel, but many. If you do a mean Quantity, one Vessel and one Furnace will
suffice for our Sublimation, i.e. Subtiliation, Coagulation, Fixation,
Inceration, Solution, and white and red Tincture.

22. Schol. I am not a little cheered with what you have already said to me,
having for a long time sought after it, but never made Trial -- But, good Sir,
your kindness emboldens me to desire the method of conjoyning the Elements
again; for I must needs confess I neither understand aright Separation or
Conjunction.

23. Mast. I will very willingly answer you, therefore mind what I say, and
conceal it.

24. After you have separated the Spirit and Soul from its Body (understand the
Aerial Essences) then return the quantitative Form to its first Principle,
after the manner of Union, and immediately the Body will receive its Soul as
Nature will receive Nature.

25. Then proceed to its Regimen, and imbibe its Water so long, till its Earth
or Quintessence flow atop, and has drunk up its Water; then may thou command
its Earth to increase.

26. Schol. Thanks, good Sir, I desire further to know, whether presently after
that Earth, which you call its Quintessence, has flowed atop, it will tinge?

27. Mast. I Will satisfy your Desire, Son: That Confluction which is called the
Quintessence is a simple Body, which contains not the Motions of the Elements,
as other Elementary Bodies do. The reason is, because that Body of the Elements
is called the Super-addition, as being extracted from them. If you would arrive
to the perfection of the Elixir, so that it may be of such great Power as to
transubstantiate every thing conjoined to its self, you must by no means do so,
unless by often repeating its Solution. -- Such is the manner of our Solution.

28. After our Stone is by virtue of our Fire become most pure and white, and
without any Dross, then convert it into a subtle Powder in one Stone, and
dissolve with our most Bright and Celestial Vinegar.

29. Then is it dissolved into a most clear, physical, and (as it were)
Fountain Water. Then after our Stone is thus dissolved, distill according to our
way of Distillation, and coagulate in the Fire by a gentle Heat.

30. And lastly, after Coagulation, calcine as it ought, as I have often told
you; and know that in the first Dissolution of the Stone, one part converts an
hundred parts into pure Gold. And this is our Solution, the Secret of Secrets.

31. Schol. Loving Master, how great are the Works of God! And how gracious is
he to bestow such Gifts on his Children! For me, I cannot but give you eternal
Thanks, who am by your Instruction brought to the end of the Work. I have no
need now any more to be sad, for my Heart is replenished with all Joy. I must
needs confess how very much they err, who go not this way to work; for some
work on Salts, Aloms, Borax Hair, Urine, Sheeps Blood, on Aqua fortis, on
Spirits extracted from Gold, Arsneck, Magnesia, Aurapigment, Honey, Fats, etc.
Nor can I but pity them, knowing that I my self once worked on them. But now I
consider what you have been pleased to say, viz. That the Stone is extracted
alone from the Mercury of the Philosophers, which Mercury is Physical not
Vulgar, as that is which is dug out of the Earth. But our Mercury contains a
Body, Soul and Spirit, as you, worthy Sir, have taught me at the beginning of
this our Discourse. Let me entreat you then to satisfy me in one point more,
and by your Benignity, I have every thing sufficient to proceed as I desire,
that is, viz. Whether in Multiplication of the Stone, the Stone is not to be
begun again from the very beginning, and to be so long and tedious a time about
as at first, or how?

Mast. I will answer you to this two ways, Theologically and Physically. First,
Theologically. In Genesis, Chap. 6. says GOD, Let us make man after our own
Similitude and image. But he did not therefore create Man alone to increase and
multiply. No [he did not, nor could he] But to that intent he created a Woman
also, that retaining the Seed of Generation they might multiply, till the end
of the World. In like manner it is also in our Magystery, for Sol retains its
Sulphur (i. e. its Seeed) to generate Gold according to its Nature, as Luna her
Seed, (i. e. her Sulphur) to generate Silver.

33. Such is our and the Philosophers Sulphur, which is not found upon the
Earth, unless in those Bodies from which it is extracted.

34. Our Mercury then is the Fermentation of this Sulphur; for from its Seed is
to be had the Fruit of Ferments.

35. It Is measured, and the Fruit thereof is gathered, and so without ceasing
for ever.

36. Schol. Pray, Sir, let me know more fully.

37. Mast. Very willingly, my Son, Thou shall then multiply the Stone after its
Multiplication, its Weight of the extracted Water, and well mix (de servo) well
washed of its Regimen, and this without Confluction; and be careful in this
Composition, lest it conflux then after Commixion, place wisely in Balneo, (i.
e. in a Gentle Heat) then dissolve all together in the Milky Water, which Water
is Lac Virginis, and Acetum Philosophorum; and let this be done for the space
of one Month, and with Discretion; then you may permit it to elevate toward
the Heavens, and become Volatile.

38. Afterward that you see it Beautified by such an Elevation, command it to
descend into the Earth, and then it will be a fluid and flowing Stone, (and hoc
in gradu regiminis mensura) and then will your Stone be multiplied.

39. Then divide into two parts, Reserve one for present use, the other for
augmentation; but first of all make the Stone pure and fixed by Assention, and
the Stone fixed by descending into the Earth.

40. Then dissolve the Fixed in pure and clear distilled Vinegar so long, until
it convert Mercury, and all other imperfect Metals into Sol and Lune (much
excelling the common sort) so will thou have the Honor and Glory of this
World, and all obscurity will fly from thee.

41. Therefore, my Son, I beg one thing from thee, viz. That from thy whole
Heart thou love GOD, who has by me, unworthy of the least of his Mercies,
bestowed the Knowledge of this Magistery on Thee.

POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
I advertised in my Preface, That if this Enchiridion be kindly accepted, etc.
I would publish the Remainder, having already translated it in order thereto,
whose Title [that you may imagine part of the excellent matter in it contain'd]
is, De Denario Medico, etc. teaching by only Ten Medicines to cure all internal
Diseases, etc. and a mortal Blow to Negromantick and Cabalistical MAGIC;
laying open and proving its Insufficiency to effect, together with its Vanity
and Sinfulness. In Annotations of that Famous and Learned German Chemical
Physician Ber. Penotus, etc. upon the abovementioned DENARIVM: A Tractate
presented to him for his Approbation, etc. which for its high Physical
Excellency was by him [with the Approbation of the most Learned Practitioners
in Physick] published many Years since in Latin, as 'twas delivered to him in
Germany, both for the Health of the Bodies and Souls of that Nation, etc.
Together with Arnoldus of the Secrets of Physic, and Force of the Imagination,
etc. And Costaben Luca of Physical Ligatures, Inchantations, Suspensions, etc.
with a little Tractate of Mercurial Waters for sundry uses. Prefixed to which
is a Preface concerning Mercury, a very pleasant, learned and profitable
Manual, and which will not be above a Sheet, or a Sheet and an half bigger than
this. Which Promise I [and my Bookseller I presume] will perform, if this but
answers Expectation:

THE INDEX.
1. THE Translator's Preface to the intelligent Reader. 2. The Author's Preface
Dedicatory to Dr. A. Libavus. An Excellent and admirable Balsom of singular
Virtues. Page. 1 Receipt. 1 An Artificial Balsom for all sorts of Wounds,
Swelllings, Gunshot not excepted. Page. 3 Receipt. 2 An experienced Balsom to
heal all desperate Wounds in 24 Hours time. Page. 4 Receipt. 3 To cure the
Frenzy and Delirium. Page. 5 Receipt. 4 For Foolishness, by want of Sleep.
Page. 6 Receipt. 5 For Convulsion Fits. ibid. Receipt. 6 For the Cramp, or
Contraction of the Sinews. ibid. Receipt. 7 An excellent Remedy for itching
Pimples, Blemishes and Wrinkles in the Face. Page. 7 Receipt. 8 A most approved
Remedy for inflamed Eyes, both Running and Dry. As also for Eyes that are
Blood-shot, and for itching of the Eyelids. A singular Remedy. Page. 8
Receipt. 9 Another most noble Medicine for the same. Page. 9 Receipt. 10 To
heal a Wound in a small space. ibid. Receipt. 11 A Secret to cure the Dropsy.
ibid. Receipt. 12 A long experienced Plaster for old and stinking Ulcers and
Fistulo's, separating the corrupt from the incorrupt. Page. 10 Receipt. 13
Another Emplaster for all bitter Maladies and Tumors. Page. 11 Receipt. 14 An
admirable Preparation of Camphir to cure cankered and corrosive Ulcers,
containing many other rare Properties. ibid. Receipt. 15 To cure the Canker.
Page. 12 Receipt. 16 For a Dyssentery and desperate Looseness. Page. 13
Receipt. 17 One only excellent Remedy for the Plague. ibid. Receipt. 18 For all
Imposthumes, Plurisies, or any such like Distempers, Page. 16 Receipt. 19 For
the Shingles [and Formicas] a most experienced Remedy. ibid. Receipt. 20 Aqua
Mirabilis for curing and expelling the Stone, and Gravel in the Reins. Page. 17
Receipt. 21 For an inveterate Megrim. ibid. Receipt. 22 For Ulcers in the
Lights. Page. 18 Receipt. 23 For Suffocations of the Womb. ibid. Receipt. 24
Catholicum Catharticum, [a great Secret.] Page. 19 Receipt. 25 For the
Epilepsie. ibid. Receipt. 26
PART II.
THE Author's Epistle to Dr. Tanchio, etc. An Apologetick Introduction of
Bernardi Penoti a Portu S. Mariae Aq. in which is evinced both by Reason and
Authority, the Error and Opinion of Dr. Nicholai Guiberti Lotharingi concerning
Alchimy, etc. From p. 1. to p. 25 The Practica Mirabilis for the accomplishing
and obtaining from the beginning to the end the White and Red Elixir, which
whosoever understands, need not read any other Book. From p. 26. to p. 39 Chap.
I. Of the First Preparation. p. 31 Chap. II. Of the Second Preparation. p. 36
Chap. III. Of the White King. p. 38 Several Chemical Axioms. From p. 39. to p.
50 Of Fermentation. ibid. The Dialogue of Arislaus, a very ancient Philosopher,
concerning the Philosophers Stone [a Work never before published.] p. 52 The
Postcript. p. 62
The End of the Index.
An Alphabetical Table of the Diseases, etc. curable by the Remedies in this
Book.
A.
AGue to cure, p. 2. 1 Animal Spirits to comfort, p. 2. 1 Anthonies (St.) Fire
to cure, p. 16. 20
B.
Balsom of many wonderful Properties, p. 1, 2, 3. 1 Bones to comfort, p. 3. 1
Blemishes in the Face to take away, p. 7. 8 Burning Ulcers to cleanse and heal,
p. 8. 8 Boils to dry up, p. 8. 8 Blood-shot Eyes to cure, p. 11. 14 Belly an
excellent Purger of, p. 18. 22 Brain to extract obnoxious humors from, p.
idem.
C.
Convulsion Fits to cure, p. 6. 6 Cramp to cure, p. 6. 7 Contraction of the
Sinews, ibid. Cankred and Corrosive Ulcers to cure, p. 11. 15 Canker, p. 13. 16
Cough to take away the causes of, p. 18. 23 Catholicum Catharticum, so much
esteemed for purging of Bodies with, p. 19. 25
D.
Dyssentery to cure, p. 13. 17 Desperate Loosenesses to stop, p. 13. 17 Dead
Bodies to preserve, p. 2. 1 Decayed Strength to help, p. 2. 1 Dilirium to cure,
p. 5. 4 Dim Eyes to help, p. 9. 10 Dropsy to cure, p. 9. 12
E.
Eyes enflamed to cure, p. 8, 9, 9, 10 Eyes running and dry, ibid. Eyes
Bloodshot, ibid. Eyelids itching to cure, ibid. Eyes having Skins growing over
them to cure, p. 9. 10 Epylipsie, p. 19. 26
F.
Fevers Hectic to cure, p. 3. 1 Frenzy to cure, p. 5. 4 Foolishness by want
of Sleep, p. 6. 5 Fits to cure, p. 6. 6 Face Wrinkles, Blemishes or Pimples in,
p. 7. 8 Face to make of an incomparable White and Red Color, ibid. Fistuloes
to cure, p. 10. 13
G.
Gunshot to cure, p. 3. 2 Gravel in the Reins. p. 17. 21
H.
Heart to comfort, p. 2. 1 Hectic Fevers to cure, p. 3. 1 Heart trembling, p.
3. 1 Heart Palpitation, p. 5. 4
I.
Itching Pimples to cure, p. 7. 8 Inflamed Eyes to heal, p. 8, 9. 9, 10
Imposthumes, p. 16. 19 Inveterate Megrim, p. 17. 22
L.
Long Life to procure, p. 3. 1 Looseness to cure, p. 3. 1 Lungs, Ulcers thereof
to heal, p. 10. 12 Looseness desperate to prevent, p. 13. 17
M.
Many Diseases a Receipt for, p. 1. 1 Melancholy to expel, p. 3. 1 Maladies of
all sorts to cure, p. 11. 14 Mederiff an excellent Purger of, p. 18. 22
P.
Poisoned Lungs to cure, p. 10. 12 Plague one only excellent Remedy for, p. 13.
18 Pimples itching, p. 7. 8 Plurisie to cure, p. 16. 19 Palsy to cure, p. 31.
1 Palpitation of the Heart, p. 5. 4 Provoke Rest, p. 6. 5.
Q.
Quartan Ague to cure, p. 2. 1
R.
Reins to comfort, p. 3. 1 Rest to provoke, p. 6. 5 Running Sores to dry up, p.
8. 8 Running and dry Eyes to cure, p. 8, 9. 9, 10
S.
Swoundings to help, p. 2. 1 Speechless, to recover Speech, p. 2. 1 Suffocation
of the Womb, p. 2. 1. and p. 18. 24. Spiritual Substance to comfort, p. 3. 1
Swellings to allay, p. 3. 2 Sinews contraction thereof to prevent, p. 6. 7
Sores running to dry up, p. 8. 8 Stinking Ulcers to cure, p. 10. 13 Shingles to
cure, p. 16. 20 Saint Anthonies Fire, ibid. Stone to expel, p. 17. 21
T.
Trouble of Mind to expel, p. 3. 1 Trembling of the Heart to cure, p. 3. 1
U.
Ulcers burning to cleanse and heal, p. 8. 8 Ulcers of the Lungs to cure, p.
10. 12 Ulcers old and stinking, p. 10. 13 Ulcer, cankred and corrosive to cure,
p. 11. 15 Ulcers in the Lights, p. 18. 23
W.
Weak Bodies to strengthen, p. 2. 1 Womb Suffoeations of, p. 2. 1. and p. 18.
24 Wounds of all sorts to cure, p. 3. 2 Wounds desperate of all sorts to heal,
in 24 hours time, p. 4. 3 Wrinkles in the Face, p. 7. 8 Wounds to heal in a
small space, p. 9. 11 Wounds to cure, p. 13. 16
ERRATA.
PAge 1. 1. r. Aloes Hepat. p. 4. l. 3. r. clear Therebinthin lbj. p. 9. l. 4.
r. Foeniculi, Eufrasia Celendine. p. 11. l. 11. r. Gum Elemus. p. 15. l. 4.
after abstaining r. from Victuals and Drink. p. 16. 19. for Beam-somer r.
Bean-flower. If any other literal Faults (though really I think there is none
of much moment) are escaped the sight, by reason of Have on both sides, the
Reader is desired either to correct 'em with his Pen, or cast a favorable
Construction thereon.

THE END.

