SOME FREE REFLECTIONS Upon Occasion of the PUBLIC DISCOURSE ABOUT Liberty of
Conscience, And the Consequences thereof in this present Conjuncture.

In a Letter to a Friend.

By one who cordially embraces whatsoever there is of true Religion in all
Professions, and hates every thing which makes any of them hate or hurt one
another.

Licenced August the 11 th. 1687.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold, by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch, and at the Three Keys in Nags-Head-Court in
Grace Church Street, over against the Conduit, 1687.

SOME Free Reflections, etc.
Dear SIR,
THE Information you gave me upon my first arrival here of the great Ferment
that is now raised in men's minds by the Kings late Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience; and the Counsel you were pleased to giv me thereupon for my own
Conduct, that I should be cautious in asserting any Opinions contrary to the
current Stream of the Times; This Information, and this Counsel, I say, were so
Prudent and so Friendly that I acknowledge my self obliged to you for them, and
therefore I now return you my hearty thanks. I know not how you came to imagine
that such a precaution was necessary for me, who have been so long a Stranger
to my own Country, and by consequence, who am not much wedded to any of those
particular Factions, that have this long while miserably divided it. But I must
confess to you, that so it is. The News I had heard of that Declaration abroad,
had been so pleasing to me, as seeming the only possible Cure for those unhappy
divisions, that without your previous advice I should have been astonished at
the dislike I have heard expressed of it by many of my best Friends; and perhaps
not able thereupon to refrain from opposing them, so directly as might have lost
me their Esteem and Friendship which I am very desirous to conserv. Well, it is
to you then that I ow the obligation of some prudent reservedness, which I have
yet maintained in all occasions of converse about public Concerns, during these
eight or ten Days that I have been here: And it is to you therefore that I am
now resolved to address my self for further directions. Such a reservedness has
indeed in it a Prudence which self Interest will always exhort unto: But when
the matter is of public and great concernment, so narrow a confinement seems
unsuitable to the generous Principle of universal Charity, wfiich the Christian
Religion insites us unto. That Principle, you know, is apt to move me when
occasions seem to require it. And therefore that I may not er in my general aim
of contributing toward the public good, I desire you to weigh with me those
Considerations which have rendered the prospect of a general Liberty of
Conscience so pleasing to me; that I may, upon your better advice, either
propagate or stifle them, as shall appear most consonant to my Duty.

The thing in it self is so agreeable to the nature of Mankind, and to the
particular Laws of the truly Primitive Christian Religion, that it is much to
be wondered how so sociable a Creature as Man is, and so meek a Creature as a
Christian ought to be, should have ever infringed such an excellent Rule. Can
any thing be more reasonable than for every man to allow unto another that
Liberty which he desires for himself? Can any thing be more peaceable than that
Principle, which, allowing such a Liberty, dos thereby take away the occasion of
bitterest Contention? The very Light of Nature directed the Wise Heathens unto
it, during some Thousands of Years; insomuch that whatever other Differences
happened among them, upon account of civil Interest, their Societies were never
disturbed by the disagreement of their Conceptions in matters of Religious
Speculation. The Jews, who had greater reason than any other Nation to set a
high valu upon their own Law, as having received it by an extraordinary
Ministration, yet nevertheless attempted not to force any one to a compliance
therwithal, who lay not under the same Conviction as themselves. The Primitive
Christians, who reasonably may be supposed to have had the truest sense of
their great Master's Instructions; were so far from inculcating any Principles
of Persecution, that they exclaimed against the practice of it, as the greatest
mark of that Antichristianism which had been*fore-told them was to spring up in
the World. The Arguments with which this Principle of Liberty, or Toleration,
has been defended ar many and strong. But it would be very superfluous in me to
insist upon them unto you, who have seen and heard them repeated of late Years
in a thousand Forms, and who I know ar your self* convinced of the natural
equitableness of the thing, not withstanding all the inconveniencys that you
have represented to me in its practice. I will therefore ad only one reason for
it, which seems to me invincible, and then pass to the consideration of those
inconveniencys, which is my main design.

I say then that the establishing of any Religious Persuasion by Force is
unreasonable, because indeed it is impossible. The Mind of man is not capable
of receiving any conviction but either by sensible proof, or rational
demonstration. Blows and Torments may force an outward Compliance, but they
cannot work any change in the Heart; and therefore, neither can any such forced
compliance be acceptable to God, because it is only the Heart that he looks
after. Thus then it is evident that all the effect of any forcible Imposition in
Religion, in those that are so forced, can be nothing but Hypocrisy; and
consequently that nothing can be more unjust, nor more ridiculously absurd than
to attempt the establishment of any Religion by such like means. Let it be
therefore concluded between you and me, as I know it is, that no man has right
to impose upon another in matters purely Religious; Which is to say, That every
man has right in those matters to enjoy his own Liberty. And now let us examine
what Advantages or Inconveniencys may arise from that Liberty in the present
Conjuncture of Affairs in England; and consequently, whether a Prudent and an
Honest man ought sincerely to wish for it, and contribute unto it, in such
opportunities as Providence puts into his hands, or no. That is the very
Question which now concerns me, and therefore I will endeavor to lay it before
you as plainly and as impartially, as I can.

The Liberty of Conscience now aimed at in England, in the ordinary Discourse
of People, implys no less than the change of our Laws; and that especially in
those two important Heads, the Penalties imcumbent upon Dissenters, and the
Test for the discovery of Dissenters. These have been looked upon by some as the
Bulwarks of our security; and therefore it is not much to be wondered if the
discourse of their removal dos alarm those men's minds. Nevertheless if it be
considered how little security those things have been unto us, how little rest
they have procured us; nay on the contrary, what discontent and murmuring, what
contests and factions they have raised and fomented among us; I say, if this be
considered, methinks the ground of men's present apprehensions should in a great
measure be taken away. What good is it, in truth, that those Laws have don us?
They have not hindered the spreading of any fanciful Opinions among the
different Sects into which we are divided. But they have rendered al those
Sectaries discontented, inclined them to Sedition and Rebellion, and thereby
made the Government it self uneasy and unsecure. This is plain matter of fact,
most evidently visible to every one that dos not wilfully blind himself. Why
therefore should any one be alarumed at the change of those Laws which we have
experienced to be so insignificant, not to say so contrary unto the very ends
for which they were Established? And why should not we al much rather rejoice
at the prospect of this new Experiment of Liberty, which affords more lively
hopes of stable Comfort? Truly the design appears to me so plausible, that I
cannot conceiv any thing but Interest capable to blind men's minds in the
consideration of it.

But to that supposition of mine it may perhaps be here replied with
confidence; That it is indeed Interest which causes the reluctance we are
speaking of, and that their Interest being such, it is fitting men should
maintain it, and oppose al innovations contrary thereunto: For this they think
sufficiently, authorized by that Fundamental Maxim, of Salu^ Populi, etc. which
affirms the Peoples Interest to be the supremest Law.

This Maxim indeed I allow to be unquestionably just; and if their application
of it to this case be so too, we must acknowledge they have reason, and join
with them. But if, on the contrary, the continuance of the Test and Penalties
be only the Interest of a very small part of the Nation, and that the general
Interest of the whole lys in the Liberty now designed, then will the force of
their main Artillery be found pointed against themselves, and their Argument
easily destroyed. It is necessary therefore to consider whose Interest it is to
introduce this Liberty, and whose to oppose it; that we may judge which of the
two is the most general. But that judgment is so easy, that no man can be long
in suspense about it. The whole Body of Dissenters from the Church of England,
however subdivided and distinguished in other things, ar al united and
comprehended in that common Cause. They have al been straightened, persecuted and
oppressed; and therefore nothing can be more natural than for them to desire
Liberty and Ease. Now this collective Body of the several Dissenters is
manifestly greater than the Church of England alone. But besides these, it is
also evident that a great part of the Church of England it self, I dar boldly
say the best part of it, those Learned and Rational Divines, I mean, who have
sometimes by opprobry been termed Latitudinarians, (tho in truth, the word sound
nothing but honorable) Those have always declared themselves of moderate
Principles, their Interest lys also evidently in Moderation and Forbearance,
because they are no less hated by the severer sort of their own Brethren than
even the Disienters themselves; and the People that have been influenced by
their Doctrine is so numerous, that the remaining strict and narrow-spirited
Church-of- England-men, whose Interest ingages them to maintain their own
Privileges by infringing the just Rights of their Neighbors; this remaining
number, I say, is so small in comparison of the whole Body of the Nation, that
it is even ridiculous for them to build their pretenses upon the forementioned
Maxim, which in effect is directly contrary thereunto.

Now if this be so indeed, that Liberty of Conscience is not only the Right of
every particular Man, but also the general Interest of the whole Nation,
methinks no Man ought any longer to be a shamed of, or alarumed at the project
of it; but rather every honest Man ought to contribute his Endeavors that it
may succeed.

Yes, may somday, if it were only Liberty of Conscience that were pretended to,
there could be little objected against it: Nay, it must be confessed that the
bent of the Nation that way is now so strong, that the most part would freely
enough consent to the abolishing of those Penal Laws which have hitherto
restrained it. But, say they, that is not al. Those that design the abolishing
of the Penal Laws, do at the same time design to take away the Test, and thereby
not only to permit the Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion, but also, to
admit Roman Catholics into a share of our Government; which, they ad, is a
Consideration wholly of a different Nature from that of mere Liberty of
Conscience, and the Practice whereof would be very unpolitic. This is the
Objection that makes the great Cry in this Conjuncture. Those that endeavor to
introduce Liberty of Conscience aim also to take away the Test: Those that
would take away the Test ar secret if not open Papists: And both the one and
the other, under pretense of Liberty of Conscience, ar Betrayers of the true
Libertys and fundamental Laws of their Country. With this Cry many modest and
honest Men ar born down, and silenced. And indeed it requires more than
ordinary Courage and Strength to bear up against so impetuous a Torrent. But
when all is don, Truth and Reason ar able to bear up against any thing: And
therefore I will now examine impartially whether they be found on the side of
these Objectors, or of the forementioned Patrons of Liberty.

Two things especially ar here to be inquired into. First, whether the Test, as
it is by Law imposed upon Roman Catholics, be really an Intrenchment upon the
natural and just Liberty of their Consciences, or whether indeed it be a mere
political thing of a different Nature, without any Relation thereunto. And in
the next place, whether the taking away of that Test may probably prove
advantageous or prejudicial to the general Interest of the Nation. Upon these
two Considerations lys the Stress of this whole Debate.

Now to the first, I must needs affirm that in my Opinion the imposing of that
Test is a thing of a mixed Nature. It is indeed political, because the design of
it is to exclude the Roman Catholics from public Employment: But it is also
Religious, because it makes their Opinion in Religion the Condition of that
Exclusion: And therefore it can in no wise be said to be of so different a
Nature from the Liberty of Conscience we are speaking of, as to have no
Relation at al thereunto. On the contrary, I conceiv not how any one can doubt
it to be an infringement of that Liberty. For those Employments being not
hereditary, the way to them is by Nature open to every Man, according as his
Capacity and other Circumstances may fit him for them. Now if a Person
otherwise duly qualified for such an Employment* which might enable him and his
Family to live in Ease and Comfort, shall by reason of some Opinion in
religious Matters be excluded from that Employment, and thereby exposed to
Penury and Hardship; this indeed is not a direct putting that Person to Death
for that Opinion, but it is a taking away from him that Talent which Nature or
Industry had given him as a Provision for the Comfort of his Life. And can any
one now say that such a Practice is not a Burden or a Snare to that Man's
Conscience? What real Difference is there, I beseech you, whether the Laws of
the Land do authorize a Minister of Justice to oppress and torment a Man for
his Opinion, or that they cast the Man himself into such Circumstances that his
own Necessities do the same thing? Surely there is none at al. It is as clear
therefore as Noon day that the imposing of this Test is a straitning of the
natural and just Liberty of such a Persons Conscience. And therefore whoever dos
acknowledge in general that Liberty of Conscience is a Right of Nature and of
Christianity, as has before been hinted, must in particular acknowledge that
the Test is unwarrantable, because it is an evident Infringement thereof. Now
the far greater Part of the Nation, at this day, seeming inclined, by that
Reason, to the abolishing of Penal Laws; if they would act consonantly to their
own Principles, they ought, for the same Reason, to desire the Abolishing of
the Test also.

This Point being once gained, that the imposing of this or any other such like
Test, in matters of Religion, is an Infringment of our Natural and Christian
Liberty, the remaining Considerations that are urged in favor of it, ought not
to be of any great weight with upright and honest-minded Men. Tho some Advantage
might be pretended to be found in the doing of it, we ought not for any
Advantage to transgress so fundamental a Law. We must not sin that Grace may
abound. We must not do Evil that Good may ensue. Those ar known Precepts; and
if they were attended to, this Debate might here be ended. But Interest,
Interest, is a strange thing. People ar possessed with an Opinion that the
admitting of Roman Catholics into a share of our Government is against the
Interest of the Nation: And therefore they still think they are bound to oppose
it, per fas and nefas. I must therefore go on still further, in examining now
whether the extending of Liberty of Conscience so far as I have shown that it
ought to go, viz. To the taking away of the Test, and by consequence to the
admitting Roman Catholics into public Offices, be contrary to the general
Interest of the Nation or no.

That we may judge rightly of this Question, we must consider in what
Circumstances the Nation is now situated, both in respect of the Head and Body
of it. Our Prince is a Catholic: and we our selves ar divided into several
Sects, of which the Catholics ar in number the least considerable. The Interest
of all those Sects, excepting only a small number of rigid and narrow-spirited
Church of England Men, has been already shown, to lie in Toleration and
Liberty. But there is no reason to expect the King should indulge them in that
beloved Liberty, unless they consent to allow him the same Liberty for those of
his own Persuasion. Now that Indulgment and that Consent do necessarily imply
the same Extent on the one side as on the other. The Protestant Dissenters
claim a Right to public Employments: And shall not the King demand the same
Right for Catholic Dissenters also? He may do it so much the more reasonably as
the Conformity of their Principles with his may naturally induce him to confide
more in their Affection and Fidelity. This being so, and the Liberty which we
thirst after not being obtainable at any other Price, who can be so unmannerly
and so il natured as to refuse unto the King that which they demand of him for
themselves? Or who can be so childlishly humorsom, and so devilishly malicious,
as to refuse unto themselves their own reasonable and necessary Comforts, rather
then allow others to enjoy the like? So strange an Extravagance as that can
not, certainly, fall into very many Heads. For it being evident by this
Consideration, that al those whose Interest obliges them to desire Liberty for
themselves (which is to say the far greater part of the Nation) ar obliged by
the same Reason to allow the same Liberty, in its utmost extent, unto others:
Because their own is not otherwise obtainable: I say this being so, though it
may seem hard to say, yet really it is much harder not to suspect some Defect
either in the Intellects or Integrity of those that oppose it.

But prehaps I sing of Victory too soon. The Opposers of that Branch of Liberty
which I now plead for, will be apt to tell me that it is not simply upon the
account of their Religion that the Roman Catholics ar excluded from any share
in our Government; but because their Principles tend to the Oppression of
others, and make them restless until they themselves become absolute Masters.
This Objection indeed would have some Force if it proceeded from Persons who
were themselves innocent of the Crimes they impute unto others: But where al are
equally Guilty, it may be wondered with what forhead any one can produce it. The
plain Truth is, that ever since Religion became twisted with secular Interest,
and the Profession of Divinity became a Trade, al sides have strove to get
uppermost; and being so, have persecuted their Fellows. The Invention of new
Creeds or Tests, and the Persecution of Dissenters, is too too ancient. The true
Simplicity of our Saviors and his Apostles Doctrine, and the meekness of their
Spirit, lasted not many Ages: I dar not say how few Years. But let us look
nearer Home. Calvin, the great Institutor of Presbyterianism, showed the
narrowness of his Spirit in the Niceness of his Theological System, the Cruelty
of his Spirit in the Death of Servet; and his Followers have trod faithfully in
his Steps, as well by the frequent Superfoetation of their Articles of
pretended Orthodoxy, as by their Persecution of Dissenters where they have had
Power, and by their Resistance even in open War, where they have been abridged
of the Privilidges they pretended unto. Shall I instance also in our Church of
England? I am loath to discover our own Shame. But, alas, it lys already too
open, without my Discovery. She has persecuted ever since her first
Establishment: And some of the Penal Laws then made, ar now the very Subject of
this present Debate. This Guilt has been Universal. And if Jesus Christ should
now say unto the Partisans of al Sects, as of old unto the Pharisees who
accused the Woman taken in Adultery, let him that is Innosent cast the first
Stone, I am persuaded the Effect would now be the same as then; they would al
go away Convicted. Let not that therefore be urged against any one unto which al
ar equally obnoxious. An Objection looses al its Force when it may so justly be
retorted against the Objector.

O but, will some say, the Case is not equal. The Danger is greater from the
Roman Catholics than fromothers, in that the very Principles of their Religion
do dissolve their Obligation to Fidelity, and leave them at liberty to pursu
the Advancement of their Church by the Violation of all the most sacred Bonds
with which other Men ar tied. For shame, let us in the End learn to be more
equitable, and not impute unto any Man as a Principle of his Religion that
which he utterly disowns. If there have been Men amongst them of such
pernicious Principles, have there not been such also amongst us? If some of
their Casuistical Doctors have palliated in some Occasions the Crimes of Treason
and Rebellion, have not some of our zealous Ministers in other Occasions
encouraged unto the same? We want not our Authors that maintain mischievous
Principles, no more than they want theirs: witness the List of those condemned
not long ago by the University of Oxford. Now will any Presbyterian think he
has fair Play shown him by those that shall impute unto him all the Consequences
which may be drawn from the Writings of Buchanan; or a Church of England Man
from those of Julian Johnson? Crimes are personal. And Societies must not be
condemned for the Miscariages of particular Persons. Let every Man then bear
his own Burden. Let us al henceforward cease from criminating others with
things wherewith we our selves may be so justly recriminated. Now the surest way
to stifle these Reproaches is by mending the Faults. Wherefore let us now on al
sides study to reform whatever is amiss: Let us unanimously renounce the
Principle of Persecution: and let that be the only Test, upon which our
Government be modelled, as has been already judicially advised by another Hand.
In doing so, there is no Fear but the common Union and Interest of al Parties,
in a League of mutual Liberty, will be incomparably a better Security for us
against any particular Usurper, then our several Factions have been hitherto
one against another.

But still this Answer is not direct enough. Those that are Partys in such a Case
are seldom sensible of the Danger wherewith they threaten others, but always
intent upon those Dangers wherewith they conceiv that others threaten them. It
is not sufficient therefore to tell them that the Danger on both sides is mutual.
No, they expect that on their Side there should be no Danger at al. Let us
endeavor therefore to satisfy them in that Point also: and then let them show
themselves to be worthy Citizens, by a cheerful Compliance with their own Duty,
and our common Interest. What can this Danger be that is apprehended by the
taking away of the Test? That the Papists should Lord it over us, and with an
open Force extirpate our Religion by the ancient Method of Fire and Faggot, or
work our Conversion by the new Mode of Dragooning? But that is not rationally
to be apprehended from so inconsiderable a Number of Men as they are. Is it
supposed that their Numbers may increase, and in the end grow formidable? That
Argument strikes more directly against the Toleration of their Religion than
against the abolishing of the Test: For it is the Toleration alone which will
giv them Oppertunity of spreading their Doctrins, and laboring to make
Proselites. Wherefore that Argument ought not to be urged by those who
acknowledge that Toleration to be a natural Right and a Christian Duty; which
certainly most Men now do, and al Men ought to do. No, but it will be said that
the Temptation to Popery will be yet greater, by the open way to advantageous
Employments, when the Test shall be taken away. But do not those Objectors see
and consider the uncertainty of the Continuance of those Advantages, or perhaps
even some stinging Consequence attending them, under a Protestant Successor? Ay
certainly they are not so blind as to be ignorant thereof. Experience has shown
them already the Force of that Antidote in some eminent Instances, which may
assure them that no poisonous Effects, at least no mortal ones, ar now to be
apprehended from this gilded Pil of Preferment.

I might here ad many other Considerations to dissipate this panic Fear. As,
The Spirit of the Nation, now animated more than ever against Popery. The
Interest of the Papists themselves to keep within modest and moderate Bounds,
lest too great a stretching after things out of their Reach, should make them
lose their present Footing. And, not improperly, The Word of a King, who has
solemnly promised us that he will not suffer any Man to be oppressed in the
just Liberty of his Conscience: Of a King, I say, who dos not now first begin
to affect that Language, but who has been long known to assert the same
Principle: Of a King, who values himself more upon his Integrity and
Faithfulness than upon all the Glories and Advantages of his Crown: And of a
King, in fine, whose Interest as well as Honor obliges him to keep his Word.
These ar al Considerations of weight. But after a Demonstration of the
Impossibility that the Roman Catholics should arrive to that Strength as to be
able to hurt us, (tho we suppose them to be never so willing) it is superfluous
to enlarge upon Topics of a weaker Nature. That which cannot happen in humane
Probability, need not be feared in humane Conduct, nor ought it to be objected
in humane Consultations.

I will therefore here stop the Course of these Reflections; which I must
acknowledge do now seem unto me strong enough to dissipate those Fears which
your Prudence first instilled into my Mind, and to encourage an honest Heart
to go on straight forwards, as Providence shall enable him, in the present Work
of this Day, notwithstanding any Opposition or Reproach that may attend it. The
thing in it self is good. And therefore I declare to you, that I will no longer
be ashamed or afraid to show my Approbation of it, and to dispose others* as I
may be able, unto the same Sentiments. I ought indeed, in good Manners, to have
expected your Judgment, before I made so express a Declaration of my own. But I
know your Honesty too well to doubt of your Concurrence herein, and your
Friendship too well to fear any hard Censure for my transgressing those little
Rules of formal Decency. Let us both of us put our Hands to the Work, in Gods
Name, in the Sphere where we are placed. And to begin the Attempt, if you judge
that these Reflections of mine may be in any degree useful unto the Public, I
giv you free Liberty to disperse them as you think convenient. But that
Permission ingages me to ad yet a few Words more; which are not indeed much
needful to your self, but may perhaps not be unuseful to others.

In perusing what I have writ, I cannot but suspect that a Prejudice may arise
against me in some Men's Minds, from the Disinteressedness I have shown in
respect of the different Sects of Protestants; as if I were my self a Papist,
and designed wholly to favorize that Party. To obviate that Prejudice, I
therefore desire the World may know that I am so far from being engaged in any
Party, that I sincerely desire the Distinctions of all Parties may be
obliterated amongst Mankind, and that all the Ends of the Earth may be brought
into Subjection and Obedience unto the Gospel of the Holy Jesus, and own no
other Name or Profession but that of Christianity. Oh what glorious Days, Oh
what transporting Comforts, and solid Happiness, would that Temper of Spirit
bring into the World! Then would the Root of Contention be cut up, when al Men
were engaged in the same Cause. Disputes would surely cease, when Men came to
know that the Religion which Jesus Christ came to institute upon Earth*
consists not in any airy Speculations, nor shadowy Ceremonys, but wholly and
solely in actual Obedience to his Holy Precepts. They would then easily infer,
from such a Foundation; that Notions and Doctrins, and much more outward Cults,
ar only so far necessary unto Salvation as they are proper to influence Men's
Lives. They would then know that the Grace of God which brings Salvation has
appeared unto al Men; and that therefore it does not ly hid in Difficultys and
Obscuritys, which few or none do comprehend; but that the Rules it prescribes
us ar plain, even to the meanest Capacitys, teaching us, that denying
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and Godlily
in this present World. This would make al Men more intent upon then Duty, upon
the strict Observance of the Rules of Justice, of Truth, and of universal
Charity and Good-wil toward one another, which is the choicest Flower in all
the Garland of Christian Virtues. And in the same Proportion as those Virtues
increased, still further Knowledge, and a sound Judgment in Divine Truths would
increase with them; and the Seeds of Discord would at the same time be
destroyed. We should then turn our Swords into Plow-shares, and our Spears into
Pruning Hooks; we should not learn War any more, but rest Fearless under our
own Vines, and our own Fig Trees, and every Man walking in the Name of his God.
Princes would not then press Uniformity in things of small Consequence, with a
Violence only tolerable in Occasions of the most fundamental and greatest
Importance: Subjects would not refuse Conformity in things indifferent, with a
Headstrongness only excusable in Points most essential: Nor would either the
one or the other mistake those fundamental and essential Points, when al were
agreed that they consisted only in Piety, Sobriety, and Virtue. An Authority
tempered with Sweetness, and a Subjection mixed with Lov, would make al Estates
of Men as happy as our frail Condition of Mortality can admit.

This Thought, you see, has a little warmed me; and no wonder it should: For
indeed it is the only Fire that heats my Zeal, the only Spring that gives
Motion to my sluggish and indifferent Temper. God grant that it may kindle some
Measures of a like Flame, nay a higher Measure, I beseech him, in those that
read it. Then should I hope daily to see more and more considerable
Advancements in the Work that Providence seems to be now acting in the World.
Shall I explain my Meaning? Why not? I am sure it tends not to the Injury of any
Man, and therefore it can not be reputed Criminal. Well, it is this. The
Persecution we have heard of in France, I am well informed, has inspired a
strange Spirit of Reformation into the Romish Clergy themselves: They acknowledge
the Abuses that are in their Church, as far as ever its outward Economy and
public Authority will admit: They preach openly at Paris against al manner of
Superstition and Idolatry* They instruct their Auditors in a spiritual
Adoration of the supreme Deity: They do not rack the Consciences of their
Penitents with any strict Determination in Points incomprehensible, but they
turn them wholly to the Essential Dutys of Life: And in this Manner they
endeavor to produce and maintain Unity between themselves and their New
Converts, as they call them, in the Bond of Peace. This appears to me an
Antiperistasis to the Designs of the Authors of that Persecution; a Rebound
guided by Providence, which produces a far different Effect from the direct
Blow. But this is not al. We have heard of something like it in Italy, and in
Spain; which has already made some Noise and a very considerable Progress in
those Countries. Perhaps indeed these things may be censured by some Doctors of
that Communion, who ar as much wedded to their old-fashioned Popery as the
narrower sort of Church-of-England-Men (amongst Protestants) ar wedded to their
liturgical Rites and Ceremonys. But however it is one Step, nay a great
Advancement, toward a general inlightning of Men's Minds in true Religion, which
I strongly hope will be conducted by Providence to a happy Issu. And as I
contemplate the Prospect of our English Liberty, as a Dispensation of Gods own
Direction, extended unto us by a Hand from whence we least expected it; as an
Instrument more exactly fitted by him for the Atchievment of this great Work
than those others aforementioned; so I heartily wish that al tru-hearted
Englishmen would put their Hands unto this Work; that we may be al found
diligent Laborers in the Vineyard where we are placed, faithful Servants in the
Improvement of the Talent committed unto us, and by no means barren and
unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto which we have so much
pretended.

Pardon, I entreat you, this Excursion. It is now time for me to return to my
first Theme, and draw toward a Conclusion of this tedious Letter. Those that
read it with unprejudiced Eyes will easily discern that I write it not to serve
the Interest of any one Party, further than that Interest tends to the general
Good: And that I despise the Censures of al Partys, in comparison to the
Satisfaction I propound unto my self in contributing toward that Good. My Rule
is straight. Let others make theirs so too, and we shall al infallibly arrive at
that happy Rest which we al breath after. I will sum up what I have said, or
supply what I have omitted, in a few Words. Liberty of Conscience is the
natural Right of Mankind, and the general Interest of England. Penal Laws and
Tests ar direct Infringements of that Right, and they tend evidently to the
ruin of that Interest. Will we therefore acquit our selves like honest and
prudent Men, let us settle our selves in that our natural Privilege, and let us
abolish every thing that is opposite thereunto. Let us abolish those things, I
say, we that are private Persons, in persuading every Man his Neighbor to that
Disposition: And when we shall be called to it, let us elect such Members to
serve in Parliament as shall be disposed to consent unto the abolishing of them
by Law. That is the surest Means to engage the King unto us, and to engage us
al unto one another. His Government will be so much the more easy as he finds
his People the more compliant with his just Desires* And our Security will be so
much the greater, nay it will be entire, when our Propertys, our Libertys, and
our Religion, shall be defended by the common Union of al Partys against our
only public Enemies, al turbulent and ambitious Innovators.

I am, Dear Sir, Yours, etc.

FINIS.

