These following words the LORD required a Servant of his to write the very
day, and about the same hour the People called Quakers we, debating their Paper
against me.

J. P.

OYe People,
called by the Name of the LORD, why seek ye to stop the Leadings of his pure
Spirit of Life in his Children, that seek nothing but to serve Him, nor delight
in any thing but to obey Him? the glory of this World, and the favor of men
they despise. Why, why Cannot you let them have their Consciences at liberty to
serve the LORD? In our Father's House is Bread enough; to Him we must go; in
Him our Souls take pleasure: It Is His Right alone to Rule, and we cannot give
it to any other, neither can we bow to the Will of any, though because of that
we be cast out from amongst You; in Meekness, Love, and Lowliness of Mind we
can bear your hard speeches, but only as the LORD leads, so must we follow
Him. O the riches of his Love! who can declare it? Is the Cross now become an
offense unto you? that none can truly take it up and escape reviling. Ah, my
Father! the Noble Birth thou have raised up, that must follow Thee fully; its
joy and delight being only in doing thy Will, and thy Peace is reward enough:
In the quiet retired mind let all sink down this day, and they shall know that
saying fulfilled, Not one barren amongst them, but every one bearing Twins. Oh,
thou pure righteous Seed! who teaches like Thee? Thy Glory is excellent, and
cannot be given to any other. Oh ye wise men, quench not the Spirit, seek not
to quench the Spirit, but let it arise in whom it will, and be not you so
troubled, for as much as some there be that must be kept chaste unto it, and are
willing to lay down their lives for its sake. Many years trial have we made of
it, and found the virtue and life thereof, and it a present strength in all
temptations, its love and bounty in all sufferings. O my Soul, bend to none
that would oppose its Leadings, it being known to thee the chiefest of ten
thousund; yea, the Marriage of the LAMB is truly come, and the Friend of the
BRIDEGROOM greatly rejoices to hear the BRIDEGROOM's Voice: They who stand and
hear Him, have no desire to cumber themselves with many things, but to keep
waiting in silence. 10th day of the Month called August, 1670.
O GOD of mighty Power, arise and reign in thy full Dominion, in the Hearts of
all thy dearly beloved Children, who cry night and day for thy Presence, and
nothing else can satisfy.

A Kinsman of mine writing to his Father into the North, sent him one of those
Papers I had got printed, which gave an account concerning my intention of
carrying my Books out of my house, and of my burning about the quantity of a
quarter of a sheet of paper upon the Exchange in London, etc. A Copy of whose
Answer I am willing here to insert.

J. P.

SON,
Though the condition your Uncle is now in, is I believe no whit troublesome to
him, resigned up welcomly to recieve what he concieves unjustly comes upon
him; yet I cannot but in affection to him, (which I have reason to have for
him) have a resentment of his Sufferings. I do believe he would be unwilling
any Friend should any way be engaged for his Liberty sake; But if I were with
you I should endeavor it even against his mind: And therefore I would have you
try what your Engagement in his behalf could procure for him: You may consult
with Mr. Bates, and join with him in what you think may be for his good.

I gather from his Paper, and I should have said so of this Act without it,
that he did not this in his own will, but as required thereto by the LORD.
August 7, 1670.
But I expected in his Paper his reasons to the World more particularly, and
what this Burning should be a Sign of.

These following words the person that writ to his Son abovesaid, writ also to
me after I was out of my first Imprisonment: I having sent him one of those
Papers put out against me by the People called Quakers.

J. P.

I Am truly glad thou art at liberty again, although I did believe thou
might obtain it when thou pleasedst, no Law being broken: Yet, for thy
Family's sake, thy Liberty is desirable, except thy Confinement were of public
service, and not to be prevented without unlawful compliance. People are
generally dissatisfied concerning this passage of thine, for that (besides the
probability that thou would have burnt those Books which the Porter carried
after thee into the middle of the Exchange, and there (as seems by thy Paper)
poured out) thou do not declare to what end and purpose the said Act was.
Perhaps thou intendedst only to burn some loose and vain Pamphlets, to give
public detestation of their vanity; or, perhaps thou did intend to burn some
of thy Friends Books, and other good Writings, to show that they are too much
idolized, that people look too much without, and that time will be when they
shall be laid aside. A meaning I am persuaded thou had in it, which thou
think not fit to publish. In the mean time, since the Action had nothing of
positive evil in it; and since I, and all that know thee are assured that there
could be nothing in it of self-interest, or dishonest project, it becomes us to
be slow (if not mild) in judging. Hence I cannot but admire at this enclosed
Paper (as is intimated) of the Ouakers, which in some parts of it looks like A
Bull of Excommunication.
a Roaring Romish Bull. They were too forward in their judgments, taking that
for granted, which only they suspected, but did not know. But who were they? It
had been fit for them, in my judgment, to have given their Names; for probably
all called Quakers are not of their Opinion, and then the Paper is not true;
Besides that, having no hand to it, to own and assert the things certified, it
becomes scandalous and libellous. I am persuaded the Authors of it will
shortly, if they do not now wish, August 22, 1670.
that the Words of it were as obscure and awanting as their Names.

I being at the Press, Anne Mudd came to me, and desired these following Lines
might be inserted.

J. P.

FRIENDS,
In bowels of Love this I have to say unto you. That the time is come that you
must arise and come to Judgment, ye that have judged the Servant of the LORD
for obeying his Command:. Wash your hands in Innocence, and then you shall not
be guilty.

Ann Mudd.

Printed in the Year accounted 1670. and publised by me

John Pennyman.


