THE ARK Is begun to be Opened, (The Waters being somewhat abated) Which with
some Papers and Passages, given forth by the Lord's Servants, I am thus to
Publish, Who am made a Living Witness of the Spirits teaching; which Worship is
so Pure, that I may not endeavor to gather any Proselites thereto; yet am
freely given up to serve all, or any, that truly fear the LORD.

John Pennyman.

Behold, they of the House of Israel say, The Vision that he sees, is for many
days to come, and he prophesies of the times that are far off: Therefore thus
says the LORD GOD, There shall none of my Words be prolonged any more; but the
Word which I have spoken shall be done, says the LORD GOD.

LONDON, Printed in the Year accounted 1671.

Several being desirous that I should Print something concerning my late
Marriage, (which was published the 24th of the Month called October, 1671.)
Which day, though 'twas a day of scorn and reproach, yet I do say, Many shall
bless the Lord because thereof: So that it is now with me, for their sakes,
and for the sake of all the honest-hearted, to write a short Account of some
Passages concerning it.

THE LORD having required me to take one called Mary Boreman to be my Wife, it
was with me to have it made public, and to that end I desired a Meeting Place
of the People called Quakers; and the rather I did desire it, because I had an
interest therein: But they not admitting me that liberty, I got leave for the
use of Merchant-Taylors-Hall; which being granted, I then was to invite several
sorts of Professors, and also was to provide Food for about 250 Persons,
(supposing about that number might be invited); The Food was to be all of one
sort, and so was the Drink, [He that can read, let him understand]: but what
with the violent opposition of some of the People called Quakers, intruding
themselves, with several of the rude People, caused such a disturbance, that I
had neither liberty to declare what I had then to publish, but also hindered my
treating those [so invited] with that civility and respect I intended. Yet what
I declared there, as a Message from the LORD, here follows.

OH People! my Bowels yearn, my Bowels yearn toward you, whose desires in any
measure are after the LORD: O that you would now (I say, that you would now)
return with all your hearts unto Him, and obey the Voice of His Power in you;
then should you be made able to stand, and endure the fiery Trial which is come
and coming. Oh! the Day hastens wherein all Profession, that is not grounded in
the Life and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ (whatever the mew of it be) will be
so shaken, that an utter (I say, an utter) blasting and withering shall come
upon it; and for that cause the LORD does, and.will yet suffer great Trials
(yea, I say, great Trials) to come, both upon the Professors and Possessors of
his Name; that so his Children [the Possessors] may be manifested unto all, and
discerned from all that are but Professors, though never so fair and seemingly
covered: for all Coverings, but what is of the Power and Spirit it self, shall
be too narrow; and all that are not covered with the Spirit and Power of
Emmanuel their shame and nakedness shall appear more and more.

This is the Testimony which the Spirit and Word of Truth gives; therefore he
that has an ear to hear, let him hear, before the day of his Visitation be
wholly past, and the things belonging to his Peace be hid from his eyes: for
yet a little while, and the voice shall be, He that is filthy; let him be
filthy still; for the Spirit of the Lord shall not always strive with flesh, but
his Plagues and Indignation shall be poured out upon such as will not be
gathered in the day of his Patience, Long-forbearance, and Free-love; and he or
she that loves Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Children, House or Land,
Liberty, Honor, or any thing more than the Life of the Lamb, shall be counted
not worthy of Him, and plainly manifested so to be* Read this who can; and he
that can receive it, let him: for the time draws nigh (yea, I say, the time
it come) that these Sayings must be fulfilled.

THE Indignation, the Wrath of the LAMB is come, Let all Flesh tremble before
HIM, yea let all faces gather paleness who are joined to Iniquity either of
Flesh or Spirit; for the Day of their Torment, yea, I say, the Day of their
Misery, Vexation and Torment is come and coming, yet more to be revealed and
made manifest: Wherefore I say again, and it is the Word the LORD, That all
Flesh is but as grass before Him, who is the MIGHTY, DREADFUL, TERRIBLE ONE;
Yea, who is, and will be more manifested to be a Consuming-Fire to all the
Workers of Iniquity: My Charge is, to Warn you, yea to Alarm you, that whilst
it is called to Day, you harden not your hearts, but that you would repent, and
turn unto the LORD, if by any means you may find a place of Repentance, before
the Night come (which is hastening on apace) wherein none can work: The Mouth of
the LORD) has spoken it.

But as for you whose Hearts are chaste, and entirely given up to serve the
LORD, I am to proclaim, that the Year of Jubilee is come, yea, the Time of your
Deliverance, yea, I say, the Set-time of your Deliverance is come and coming,
yet more to be revealed and made manifest. Glory and Praise, Hallelujah and
Thanks be given to our GOD, who Lives and Reigns in all His Saints and
sanctified Ones, both as KING, PRIEST and PROPHET. Glory and Praise in the
highest be given to HIM, from this time forth and for ever more. Amen,
Hallelujah.

Subscribed and Published by one of the least of the Thousands of Israel, yet
one of that Number whom the LORD has [of His infinite Mercy] chosen to follow
Him fully, and has accounted Me worthy to stand in the Gap, and to be a
Living-Witness against All Unrighteousness, yea I say, against All manner of
Unrighteousness. O let my Soul for ever Praise and Magnify His Name, who Alone
is Worthy, says His Servant. J. P.

After I had delivered the aforesaid Message, it was with me to Read this
following Paper; which my Wife had writ above a year ago, concerning her
leaving the City.

Friends and People,
It Is in my heart to give satisfaction to all that have known me, how it is
with me as to the leaving this City. The LORD having been with me
miraculously these eight years (since the death of my dear Husband) and carried
me through many deep sorrows, in which time He brought me near unto Himself,
for which my Soul does truly bless His most holy Name; and by His Heavenly
Power He has also kept me from the very temptation of being greedy of Gain;
I have neither wronged nor defrauded any Creature, either in Buying or Selling,
that I know of, but have sought their good even as my own; and now, I say, the
same GOD that has thus preserved me in this place, has put it into my heart
to depart from hence; the cause thereof is not yet made known unto me, but
feeling His good Spirit leading me forth, (not knowing what my Service may be
for Him else where) I dare not to say, as Pharaoh did, Who is the LORD that I
should obey Him? Neither am I to reason, or consult with flesh and blood about
it, because I know Him to be a GOD of Power, by whom all Actions are weighed:
So let none blame me, as to my Children, for as the care of a tender Mother
has been in me for them, so it remains, and must be so to the end of my
days, being assured that their Father's GOD will be with them, and His
Blessing shall rest upon us for ever more, even His Blessing who has chosen
me to follow Him fully; and I may not thus requite Him who has blessed me
with a great Trade and plenty (as to the outward) even what can be desired, as
to make it the cause of my disobedience to Him, and so to have my heart set
upon if, as not willingly to leave it when He calls from it.

Oh my Father! Thy Presence with me is the only thing desired by me; having
that, it is enough; and, as Thou have given, even so take away as Thou please.
A certain Faith is in me, that not one Hair of my Head shall perish without
His Providence, Who rules all Things according to the Counsel of His own Will;
So that neither I, nor mine shall ever want.

Then let none take thought, for it never added any thing to me; but let all
your minds be turned inward, and in the Dread and Fear of the LORD look not
out. It Is but a little time, and we are all passing out of this World; Oh! let
all watch, that Their days be not ended before Their Work be finished for
which They came into the World. I know it was not to be heaping up perishing
Riches all our days; but the PEARL of greatest Price being found, they that
know the Excellency and Virtue of it, can willingly sell all to purchase it:
for all outward glory, I am to declare, shall more and more be stained, and the
Glory within more fully revealed to all that love the LORD in sincerity.

The Treasures of this World let them take that seek after them, for indeed my
Kingdom is not of it, neither is my delight in any thing but to feel the LORD
near unto me, to guide me in all my ways, whose Voice, His own Sheep do
know, and cannot follow any other; all perishing things are under Their feet;
the Mystery of Everlasting Life being revealed, is more to them than all.

This let all know, that I leave not my Trade in my own Will, nor in a
Temptation, nor in an Imagination, nor in slighting the LORD'S Mercy to me
therein, neither Their love, into whose hearts the LORD put it to trade with
me; but in pure obedience to the Leadings of His own Spirit of Life, made
manifest in my mortal Body: and good have I found it for me to be kept in the
Cross, which is now freely taken up by me, because He has of His infinite
Love and Mercy joined my Soul unto HIMSELF in an everlasting Covenant, that no
mortal Thing can break; Bless the LORD all you that know the same.

And this is in my heart to desire, That the LORD may show mercy to all that
have showed mercy to me; and where any hard-heartedness has been, it may be
forgiven.

And so in the love, and good will, and peace of my Heavenly Father, and in His
meek, pure, and quiet Spirit I am to leave you, and could, if it were required
of me, even lay down my Life for the Righteous Seed's sake in all, that It
might Reign and Rule, which can only glorify the LORD.

M. B.
24th of the month called September, 70.
Ezekiel. 12.2, 3.
After I had read the foregoing Paper, some of the People called Quakers, (for
all called by that name I may not speak against, there being a Remnant amongst
them whose hearts are upright to the LORD, and in whom He will yet be
glorified) who though they had interrupted me before, yet now began to be so
violent, in their rage and opposition, that I could not proceed so as to be
understood by the People, which caused much crowding; so that I was desired to
withdraw, which accordingly I did, desiring all to depart that were not thither
invited. Since which time I have been silent in Publishing any thing that in
the least might vindicate our Reputations from the many Lies and Aspertions
cast upon us concerning that Matter; neither is it my desire at present so much
as to mind or meddle with them; but as to that love which we then had, and
still have, to Them, and unto all People, I cannot but here mention, and am
willing to Print this following (it being suitable to the present Occasion)
which I writ to one above a Year ago.

Dear Friend, etc.
THE Word of the LORD has not been, nor shall be published in vain, viz. [That
many that have been first shall be last, and many that are last shall be
first]: At which many are offended; yea, I know it is that, and that chiefly, at
which many, called my Friends, are so much offended with me: but blessed are
they that are not offended in Him, whose Servant I am, and whose Will I have
done, and Who has rewarded me a thousand, yea, I can truly say, a thousand
fold, Blessed and Praised be, yea, let all the upright in heart bless and
praise His Holy Name, from this time forth, and for evermore. Hallelujah.

O go not forth, but Keep still and low, and wait in the stilness, till thou
be endowed with Power from on High, and enabled to come forth in the
Authority of the Most High, to level the Mountains that stand in the way of our
ZERUB-BABEL from building this latter House, which Glory shall far transcend
the Glory of the former; O! hasten, hasten, tarry not, my BELOVED calls, the
Marriage-Supper is prepared, and His Table well-furnished, and many are
invited; but excuses are so many, that few are come: but my LORD will have His
Table filled, and to that end will send to invite the Blind and the Lame, yea,
the Hedges and Highways must be sought out: Blessed are they, and they only,
that are accounted worthy, for they shall eat the good of the Land, yea, they
shall be filled; yea, I say, their Cup shall overflow, and of their Joy and
Peace, Comfort and Consolation, there shall be no end. Praises in the Highest
be to our GOD for ever and for evermore.

18th of the month called August, 70. J. P.

These are some of the Messages which the LORD required me to deliver at
several of the Meetings of the People called Quakers, viz. I Am to proclaim the
Day of the LORD, which is come to gather the Outcasts, and to cleanse the Camp
of Evildoers. The Life of the LAMB is risen, whose Spouse was, is, and must be
chaste unto Him, without spot, wrinkle, or any such thing. The Fear, I say, the
Fear of the LORD keeps the heart clean; for it is only the Clean and Pure in
heart that can see GOD. Many, I say, many have been called, yet few have
followed the LORD fully. The Wisdom, I say, the Wisdom of the JUST is risen, to
confound the Wisdom of the Wise. I am a Messenger of glad Tidings to all that
are of an upright heart to the LORD -- I say, I am not only a Messenger of
glad-Tydings to all that are of an upright and single heart to the LORD, but
also am a Messenger of Woe and Misery to all the workers of Iniquity.


J. P.

Here follows some Lines (which the LORD having made me a Living witness of,
are a true and faithful Testimony) I am also to Publish.

J. P.

AS I was sinking down into the Invisible Life, it lay hard upon me to warn
every one, and that in the pure Fear of the LORD, to return home with haste
unto Him, and to cease from all men, who are but as the dust of the Earth
before His Mightys Power; which Power His Children dread to disobey: What
though those People that have called themselves by His Name, be come out, as it
were, with Swords and Staves against Him, to betray the Innocent, and to raise
up malicious, evil Reports against those, who though in themselves are feeble,
yet have nothing in their eye but to follow His Leadings: Having many years
ago received the Truth in the love of it, and also in the Faith thereof, that
it, and it only, was and is sufficient to Lead and to Guide, and to preserve
out of all evil, all those that diligently, and with a single heart wait upon
it; as we (the two Servants of the LOKD) are Witnesses, whom He has joined
together; having first wholly redeemed us out of the love and the delight of
all visible things, and showed largely to us the emptiness and vanity of them
all; then did He make of us Twain, One; which when we came to Publish, and that
with simple innocent hearts, before the LORD, and many Witnesses, then did many
cast out their floods of Opposition and Reviling, as if there were no GOD to
behold their Words and Actions; yet in patience and innocence were we kept,
even as Lambs dumb before the Shearer, and opened not our mouths in the least
to revile again: Saying, O LORD, it is Thou that fully Justifies, it matters not
who condemns; and we know Thee to be our Shield, and our exceeding great
Reward. So in Thy Holy Awe, and Fear, are we made to declare, against all that
tyrannical Power that would be Lord over the Conscience of the least Babe that
knows Thee to be their Father, and to say, do but Thou lead, and we are
willing to follow Thee through both good and evil Report; for Thou have of a
truth indear'd our Souls unto Thee, and to nothing else besides Thee: Glad
should we be to bear all in silence, and not to meddle in any Case, if Thy
Will were so: But the Righteous Seed is raised up, (that respects no People for
their outward Forms of Religion, but bears witness against all unrighteousness)
in which to live are we called; and every Soul that pants after it, and cannot
live without it, shall enjoy it: The Day is come that the pure in heart sees
the LORD, and parts with all for His Sake, following Him through great
Tribulation.

Oh! let the Souls of all that love Him, bow to none besides Him: Even so let
it be with all the upright in heart, says His Servant

23d of the month called November, 1671. Mary Pennyman

O Thou Righteous Everlasting Seed! how have Thou been my Preserver from my
Infancy! I cannot forget how Thou have followed me with Mercies, and
multiplied Thy Blessings upon me. Now is Thy Reward felt for all Reproaches;
Let none through unbelief depart from Thee, for Thou art certainly the same
this Day to all that trust in Thee, and love nothing in comparison of Thee.
Draw all Thine after Thee, to rest in peace with Thee, as my Soul does at this
Day.

M. P.

The Day of trial is come that no Hypocrite can pass through. The Fury of the
ALMIGHTY is broken forth to trouble and torment all the double-hearted. The
evil Spies are discovered, that seek to weaken the Faith of those that follow
the Leadings of the Pure Spirit of Life, because it leads not according to
their Imaginations. The subtilty and wisdom of Man is rejected by the LORD,
confusion and darkness is come upon it.
We being called into the Country that day forty days after the Publication
of our Marriage, at which time this following was writ.

NOW are forty days expired since the Waters began to swell, which swelled so
high, that they even overflowed all Banks, so that I may say, as of old, That
all flesh dyed that moved upon the Earth: For as it was then (that none could
be preserved or kept alive to the LORD, but who were preserved and kept alive
in the ARK) so it is now She that can receive it, let him.

And now the DOVE having brought me Glad-Tydings, that the Waters are somewhat
abated, The ARK is to be opened, and the Seed of the Righteous, that was
preserved and kept therein, must now go forth and replenish the Earth, which
has for a long time been void, and as it were without form, so that the Souls
of the Upright have had little Pleasure or Delight therein; but now is the Day
of Glad-Tydings come, now is the Day of their true Joy witnessed, now is the
Day of their Singing at hand; now will the LORD alone be Exalted, yea, I say,
He alone will be Exalted in this Day, wherein all the Wisdom of the Wise is
confounded (and will yet more abundantly) that know not Him (or that measure of
Himself which He has given to every One) to be their Guide and Leader:
Wherefore, be awakened all ye Sons and Daughters of Men (of what Profession or
Persuasion of Religion soever you are of) for this is a Visitation from the
LORD unto you; happy are you that can, and that do receive it; Yea, it is such
a Visitation of His Love unto you, that I am to declare, and that in His Name
and Authority, That your Forms of Religion, and outward Worship (set up) is not
at all [this day] acceptable to Him; so that every one that love your own
Souls, and desire to serve the LORD GOD only, must hasten out from amongst
them, and return to Him, and wait upon Him alone, that so you may not dare to
Sacrifice or Worship Him, but as you witness Him to be your Guide and Leader:
For as it was of old (that all Sacrifices and Worships that were not offered
and performed by His requiring, were abomination to Him) so it is now: He that
has an ear to hear, let him hear; yea let him hear what the Spirit says, for
the Spirit speaks expressly in this our Day, That the Children of the LORD
shall be taught of the LORD: Wherefore come away you Sons and Daughters of the
MOST HIGH, you that have long waited for this Day, wherein the SEED must be set
at liberty from all Bonds, yea, I say, from all manner of Bonds: So that this
is the Message I am to declare to you at this time, That you set up no more
Teachers without you, but that you hearken and obey the Teachings of the LORD
GOD within you; for no longer will He be mocked: but such as you sow, such
must you reap; and if they be your Gods, then hearken and follow them; but if
the LORD be your GOD, then hearken and follow Him: yet whatever you do, or
whomsoever you will serve, this I have determined (as the Servant of the LORD
did) that I and my House will serve the LORD GOD only.

And thus I am clear from the Blood of all Men, having faithfully Declared what
the LORD has required of me; who am a true lover of All, without respect of
Person, because I am at perfect peace with the LORD.

J. P.

Glad Tidings of great Joy is sent abroad to all you who have kept the Faith,
and not loved your lives unto death.
THe SEED is Raised, the CHILD is Born, we have seen His appearance, and are
called to worship Him in the Spirit and in the Truth, and cannot but rejoice
with an exceeding great Joy; for the Deaf hear, the Dumb speak, the Lame walk,
and to the Poor the Gospel is Preached: Blessed are they that can receive it:
But now do the wise Men seek to destroy the young Child's life, though with
fair pretenses, that They also would worship Him, yea they are exceeding wrath
and would destroy, if possible, every motion of life that springs up purely in
every true Thirster after it; but the Voice is heard, This is My Beloved Son,
hear ye Him; Glory is given to the LORD on High, and good will is offered unto
Men. Behold! this Manifestation is appointed for the Fall and Rising again of
many in this day, and for a Sign which shall be spoken against; But in THEE, in
THEE is our Souls delight, who have longed to see Thy DAY break forth in its
Glory, though many days we have suffered with Thee in mourning and weeping,
being ready to say, They have take away my LORD, and I know not where they have
laid Him; But now is the Joy received that none can take away. How can we but
call upon all to cast off whatever would hinder, and to wait with all diligence
to receive HIM, that none but the pure in heart can see, who by His quickening
Power has raised the Dead to Life: Behold, it is come, and it is done, says
the LORD GOD, this is the Day whereof I have spoken.

Here is the Patience of the Saints: Here are They that keep the Commandments
of God, and the Faith of JESUS.

THE END.

