John Pennyman's INSTRUCTIONS TO HIS CHILDREN.

Which also may be of service unto others, and therefore they are thus
Published.

Read in Fear, that you may receive a Blessing. LONDON, Printed, and are to be
given by the Author, or to be had at Dorman Newman's Shop, Bookseller, at the
King's Arms in the Poultry, 1674.

DEAR CHILDREN, Hearken diligently to the Counsel and Advice of your Parents,
for they watch over you for your good.
IN the First place, let the fear of the LORD, who is the searcher of your
hearts, be always in your minds, that in awe of Him, you may for ever stand;
not daring to bring the least Reproach upon His holy Name, by any Miscarriages
of yours; so shall you be CHILDREN to His praise, and a comfort and blessing to
your Parents.

Secondly, See that none of you render evil for evil unto any one; but do you
ever follow that which is good, both amongst your selves, and toward all men.

Thirdly, Take heed of letting out your minds and affections to visible things;
for they perish in the using, and bring trouble, and sorrow, to all whose
hearts are set thereon; but let your minds always be retired inwards, that you
may wait to feel that which is not of this world, nor esteemed by it; but only
esteemed by those who know the virtue and excellency of it, and who have been
willing to part with all to purchase it; it is the PEARL of greatest price;
happy are they that have found, or that yet shall find it.

Fourthly* Take heed of entering into many words, when you are bid to do any
business, either by your Parents, Masters, or other Superiors* but with all
readiness of mind, see you obey all their lawful Commands with diligence and
cheerfulness.

Fifthly, Beware of mentioning the Name of the LORD in any case but with fear
and reverence; for His Name is Hallowed by them that fear Him, but taken in
vain by those that fear Him not. And though they seem to Praise or Pray unto
Him, yet such Services without His fear are an Abomination: wherefore take heed
you be not deceived by those who are only in the good Words and fair Speeches;
but let your minds be kept single to the LORD, and He will show you who they
are that draw nigh to him with their lips, when their hearts are far from Him,
and from such you are to turn away.

Sixthly, Let your words be few; and be always more ready to hear than speak,
especially when it is your place to speak, be sure it be in Mildness, Love and
Gentleness; lest through your provocation you cause others to sin, and then you
will not be guiltless, for their sin will be charged upon you: wherefore let
this be always ways in your remembrance, and for ever observed by you (as it
has been the practice and experience of your Parents) to give mild and soft
answers; for they do often turn away wrath.

Seventhly, Whatever you see Virtuous in any, be sure to follow that; and what
you see amiss others, diligently search your own hearts, lest your selves be
found guilty thereof; for it is an easy matter to see and find fault with
another (most can do that) but few love to examine themselves: be you (my dear
CHILDREN) of that number, lest you perish with the multitude; for the way is
broad that leads to destruction, and many walk therein: Therefore whilst you
are young seek after true Wisdom, and it will guide and lead you in that narrow
way, which all the holy Men walked in, and in which all must walk, before they
can enter into Eternal Rest.

Eighthly, Beware of reading foolish and vain Books, which tend only to the
corrupting of Youth, and dishonoring the LORD; Wherefore heed you only those
that tend to Holiness and Virtue.

Ninthly, Consider how the LORD has blessed and prospered your Parents; not
withstanding the fury and rage of our enemies, who have accounted us as the
greatest transgressors, and judged us as the vilest of sinners; and all this
for no other cause but only for the discharge of our Consciences in the matters
of our GOD.

Tenthly, I warn you, as I did at the first, so I do again charge you, that you
walk in fear and in humility all the days of your being upon the Earth; then
shall you know that the LORD has not only blessed and prosper'd your Parents,
but will also bless and prosper you: but if you depart from his fear, and cast
these my instructions behind your backs; then know, that you shall perish in
your own iniquities, and I shall (thus far) be clear in my conscience
concerning you.

J. P.

DEAR CHILDREN, Since my writing the former Instructions, these following came
into my mind to impart unto you.
1. BEware of a lying, flattering, deceitful tongue; also beware of Pride and
high-mindedness, and an exalted Spirit; for such the righteous GOD will judge.

2. But be you adorned with Faithfulness, Meekness and Patience; and let your
behavior be modest, courteous and gentle toward all: and whatever you would
have others do unto you, be sure you do that unto them; and heed not so much
theirs, as your own Duties.

3. Busy not your minds with others concerns; but be you careful and diligent
in the discharge of your own; and then you need not be troubled what reproach
you bear for them.

4. Bear patiently Afflictions, for they are good for you; therefore hasten not
to be delivered from them; but in the retiredness of your minds consider the
cause, and being bettered thereby, bless the LORD for His Mercies; for whom He
loves, He chastises.

5. Be careful with whom you associate; and choose none to be your intimates;
but such who are exemplary in Virtue and Goodness: so will you avoid much
contention and trouble.

6. Be ready to do good unto all as opportunity is offered; and take heed of
wasting any of the good Creatures; for if you be unfaithful in those things
that are earthly, who shall commit to you those that are heavenly.

7. Be not desirous of Riches or Honor; neither covet that which is another;
but be content with your present conditions, and learn to be as well satisfied
with want, as abundance; then will you follow the steps of your Parents, who
have learned contentment what ever befalls them.

8. Beware of jeering, or scoffing at any; neither give abusive or scurrilous
language (either by Tongue or Pen by) for that will provoke the LORD's Anger
against you, and bring reproach and trouble upon your Parents, who always
disliked, yea abhorred such things.

9. Be careful your hearts and minds be kept clean within, and then you need
not be advised to have your words and actions clean without, for that will
unavoidably follow.

10. Be not hasty in reproving or correcting of any; but if (you live to be)
called thereto, let it be in Love and in Wisdom; and if the offense be great,
let it be with severity, yet not in anger, or passion; for that will harden
them against you, and so instead of bettering them, you will thereby become
transgressors your selves.

11. Beware that your wills bear not rule in any case; but let Truth and
Righteousness always be the sway of your Judgments; then will you be delivered
from that great iniquity which has so deeply corrupted many.

12. Be sure you have regard to the oppressed; and take heed how you make
advantage of another necessity, but rather consider how you may be helpful
unto them; always remembering the Parable of the good Samaritan, Luke 10.33.

13. Be cautious for whom you are engaged, or unto whom you are obliged; for
such things do often prove snares: but be more ready to give, then to receive;
and yet be sure to acknowledge the least kindness; for ingratitude is hateful.

14. Be not self-ended; neither spend too much upon your own particulars,
either in meats, drinks, clothing, or any thing else, for that may be a
hindrance to the good you should do; but rather be sparing in that which
relates to your selves, that you may be in the better capacity to do the good
you ought to perform unto others.

15. Be not found in many needless words; neither contend with such as are in
them, for that begets strife, but as they (out of the evil that is in their
hearts) bring forth evil things; so do you (out of the good that is in yours)
bring forth good things.

16. Be not grasping after earthly concerns; for they bring trouble and sorrow;
and yet how many through their eager desires after such things, have choked
that good which once stirred in them: wherefore take warning, and learn this as
a truth experienced by me; that a little will satisfy a contented mind.

17. Be not desirous after that knowledge, which will lift and puff up your
minds; neither be too prying into those Mysteries that are hid; but if the LORD
should reveal any thing unto you, be sure of leave, when and to whom to impart
it, not daring, either to add, or diminish; for that has been (and is this day)
a great and sore evil.

18. Beware of taking up your rest in any outward form of Worship, but keep in
subjection to the fear of the LORD, who may lead into, or out of such things as
He pleases; so let him be your guide all your days, though you should be
hated of all for His sake; for our eyes have seen the sad fruits and effects of
those that have gone about to set limits and bounds to His Leadings.

19. Beware of imitating other men's words, gestures, or actions; that relate to
religious performances; for Imitators, as well as Image-makers, in Worship, are
an Abomination; and yet thousands do err and have erred herein: Neither be
followers of the vain Fashions and Customs of this World; but whatsoever is
virtuous and of good report, that you may and ought to follow.

20. Be not hasty in judging other men's Actions, wherein you have neither
command nor certainty; it being not barely the Action, but the Spirit from
whence it proceeds, that makes it either accepted, or rejected: therefore take
heed lest you condemn that, which GOD justifies: for many are guilty herein,
notwithstanding it is written, Judge not according to outward appearance; but if
you do, you must as well as they, witness Sorrow.

21. But lest, through many words, your minds should be drawn forth, and (as
but too ^oo many have been) hurt thereby; it is with me to conclude, with those
two great and weighty Commandments, viz. the first is, You shall love the LORD
with all your hearts, with all your souls, and with all your strength. And the
second is like unto it, namely, You shall love your Neighbors as your selves:
for upon these two Commandments depend all that can be written, or spoken,
concerning your Duties either to GOD or Men.

J. P.

Hear me your Father, O Children, and do thereafter, that you may be safe.
IF you come to serve the LORD, prepare your souls for temptation. Set your
hearts aright, and constantly endure, and make not haste in time of trouble.

Whatsoever is brought upon you, take cheerfully: For, as Gold is tried in the
Fire, so are acceptable Men in the Furnace of Adversity.

So incline your ears unto Wisdom, and apply your hearts to Understanding, and
seek her as Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasures: then shall you
understand the Fear of the LORD, and find the Knowledge of GOD.

Happy is the man that finds Wisdom, and the man that gets Understanding:
But where is Wisdom to be found? and where is the place of Understanding? The
Fear of the LORD, that is Wisdom; and to depart from evil, that is
Understanding.

Wisdom exalts her Children, and lays hold of them that seek her; they that
love her, love life, and they that seek her early, shall be filled with Joy;
and wheresoever she enters, the LORD will bless; and if you commit your
selves unto her, you shall inherit her.

But at the first, she will walk with you by crooked ways, and bring fear and
dread upon, you, and torment you with her discipline, until she can trust your
Souls, and try you by her Laws.

Then will she return the straight way unto you, and comfort you, and show you
of her secrets.

But if you go wrong, she will forsake you, and give you over to your own ruin.

And when they cast up the accounts of their Sins, they shall come with fear:
and their own iniquities shall convince them to their face. Then shall the
righteous man stand in great boldness, before the face of such as afflicted
him, and made no account of his labors. when they see it, they shall be
troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his
Salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. And they repenting and
groaning for anguish of Spirit, shall say within themselves, This was he whom
we had sometime in derision and a proverb of reproach. We fools counted his
life madness, and his end to be without honor. How is he numbered among the
Children of GOD, and his lot among the Saints?

MY Dear Children, suffer not your minds to wander abroad, but heed your
Fathers Counsel that it may be well with you, when our days are finished on
earth, and we taken from you, or you from us; therefore ever follow that which
draws your minds after holiness, and choose that good part, which can never be
taken from you; so shall you excel in all Virtues, and answer our greatest
desires for you.

The riches and glory of this world I never sought for you, nor my self; but
with carefulness have sought after an inheritance in that Kingdom which is not
of this World, for that cannot fade away. Often has my Soul been and is
humbled before the LORD, to consider his manifold Mercies to us; Can it ever be
forgotten how we were preserved in the late great Plague and Fire! and Trials
much greater then those have I been carried through since; that I might be also
proved in that which came nearest to me, and seemed the hardest.

Dear Children, I your Mother have tried many; and my love has been in great
sincerity to those in whom I found uprightness and simplicity, even to such was
I made willing to give up my self as a Servant, for their honesties sake; and
with them I walked in meekness and fear: but coming to be tried whether my Soul
could cleave to the LORD only, then some began to limit my Conscience to their
apprehension and sight; this I durst not consent to; but my cry was in secret,
concerning those, To bridle the liberty of the Spirit, is the greatest Tyranny
in the world. Sharoon of Wisd. p. 244.
that would be as Lords there, O you cruel Taskmasters, will you not let me go
to my Father? For my heart was filled with pantings and longings after the
LORD, which constrained me to yield obedience to whatever I believed was His
will, who had been to me a mighty Deliverer in many straits.

Children, in some part you have been witnesses how the love of my nearest
friends (as well as others) have been turned into evil surmisings against me;
and why was it? but because I could not part with my integrity; but rather than
so, gave cause to those, who judged by outward appearance, to take offense
against me; but in all these things I appeal to Him who has known the secrets
of my heart, and has seen the true tenderness I have had toward those, who at
the same time have writ and spoke bitter things against me. Whom have I
wronged, or defrauded? or against whom has my tongue dared to speak lies? Not
any that I know of. So Children, trust you in the LORD only, and not in mortal
men; for they will fail you when the Cross comes to be taken up to your and
their wills: and though this is set down for your warning; yet assuredly my
love is to them all, and can say to such, as Joseph did to his Brethren; be not
grieved with your selves though you sold me hither, (even under great reproach)
for we were to be separated.

Dear Children, gather your minds inwards; fear the LORD all your days, and
you shall receive His reward; which has been great to your dear Mother,

Mary Pennyman.

This is my Commandment, That ye love one another,

John 15.12.
Strive for the Truth unto Death, and defend Justice for your Lives: and the
LORD GOD will fight for you.
THE END.

