WIT^ ACCADEMY.



THE Wits Academy: OR, THE MUSES DELIGHT.

Consisting of merry Dialogues upon various occasions composed of Mirth, Wit,
and Eloquence, for a help to discourse to such as have had but small converse
with the critical sort of people, which live in this censorious Age.

AS ALSO, Diverse sorts of Letters upon (...) occasions both merry and Jocose,
helpful for the inexpert to imitate, and pleasant to those of better Judgment,
at their own (...) to peruse.

WITH A perfect Collection of all the newest and best Songs, and Catches, that
are, and have been lately in request at Court, and both the Theaters.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by most Booksellers in London and
Westminster. 1^77.

Licensed,

April 10. 1676. Roger Le' Estrange.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHen first you cast an Eye upon the Title Page of this small Volume be not too
soon censorious in giving judgment to condemnation: for daily errors we do
see committed, by those that rashly give their ill opinion of the outward
shape, suggesting what they do not understand; for Fronti nulla Fides, is as
true, as that we may observe amongst the Spanish Gentry, who line their
garments with the richest Silk, when as the outside is but mean and course.
The Title of this Book I must confess is little different from that piece of
weatherbeaten Antiquity, vulgarly known by that once famous Name of, The
Academy of Complements; But turn aside the Frontispiece and read, beginning
with the Dialogues, and so proceed till you have viewed all over, and the
reason of your mistake will soon be unmasqu'd, for though Sub sole nihil novum
est, yet this you will find to be far different from any other tract which has
preceded of this Nature; exemplary works are for the most part very laudable,
especially when we make an imitation on those which have been Famous, Learned,
and Nobly extracted, etc. Yet in undertakings of this Nature, imitation is only
deemed to be the barren products of a threadbare Fancy, and that which a Man
cannot properly call his own. As for the Dialogues and the Letters which are
contained herein, I challenge as my own, scarce worth the owning; yet for
divertisement (as it was with me when I writ them) I hope they will please you,
being either profitable or pleasant to each capacity. As for the Songs I lay
not claim to all of them, for they are a Collection composed by the most
pregnant and refined Wits of this Age; all which bound up together, I humbly
present the Reader with, whose kind acceptance will be understood by his
gratifying liberally the Book seller, and giving the unknown Author a good
report, who am yours,

Dum aura aetherea vescor, W. P.

MERRY DIALOGUES UPON VARIOUS OCCASIONS: Composed of Mirth, Wit, and Eloquence,
for a help to Discourse, to such as have had but small Converse with the
Critical Sort of People which live in this Censorious Age.
DIALOGUE 1. A loving Discourse betwixt Samuel and Sarah.
Sam. LOve is the cause I have so often made my addresses to you Madam,
therefore let me beseech you not to disdain my present Suit.


Sarah, You tell me much of Love, but that is a thing I never yet could
understand.


Sam. The more is my grief, for if you knew it but half so well as I do, I am
sure that you would incline your heart to pity my afflictions.


Sarah, Why then it seems it is an affliction to be in Love, I am therefore
glad I never yet knew what it was.


Sam. Yes Madam, it is a sorrow and a great affliction to be in Love, and not to
be beloved again.


Sarah, How Is that Sir?


Sam. Ah Madam, too well I know it, and it will ell it you if you will give me
leave.


Sarah, Pray Sir, let me hear it.


Sam. The sad example which I now shall instance is my own self: I love you
Madam, and have often told you so, but you have ever seemed to slight my kind
proffers of Love, to my great torment.


Sarah, I know not what you mean: wherein have I ever slighted you, pray tell
me Sir.


Sam. I will Madam: you know I have at several times told you that I loved you,
and so well, as to marry you and make you my Wife.


Sarah, And call you that love to marry you, and be your Wise, pray how do you
make that appear to be love?


Sam. Yes, that is love to me, and the greatest love that tongue can e're
express, if that you once would say, that you loved me well enough to be my
Wife.


Sarah, Why then, I find I do not yet know what love is, for I never could find
in my heart to marry you; but pray tell me how you came to love me, and it may
be after I hear how you began to love first, that I may learn to follow your
example.


Sam. Madam, I know your pretended iggorance is but to mock your poor
disconsolate Lover, one that adores you above all the World befides; but
however, since you say that you will follow my example, in loving me as I love
you, I must tell you, Madam, that the first time I ever saw your face, Cupid at
that instant of time borrowed Arrows from your bright Eyes, and bending of his
Bow, he shot me to the heart, that straight I fell in love with you, and ever
since that I received this wound, my lovesick pains grew greater and greater,
because you would not grant me love again.


Sarah, Methinks you talk most strangely: you tell me of Cupid, pray what is
he, and why does he keep a Bow?


Sam. Cupid, Madam, is the little god of Love, a Boy he is, whom the Poets
relate to be blind; he has a Bow his Mother Venus gave him, and he borrows
Arrows from young Ladies Eyes, and when he pleases to sport himself, he bends
his Bow and shoots where he pleases, and where ever it hits, that person is so
sorely wounded, that he can never rest night nor day, unless the Lady from
whose Eyes the Arrows came, will grant him love again; which is my condition,
and if you deny me love I shall be of all men most miserable.


Sarah, But why do you speak to me Sir to cure you now you say you are wounded?
you must apply your self to that Lady from whence the Arrows came, as for my
part I am sure that I have no Arrows in me, nor I would not that there should
be any there, for all the world; that were the way to kill me if I had Arrows
in my Eyes: but if there be Ladies that have any such things that wound young
men, and can also cure them, you had best to cease your discourse with me and
seek till you find them out; as for my part (as I told you before) I declare
that I keep no Arrows to hurt any one, neither (according to your own words)
can I cure any that are so wounded.


Sam. Ah Madam, though we have hitherto discoursed after the Romantic Way and
Mode, yet you well enough know my meaning; therefore, not to talk any longer at
this distance, I must (with your pardon) tell you plainly that I love you
Madam, and none but you alone; therefore pity my condition.


Sarah, Since you have discovered your self to be 1 Lover, and for my sake, and
not only now on a sudden, but a pretty while since, if I may believe you; but
young men are so false, that I know not what to say to you.


Sam. You have tried my constancy, for it is some years since (you know) I
first offered the tenders of my love to you; and though you answered me still
with flat denial, yet you see that I had not so slightly grounded my passion,
as that your frowns as yet could make me have an ill opinion of your love.


Sarah, Well, since you are resolved to proceed, and will take no denial, know
then that I must try you further still; therefore prepare your self to answer
me.


Sam. Speak boldly, Madam, and let your demands be never so difficult to
perform, if they are in man's power to accomplish, you shall be obeyed, and
Madam, gladly too, should you command me this very minute to be my own bloody
Executioner.


Sarah, No Sir, I wish you long may live and happy, but if you ere intend to be
my Bridegroom you must --


Sam. What must I do, Madam? speak without fear, your will shall be my pleasure.


Sarah, No, I am ashamed to tell you, but yet I cannot forbear, but I must tell
you, you must --


Sam. Dear Madam, speak and blush not.


Sarah, Why this it is, you must come now and kiss me, and by that kiss swear,
that within the space of six days you will marry me.


Sam. Auspicious Heaven, and all ye Powers above, to you on bended knees I
first return my thankful Prayers! and next dear Madam, with humble gratitude, I
at your feet do prostrate fall, where silence gladly shall show I do consent;
for words cannot express my present joy.


Sarah, Rise, worthy Sir, you have deserved my love, nor could I longer keep
you in despair; from hence call me your own.


Sam. My dearest only Joy, you have now for ever blessed me, this kiss shall
usher in a thousand more; give me your hand I Will wait upon you home.

Where speedily without the least delay,
We will appoint our Joyful Wedding day:

DIALOGUE II. A Discourse betwixt Corydon and Celia.
Corydon, WHy dearest Celia should you prove so cruel to him that loves you
more than life or any other thing that bears a name? a world of fighs and
groans have filled the skies with the Echoes of My Celia, Fair and Cruel
Caelia; but no redress as yet I have found: then dain my pretty Paramour at
length to smile upon distracted Corydon.


Celia, What means the Shepherd thus to trouble me, what Cruelties are these
you speak of, for my part I know not of any unkindness that I ever showed to
you? What is it you would have, tell me wherein that Caelia has been offensive
to you, and without doubt a speedy recompense will be made you?


Corydon, Oh would that Corydon could find it so as Celia has told him, soon my
dearest Celia should know the cause of all my Miseries and Woes: You need not
ask me Celia why I call you Cruel, my looks will tell you though my tongue be
silent.


Celia, Indeed Corydon you do mistake my skill, for I am no good Physiognomist,
neither did I ever pretend to it; therefore if you would that I be made
sensible of your grief, you must tell it me downright, and then if it lies in
my power to give you ease, and I deny it, you then will have just cause to call
me cruel and not before: For no Doctor or Surgeon can tell how to apply any
remedy to a Sick Patient, before he knows from whence his distemper springs.


Corydon, You cannot be so ignorant as you pretend you are, I cannot think but
that you know my grief; it is Love, my Dearest Celia, it is Love.


Celia, How Coryden, did you say Love, or did I mistake that word; speak it
again?


Corydon, Yes so I will, my Celia, for it is Love and the Love of you alone,
that I, that I poor Shepherd langaith after thus.


Celia, And is it so? Do you Love me so well Corydon, that it makes you sick?
Poor man why do you Love me so much then, cannot you forbear?


Corydon, Yes I can forbear to live but not to love. Death will be a Welcome
Guest to my discontented mind.


Celia, Oh Corydon, why do you talk of death, the very name of death
affrightens me; prithee tell me Corydon, does love and death keep company
together?


Corydon, No Celia, Life and Love are companions together, and death associates
himself with disdain: Do you not know I love you Celia?


Celia, Why what if you do love me, what then? I will not kill you. I hope every
body loves me, I am sure my Father and Mother does, and what must I kill them
too? God forbid.


Corydon, Ah Celia thy pretty innocence does make me smile, I had thought thou
had been more crafty, and by consequence more cruel, till now I hear thy
answers; but tell me Celia do thou love me, my sweetest?


Celia, Yes indeed do I Corydon, and have done, ever since you and I played
together in our Churchyard.


Corydon, That Is my good Girl, come and kiss me Celia.


Celia, Well, are you satisfied now, I hope you will not say I am cruel now,
will ye Corydon?


Corydon, No, no, my pretty Love; thou art kind to me now; come and let me kiss
thee again.


Celia, No indeed but you must not.


Corydon, Why did not thou like the last kiss I gave thee Celia?


Celia, Yes, I liked it well enough Corydon; but my Mother always charged me
that I should not suffer any man to kiss me.


Corydon, Did thy Mother never talk of me, Celia?


Celia, Yes, very often Corydon; and I told her how you talked of love to me a
great while ago, but I knew not what you meant by it, nor don't yet; but my
Mother charged me not to come into your company, nor suffer you so much as to
touch me; and told me that I must not hear you when you talk of Love, for I
must love no body but my Father and Mother.


Corydon, Why surely she did not tell thee so, did she Celia?


Celia, Yes indeed she did, Corydon, and a great deal more than that; but I
shall not name it.


Corydon, Yes prithee do Celia, let me hear what 'twas she said to thee?


Celia, No, indeed you shall not, 'twas something she bid me not to let you do,
but what it was I will not name for all the world.


Corydon, No more thou shall not Celia, for I guess it already, and that is
enough for me.


Celia, Well if you do, you do, I don't much care; but I vow you make me blush.


Corydon, Blush not my Celia, for I will not name it; come sit thee down my
Celia upon this green bank, and now we have an opportunity, let us make use of
it in discoursing of matters of Love.


Celia, I know not what you mean Corydon, but I will sit down a little while
with you, for I cannot stay; my Mother charged me not to stay too long.


Corydon, Why thy Mother does not know that I am with thee.


Celia, No indeed I think not, for if she did, it would be a we day with me;
for she cannot abide you, because you talk of Love to me.


Corydon, Well but I hope thou will love me never theless for that, will thou
Celia? I am sure I love thee well.


Celia, No indeed I love you well enough, and methinks better now then ever I
did before.


Corydon, I thank thee, Celia, but I have other questions to ask thee
concerning love.


Celia, What are they Corydon, prithee be not too tedious, for I cannot tarry
too long; you know my Mother will chide me.


Corydon, Thou say thou love me Celia, but how well?


Celia, Why a great deal, is not that enough?


Corydon, Well but do thou love me well enough to be my Wife and to be
married to me?


Celia, Why how must I be married to you Corydon?


Corydon, Why we must go to Church together, and the Minister after some
Prayers said joins our hands together, and then we are Man and Wife: why
did thou never see any married yet?


Celia, No not I, never in all my life; but what must we do after marriage
Corydon, prithee tell me.


Corydon, Why that very night we must go to bed together and lie together so
long as we live.


Gelia, Oh strange, why then I must not marry with you, for that was the only
thing that my Mother charged me to have a care of; and not to lie with you, nor
any other man in the whole World, and I dare not do it if you would give me six
pence; No, no, I must have a care of that, for I know what I know.


Corydon, Why what do thou mean my Love? when we are married I will get thee
brave Boys and Girls of thy own, Child what do thou think of that?


Celia, Oh fie, oh fie, now you have named it all that my Mother has forewarned
me against; how dare you name such words, sure God will not bless you Corydon. My
Mother told me that God would not bless me if I did but think of such things,
much less dare to act them.


Corydon, That is to say before Marriage Celia you ought not to act such
things, but marriage makes it lawful with your own husband, and not only
lawful but honorable it is to be a Mother of Children.


Celia, Say you so, Corydon; but my Mother will never yield to this, I am sure
on it.


Corydon, Well but thy Mother will have nothing to do with thee; after we are
married thou art at thy husbands disposing then, no bodies else.


Celia, Well I Will go home and tell my Mother what you say, and see whether she
will give her consent that I should do all these things with you as you have
named or no.


Corydon, No, no, my sweetest Celia, by no means, do not acquaint her with it
yet.


Celia, Why so?


Corydon, Because you know that she does not affect me so well as I do you, and
therefore you and I must never marry nor ever meet again, if you tell her of
any thing that I have said to you.


Celia, Why what would you have me do then Corydon?


Corydon, Why do thou love me well enough to be my Wise?


Celia, Yes truly Corydon, you have almost persuaded me to it, if my Mother
was but willing.


Corydon, Why then I Will tell thee, Celia, we will marry first, and I Will warrant
thee we will please her well enough afterward.


Celia, Think you so Corydon; Well but must I have Boys and Girls too, what
will she say to that?


Corydon, Why what should she say my Dear, she will rejoice to see thee have
Children, which when they come to bigness will ask her blessing.


Celia, Well, but I shall be ashamed to have Children; I vow I shall Corydon.


Corydon, Prithee don't talk so childishly, my Dear, 'twill be an honor to
thee to have children.


Celia, Well, but how shall I do to get to bed to thee, I Will swear I shall not
have the face to go to bed to a man.


Corydon, Well, well, we will do well enough for that, meet me here too morrow
morning, Celia, and we will go and be married; till then farewell.


Celia, Nay but stay Corydon, I can afford to stay a little while longer now,
to talk about having of children and going to bed after we are married.


Corydon, Can thou indeed, poor Rogue, well I love thy innocence, and too
morrow at night, thou shall be satisfied in every thing that thou do desire
to know, and with this sweet kiss at present, I take my leave, not willing to
detain thee too long too day, for fear thy Mothers Jealousy should arise, and
guess the truth of what we have designed, and so frustrate all our hopes and
expectations, by keeping thee a close Prisoner in her house, and not suffer
thee to stir abroad any whither, not let me come to see thee: therefore dearest
Celia be careful, and say not a word to her of what we have been talking of;
for if you do, I am sure our loves for ever will be ruined.


Celia, I Will warrant thee Corydon she shall never know the least through me, I
can keep my own Counsel well enough; and that she shall find to her anger and
vexation.


Corydon, It Is a good Girl, well, fare thee well once again; My Dearest,
Remember what you have to do too morrow.


Celia, Adieu dear Corydon, farewell my loving Shepherd. Yes surely, I shall
not forget the time and place of meeting, my Eyes no rest shall take this
night; my mind will be employed another way: the thoughts of what I have to do
too morrow will busy me enough 'twixt this and then.

A Virgin pure I Will to the Temple go,
And there the Marriage Rites of Hymen know.

DIALOGUE III. A Discourse betwixt two Gentlemen as they were riding on the
Road together.
Tiberius, GOod morrow to you Sir.


Rowlandus, A good morning to you Sir.


Tiberius, How far do you ride in this Road Sir?


Rowland, As far as I can Sir too day.


Tiberius, That Is as much as to say as far as your Horse will carry you too
day; for possibly you may be capable of riding farther in a day than he is able
to perform.


Rowland, You say right, Sir, but I love my Horse too well to wrong him by
over-riding him.


Tiberius, You are the better Master Sir.


Rowland, Yes, and by consequence he the better Horse Sir.


Tiberius, All this I must confess, Sir; but pray now let me know how far you
ride, Sir, this way; for I shall be more than a little glad of your good
company, if you will be pleased to accept of mine?


Rowland, Sir, Your company will be an honor to me, therefore you need not
make any entreaties, for I shall be very forward to conjoyn my self with so
good society as I sind you are; and to answer your question, I shall tell you,
Sir, that I intend to reach as far Dunstable too night, and there to lie, being
in my Road to West-Chester, whither I am bound.


Tiberius, In a happy hour I have set forward on my Journey, for I am
traveling within ten miles of Chester; therefore I hope I shall enjoy your
company so far.


Rowland, With all my heart, Sir.


Tiberius, Your Horse goes very well Sir, pray what price?


Rowland, My Horse is a Mare, Sir, and I think she goes well enough, I am sure
she pleases me.


Tiberius, No doubt of it Sir, there is no reason why I should mislike her if
she pleases you; but how do you like mine Sir?


Rowland, Why Sir, for fear I should make the same mistake as you have done, I
must tell you that be it Horse or Mare, or what ever the Beast is, I cannot
tell but it goes very well.


Tiberius, It is (to speak after the Jocose manner, as you have done) a double
hol'd Gelding, a Mare Sir; as we say in English, of the same Sex as yours is,
but I think not altogether so stately.


Rowland, Well, we'll make no comparisons Sir, but I believe they both may be
very good: but where do you intend to Inn, for this night?


Tiberius, Why Sir, I would willingly be directed by you; but I Will tell you
where I used to lie.


Rowland, Pray, where is that Sir.


Tiberius, At the Sign of the two Travelers, it is a very good Inn, and there
we shall have good entertainment for our Horses and our selves; I name the
convenience for the Horse first, for if they fare well I don't question but we
shall do well enough.


Rowland, You say true Sir, for they cannot speak for themselves, but we can,
and I Will warrant you we will want for nothing, no more shall not the Horses;
'or I Will take care of that.


Tiberius, You say right Sir, the Mares shall want for nothing, for our first
care shall be for them, and then Sir I shall be at your service.


Rowland, Sir, I am at your service; but pray what a kind of Hostess have we?


Tiberius, Nay Sir you say right, for we have a very kind Hostess.


Rowland, How do you mean, Sir?


Tiberius, I mean honestly: a very good woman to our Landlady, and in faith she
rules the roast.


Rowland, I am glad to hear it Sir, for we intend I hope (at least I do) to
have some Roast, but pray have we never an Host or Landlord there?


Tiberius, Yes, yes; we have a Landlord, a very good man, that is to say, a
very merry Landlord, you shall see when we come there; but as I tell you, the
Hostess his Wife, id est, our Landlady, rules the roast.


Rowland, And so I would have her Sir: for it properly belongs to that sex to
see after the Roast.


Tiberius, Well Sir, and so I say too, but no more of this till we come there.


Rowland, Agreed Sir, but I think we don't want much of it now.


Tiberius. Sir you say true, but shall I be honored so far as to be a
Supper-man with you as well as a Fellow-traveller?


Rowland, I hope that question is not to ask now, your invitation was so fair,
that I should be a Churl, and a great one, if I should deny you what so readily
you have proposed.


Tiberius, Why then Sir let us take up our quarters together, but not too fast,
now we are nigh our Inn; but let us ride softly, that our Horses, alias, Mares,
may not be too hot when we come into our Inn.


Rowland, Here Hostler.


Hostler, Who calls?


Tiberius, Here take our Horses.


Rowland, And rub them down clean, and come to us by and by, and you shall be
informed what Corn we intend to give them.


Tiberius, Will you be pleased to walk into the Kitchen, and see what is there
you like for Supper?


Rowland, Yes Sir, I Will follow you, it seems you are acquainted with my
Landlady; therefore pray walk first and renew your acquaintance with her.


Tiberius, Your servant Sir, I Will obey your commands.

Landlady your humble Servant, how have you done this many a day.


Hostess. Why let me see, who is this Master Tiberius?


Tiberius, The very same.


Hostess, Lord is there such a man alive?


Tiberius, Yes I am alive still Landlady; and this Gentleman and I do intend to
be your Guests too night.


Hostess, Come old Boys, I Will give each of you a kiss if you will meet me half
way, and bid you welcome: So, now you are welcome Gentlemen.


Rowland, Well, honest Landlady, what shall we have for Supper?


Hostess, Troth e'ne what you please Gentlemen.


Tiberius, Well but what have you got in the House Landlady?


Hostess, Why you may have a couple of Capons, or a couple of Pullets, or a
dozen of Pigeons, with two or three dozen of Larks; you know Sir that we live
in the only Lark Country in England: but if you be not pleased with hollow
birds, you may have a Shoulder of Mutton, Or a Loyn of Veal, or any boiled
Meat, if you please.


Tiberius, Well Landlady you have named varieties enough, come you know my old
Custom, give me a pint of your best Sack, and whilst we are drinking that, we
shall have time to consider which of these dishes of Meat to pitch upon.


Hostess, You shall have it Sir.


Rowland, We have a good Jovial Landlady here I perceive Sir?


Tiberius, Yes Sir, she will talk merrily, but I really believe it is only to
please her guests; for I am very confident that she is honest.


Rowland, No doubt of it Sir, for you know we commonly find that the greatest
talkers are the least doers.


Hostess, Gentlemen I Will make bold to begin, and present my service to you
both, and you are both welcome.


Both, Thank you Landlady.


Hostess, Mr. Tiberius I Will present it to you first, because you are my old
acquaintance.


Tiberius, Thank you Landlady.

Sir my humble service to you, and I thank you for your good company.


Rowland, Your servant Sir, I am glad of so good a companion as your self; come
Landlaiy the the other glass to you, and then we will think what to have for Supper.


Hostess, With all my heart Sir: But Mr. Tiberius, where have you been this
many a day?


Tiberius, Why about the World Landlady, sometimes in one place, and sometimes
in another. You see I am alive still.


Rowland, Well Sir, now what shall we have for Supper?


Tiberius, Pray Sir do you speak.


Rowland, Why I think a shoulder of Mutton, and two or three dozen of my
Landladies Larks, since she praises them so much.


Tiberius, Agreed, withal my Heart.

Landlady, pray take care that they be made ready presently.


Hostess, They shall Sir, will you be pleased to walk up into your Chamber.


Tiberius, Yes Landlady, we will walk up; but though we sup together, yet we
must have two Chambers to lie in.


Hostess, You shall Sir. What will you be pleased to drink Gentlemen?


Rowland, Why let us taste of your Ale and Beer, Landlady, will you?


Hostess, Yes you shall Sir. -- Exit Hostess.


Tiberius, Well, but pray Fellow traveller, give me your absolute Opinion of
our Landlady?


Rowland, Why Sir, as I told you before, she may be honest; for what I know by
her, I am sure she is; but for your own part I believe that you know something
by her, by your redoubling the question of what I thought of her; besides that
is not all the ground I have for suspicion, for I have observed some amorous
wanton glances cast toward you now and then, when we were in the Kitchen, and
also since we came up into the Chamber: but what the meaning of it should be is
best known to your self.


Tiberius, Fie Sir, Fie, sure you mistake your self; she did not look and smile
on me, did she?


Rowland, Nay I am sure I am not mistaken, for she did smile and cast a wanton
eye on you too.


Tiberius, Well well Sir, how do you like her, did she not kiss well?


Rowland, In troth Sir I cannot tell, I took so little notice of it, 'twas
only for fashions sake, that I kissed her; not out of any desire I had to it,
but to fulfill the ancient custom.


Hostler, What corn will you be pleased to give your Horses, Sirs?


Rowland, Why give mine half a peck of Oats too night, and the like quantity
in the morning.


Tiberius, And let mine have the same.


Hostler, They shall Sir.


Rowland, Here Hostler, take the pot and drink.


Hostler, Thank you Master.


Tiberius, Be sure let them have their due.


Hostler, I Will warrant you Sir.


Hostless, Gentlemen your Supper is ready, will you have it brought up yet?


Rowland, Yes, Yes, by all means Landlady, bring it up; for we think long till
we be at it: I am sure I do.


Hostess, You shall have it immediately Sir; will you be pleased to seat your
selves?

So here it is come now.


Tiberius, Come Landlady sit you down pray, where is my Landlord your Husband?


Hostess, Alas poor Cuckold, where should he be, he is abroad about his
business.


Rowland, How Is that Landlady, you do but jest sure?


Tiberius, No, no, she uses to talk after this rate, I know; but I believe my
Landlord is no Cuckold for all that.


Hostess, Well, come Gentlemen fall too, I have said grace for you.


Tiberius, Well said Landlady, I perceive you are merry; but we will every one
say grace for himself.


Rowland, So, Now Landlady be pleased to help your self, and we will cut
afterward.


Tiberius, Well Landlady, I know your temper; you connot eat well without a
bottle or two of Claret.


Hostess. Well, then if you know my humor, I hope you will let me have it;
for I shall live the longer, and I know you would not have me die yet, for
you will never meet with such another Landlady.


Rowland, Yes, yes, Landlady, if that a bottle or two of Wine will prolong
your days, you shall have that Cordial to be sure; and I am also in your
opinion, that a good Supper cannot be made without a bottle or two of Wine.

Here Boy bring us up a bottle of Claret.


Boy, By and by, you shall have it Sir.


Tiberius, Come Landlady, have we never a merry Jest at Supper?


Hostess, Are you married Sir?


Tiberius, Yes, that I am Landlady.


Hostess, Why, then you are a Cuckold.


Rowland, How do you know that Landlady?


Hostess, Why, it follows by confequence, that all men that are married, must
of necessity be Cuckolds, because my Husband's one.


Tiberius, Suppose your Husband be one, must all men therefore be Cuckolds,
because he is so? surely all the Women in the World are not Whores.


Hostess, Oh Fie, Mr. Tiberius, I had thought you could not have spoke such a
word, I vow I could find in my heart to be angry with you; what must all those
women that make their husbands Cuckolds, be called Whores, no sure I hope not?


Rowland, Nay, but Landlady, setting all aside, how do you call those Women as
make their Husbands Cuckalds? if they are not Whores, I am much mistaken.


Hostess, Lord Sir, I had thought that you had lived long enough in the World
to know better things: Suppose I or some other Woman, should be willing to
satisfy your desires, in that way, rather then disoblige you, methinks you
would not call me or the or whoever it be, Whore, for condescending to your
will.


Tiberius, Why, what would you have her accounted then Landlady?


Hostess, You may say she is a kind Woman, or so: a good natured Woman, or
so: but the name of whore is so odious, that it deserves not to be given for
it, except the party so called be a common strumpet and mercenary, prostrating
her self to any sort of fellow, for half a Crown or under; she indeed deserves
the Name of Whore, and no other Woman whatsoever.


Rowland, Well Landlady, it shall be as you say; come one glass of Claret to
you, and all shall be well I hope.


Hostess, Sir, I Will pledge, and now I hope you understand the difference
betwixt a Whore and a kind Woman.


Tiberius, Well well, Landlady, we are satisfied, and too morrow morning
before we go, you shall be satisfied too.


Hostess, I question it not, Gentlemen, good night Sir; Mr. Tiberius, if you
please, you shall lie in another chamber, and this Gentleman shall lie here.


Rowland, With all my heart Landlady. Sir good night to you; pray use my
Landlady kindly.


DIALOGUE IIII. A Merry discourse betwixt Harry and Doll, in Country Phraises.
Harry, HOnest Doll, well met in troth, whither art thou going, this morning so
early?


Dol, Why, what is that to you, Good man Coxcomb, I hope I am not to make you
acquainted with my Master and Dames besiness; that would be a pretty Jest
indeed, if I should do so; but I think the fool has more wit in truth: pray do
you mind your business, and I will take care of what I have to do, and so
farewell.


Harry, Nay stay a little sweet Dorothy, stay, do not be so angry, that is my
good Girl, what have thou pissed on a Nettle this morning, that thou art so
tachy? come, come, Doll, prithee be gentle (for I vow to God) I ask thee for no
harm.


Dol, No harm, sauce-box, what is it you ask me for then?


Harry, Nay, sweet Dorothy be patient, and I Will tell thee.


Dol, Well, come let me hear it.


Harry, Why, it was not to enquire after any of thy Master or Dames business,
that I stoped thee, but because I have a little business of my own to tell thee
of, if thou will hear me with patience.


Dol, I wonder what I have to do with your business, I Will bear none of your
business, by the Mass not I, therefore pray let me go.


Harry, Nay, stay a little Doll, you must hear me, I Will swear I shall cry if
you are thus unkind to me, therefore prithee stay and hear me.


Dol. How do you say, shall you cry?


Harry, Yes that I shall, and die too, if you be not more kinder to me.


Dol. Well, come fool, rather than you shall cry, and die too, I will stay and
hear what it is you have to say to me, if that you will promise me not to be too
long about it.


Harry, No indeed Doll, I will not keep thee too long, I will be as brief as
may be.


Dol, Come then begin, why don't you begin, I say?


Harry, Nay, but hark ye Doll, I do not take this to be a very convenient
place, being in a common Footpath, and in the open Field.


Dol. Why, whither now I trow?


Harry, Why, I Will tell thee Doll, on the other side of yonder Field you know is a
little River, and by the River side is a most pleasant Grove, where we may fit
and talk of our business, and no body never see us, nor disturb us.


Dol, You tell me of business and business, but I know not what your business
is.


Harry, Come along dear Dolly, come along, and I will tell thee presently, to
thy satisfaction and content.


Dol, Well, I could find in my heart to go along with you, but it must be upon
these conditions.


Harry, What conditions, what do thou mean sweetheart?


Dol, Hey day, pray how came I to be your sweetheart? to my best knowledge I
never saw you but once before, and then I am sure you never talked of Love to
me.


Harry, It Is no matter for that dear Dolly, the more's to come; but prithee,
first let me hear what the conditions must be that I am to subscribe to, for
indeed Doll, I begin to be a little in have.


Dol, Pray stay, I am not so hasty, however (...) you my Conditions.


Harry, Pray, sweet Dolly, let me hear 'em then quickly.


Dol, Yes, you shall; and these they are.

First, you shall swear, that you will not tell my Master nor Dame, nor none of my
fellow Servants, nor any body else that knows me.


Harry, What, must I not tell them Doll?


Dol, Why, I say you shall not tell any of them that I go to talk with you
privately; and then secondly;


Harry, Oh dear, secondly, why what is next Doll; the first I Will swear too
willingly, but is there any more?


Dol, Yes, Yes; secondly I say, you shall not offer any rudeness to me, when we
are alone, you shall not --


Harry, What, do thou mean Doll? thou know I am not rude but gentle; but
prithee what do thou call rudeness?


Dol, Nay, if you interrupt me thus, we shall never have done, I say, --


Harry, What, what, dear Dolly, what do thou say, speak out VVench?


Dol, But you will not give me leave to speak, I think; why, I say, you shall
not offer any uncivility to me.


Harry, What Is that Dolly, that is a hard word, I Will protest it is a very hard
word.


Dol, That is to say, you shall not offer to do any thing to me but kiss me
when we come there, and that not above twice or thrice.


Harry, Oh law Doll, thou talk strangely, why what would thou have me do
more, I intend to do nothing else, only to kiss and talk of business.


Dol. Come, come, for all you pretend so much ignorance, I dare not trust you,
unless you swear.


Harry, What would thou have me swear to Dolly?


Dol. Why, If I must tell you plainly, I must; You shall swear that you will
not put your hands under my Coats.


Harry, Why, what should I put them there for Doll, hey?


Dol. Nay, it is no matter for that; will you swear, will you swear Harry?


Harry, Yes, I can swear Doll.


Dol. Ay, ay, I don't question that, but will you?


Harry, Yes, I will swear Doll, but what must the Oath be?


Dol. Why, the Oath shall be this, you shall swear by your --


Harry, By my what Doll?


Dol. Why, you shall swear, by your honesty, and by your Maidenhead, that you
will not abuse me.


Harry, How can I abuse one that I love so well: No, no, that cannot be.


Dol. Well, but however you shall swear as I have told you.


Harry, Yes, yes, I will swear boldly Dolly, by my everlasting honesty; but
what is the the other word that I must swear by Doll?


Dol. Why, by your Maidenhead, I told you.


Harry, Prithee what is that Doll?


Dol. Nay, if you know not, I shall not tell you.


Harry, Why, then I Will swear on at a venture?


Dol. Do so then if you will.


Harry, Why, then by my pure honesty, and by my Maidenhead, which I know not
of, I will not Misuse thee.


Dol. Well, come then, I don't much care if I go along with you.


Harry, Come on sweet Dolly, prithee give me thy fist, and we will walk
lovingly together.

Then away they did walk,
To the fine shady Grove,
Where no body could them espy.
There Harry did tell her
The pleasures of love,
And I Will tell them to you by and by.
Though he was a Clown,
Yet he well understood
That Women de love to Embrace.
He gave Doll a green gown,
In the midst of the Wood,
'Twas a pretty convenient place.
But listen a while,
And you will bear their discourse,
How Harry proceeds in his wooing,
He made Doll to smile.
Who seeded no force,
Though Harry begun to be doing.

Dol. Well, now we are come to the place, I suppose, which you told me of?


Harry, Yes, so we are Dolly, and now in this pretty shady place, under this
tree, we will sit down and discourse about the business.


Dol. Yes, prithee do, lets hear this business, that has been so long a
bringing out.


Harry, Why, then this it is Dolly, I must tell you that I love you, and not a
little, but a great deal Dolly, I vow I do.


Dol. Well, and what then Harry?


Harry, Why, then let us kiss a little, nay, again and again too.


Dol. Nay, but hold Harry, you remember your Oath you swore, before I consented
to come hicher with you; which was, that you should he civil and not kiss me
above once or twice, or three times at farthest.


Harry, I Will swear Dolly, I had almost forgot that, but if I have exceeded a
little beyond my bounds, you will not be angry I hope, will you Doll?


Dol. Nay, I don't know what you mean, methinks you tempt me strangely.


Harry, I Will warrant Girl I Will do thee no harm, don't fear it; come, the other
kiss and then --


Dol. And what then Harry? Well but you said you loved me, but how much, or how
little, or for what, I cannot yet till.


Harry, Oh, oh, I Will tell thee that presently.


Dol. Nay, but I must know just now?


Harry, Why, I love thee abundantly Dolly, even so much that I could find in my
heart to --


Dol. To do what Harry?


Harry, Why, to kiss thee again, and to hug thee lovingly.


Dol. Is that all? but don't you intend to marry me too Harry.


Harry, Marry thee* Yes, yes child, I Will marry thee by and by, even just now.


Dol. Yes, I do so, therefore let me have no excuses, but make me your wife
forthwith.


Harry, Then it seems you are in as much have now as I was before? Well,
satisfy thy self Doll, for I will make thee my wife, and will prove an honest
careful husband to thee, what can thou desire more?


Dol. Nay, if you prove as good as your word, I shall not need to defire any
more; but when will you appoint the time, that I may make some small
preparation?


Harry, I leave that to thee Doll: but be private in it and conceal what is
past, for people you know will make the worst of any thing they hear.


Dol. As for my secrecy, you need not doubt it, for the making of this our
meeting known, would reflect upon me as much as an your self, and rather more.


Harry. Thou say true Dol; therefore prithee let us make an end at present,
and do thou name the day when we shall meet again, and I will Marry thee
without delay, hoping that thou will prove an honest, kind, and virtuous Wise
to me.


Dol. I will so, and for ever be obedient to thy Commands; and since you leave
it to me to appoint the time, I think just this day week, at the same hour we
met too day, will be a very good time if you think it so.


Harry, I do agree to it, and I will be sure to meet thee that morning in this
same place where now we are, and from hence we will go to the Church and be
married privately, and then return to our services again, where we will stay
till our years are up, and then I ear not if all the world do know that we are
Man and Wife.


Dol. A match my dearest Love, this kiss shall part our bodies for this time;
yet surely know, that though I am gone, thou bear away my heart; my body to
my heart shall shortly go.


Harry. Sweet Dolly fare thee well till next we meet,
Ten thousand kisses, kisses that are sweet
I Will give thee here at parting; do but guess
The number till I make them numberless.
Rejoice my Dolly, for our Wedding day
Will quickly come, Love's time makes no delay.
Prepare thy self, and every thing provide
Against that day to meet me, not with pride,
But blessed humility, and loving Charms,
Such as become a faithful Bridegrooms Arms:
Fear nothing Dolly, for I will requite
All these past favors on our Wedding night.

DIALOGUE V. A merry Discourse betwixt two Poets, meeting with one another
accidentally in the Street.
Will. BRother Tom, well met; how goes the affairs of the world now adays?


Tom. In troth Will very dull, mighty dull; I Will swear, methinks, all the world
is dull but we; and Faith we shall be dull too, except we can get more money; I
speak for my own part, I know not how your Pockets stand affected, I am sure
mine find a mighty Vacuum of late.


Will. Prithee now don't say so, I know you cannot want money except you are
covetous, and so want by consequence, according to that old Adage, which tells
us, that semper avarus eget.


Tom. Prithee Will don't speak Latin, for I cannot understand a word so long
as Aegrotat Crumena; besides, I have drank never a drop of Sack, nor no other
Wine; therefore how can thou expect that I can speak or understand a word of
Latin.


Will. Come, come, Brother Tom, we live by our Wits, we must not want money,
for my part I have money enough; Come, come along with me, I Will revive thy
spirits with some of the Heliconian Liquor, and you know Faecundi Calices Tom
will inspire our Brains, and make our Muses fing such delightful strains, that
shall charm the Usurers Gold to fly into our Pockets, and never repine for
being bountiful.


Tom. On my word Will. you are very bri^k, but what Tavern shall we go to;
methinks I cannot turn my head on neither side, but my Nose smells Sack ever
since you talked of going to the Tavern, for I Will swear I have a very empty
Cavern; therefore prithee Will. name the place quickly, and we will discourse
of all things there as we shall think fit.


Will. Prithee Tom go whither thou will, for my part it is all one to me; but I
think we had as good go to the Devil, because we are just by it.


Tom. No Will, I don't care for going to the Devil now, for there I shall meet
with a small Dun; it is no great matter, I owe five or six Pounds, or
thereabouts.


Will. Well then avoid Satan, we'll come not near thee; but name some other
place Tom.


Tom. Why, there is a glass of as good Wine at the Rose, and there whatsoever
we say shall be under the Rose; and that is as nigh as the other: besides the
head Drawer is my very good friend, he never lets me pay a Farthing for Tobacco.


Will. Prithee don't talk of such pitiful things as paying for Tobacco; if he
will draw us a Bottle of good Wine, that shall be all we expect from him. Tom,
we must keep such fellows as Drawers are at a distance, lest they grow saucy.


Tom. But I am forced to make them my Familiars, sometimes against my will, but
it is no matter for that, come let us go.


Will. Come along Tom, I Will lead the way.
A Drawer comes to them at the Rose.

Drawer. You are welcome Gentlemen, will you be pleased to walk up stairs.


Tom. Yes, honest Drawer, we will follow you up stairs as fast as we can.


Drawer. What Wine will you be pleased to drink Gentlemen?


Will. Hark you, be you the Head- Drawer?


Drawer. Yes, Sir.


Tom. Yes, yes, this honest Drawer knows me well enough.


Will. Well honest Drawer, since he calls thee so, prithee bring us up a Bottle
of the best Canary in the Cellar; be sure let it be good, and thou shall lose
nothing for thy civility.


Drawer. Your Servant. Sir, I Will warrant you rare good, Sir.


Tom. Do you hear, bring up some Tubacco with you also, such as I used to smoke
when I come here.


Drawer. You shall have it, Sir.


Tom. We shall want a third man to help hold a discourse, shall we not? What do
you think of a third man, Will. I know where to send for one?


Will. A Por of a third man; tell me of no third man: I Will warrant thee, that
we'll find Discourse enough betwixt our selves.


Drawer. Here Is a Glass of rich Canary, Sir.


Tom. Give it me: Will. give me thy hand: Come, a good Health to the Muses our
Sisters, our old Sire Apollo.


Will. Well bowl'd Boy. Come, give me a Rummer, I Will pledge thee.


Drawer. Does the Wine please you, Gentlemen?


Tom. Thou art an honest Lad, it is very good Wine, and I Will remember thy Box
for it.


Drawer. Your Servant, Sir.


Exit Drawer. Will. Come Tom, fill the other Glass and drink to me, I Will
warrant thee this will put thee out of thy dull humor: Come be merry old Soul,
Let Us quaff whilst we may: None knows who shall live to be merry next day.


Tom. Nay, if thou begin'st to be inspired already, what shall we be before we
go: Come Will. God bless the King.


Will. Prithee Tom drink off thy Glass: What thou do not begin to start
already? Come suck him off, and I Will pledge thee a brimmer.


Tom. So now I hope I have pleased you, Will.


Will. Yes, so thou have Tom. and I Will do the like, I Will warrant Boy.


Tom. I think we had best to call for the other Bottle before we begin to smoke.


Will. Do so Tom, do you call, because you know the Drawer.


Tom. Well, I Will knock. Here Drawer, B^y.


Drawer. By and by, I am coming Sir.


Tom. Prithee draw us a Bottle of the same Wine.


Drawer. You shall have it Sir.


Will. Come Tom, now let us smoke it awhile.


Tom. Agreed: But stay, let us do nothing rashly, let us rake each of us another
Glass first. Is this the same Wine, Drawer?


Drawer. The very same Sir.


Exit Drawer. Tom. Come Will, here is my Mistresses health.


Will. Drink it off Tom, and pledge mine, and then --


Tom. Ay, and then, as thou say Will. we shall be fit for discourse.


Will. So, now let it rest awhile, and prithee tell me how thou have spent thy
time of late: Upon what new Subject have thou exercised thy fancy of late.


Tom. Why, I Will tell thee Will, but the other day there comes to my Lodging a
brisk and lively Blade, a good Sack-drinker, but a younger Brother, and he like
other men now adays (I will not say thee, and I Will. because he was no Poet) had
more Wit than Money. This Young Gentleman had found out a Female Creature that
had more Money than Wit, whom he thought were a very fit Match for him: He told
me, that he had often made his Addresses to her, she not giving him a flat
denial, he was persuaded, that his own Wit, with the assistance of a smooth
Poem in praise of her Perfections (or Imperfections, all is one in that Greek
you know Will.) might win her, and work upon her foolish good Nature, so far as
to accept his suit.


Will. And how then Tom?


Tom. Nay, I must drink the other Glass before I can proceed any further with
my Story.


Will. Well, drink and be hanged, you love this Sack, I perceive.


Tom. Faith Will. 'twas well said: Let me drink before I am hanged, for I love
Sack better than hanging by far.


Will. Well, but go on with the Story.


Tom. Then I told him Will, that I could fit him to a hair with a Copy of
Verses, but I exprcted to have something in hand, and a promise what I should
have after I had done. The young Fop heightred with the thoughts of good
success, gave me a Guinny in hand, being all the Money he had, I suppose; and a
promise of four more if he married the young Gentlewoman: which I gladly took,
and could not in Conscience but give him a glass of Wine out of it.


Will. Well, and you did give him Sack out of his Guinny, did you not Tom?


Tom. Why yes, I tell thee, I did make him drink for his Money; we had two
Bottles of Clarer, and that looked more gentile than one Bottle of Sack, though
I must confess, that I love Sack far better than French-Wine, Will, and so
here is to thee.


Will. Nay I believe that you love Sack well enough, without swearing to it; for
you signify as much by your present drinking. Well, now you have took off your
Glass, I hope you will proceed with your Narration concerning the Poems you
were to make.


Tom. Yes, I will so; but had not we best to drink another Glass apiece first:
I vow this is excellent good Sack, Will.


Will. Yes, yes, the Sack's good enough; but prithee be not so greedy of it
Tom, but go on with thy Story.


Tom. Well here is one Glass to thee Will, and then --


Will. And then I think thou wilt be drunk, Tom, come prithee make haste then,
for I am impatient of thy tediousness.


Tom, Well, if thou will not pledge me Will, I Will set it by a while, and
proceed with my young Gamester, which was after this manner. I bad him come
again that day week he gave me the Guinny, and he should have the Poems.


Will. Why, thou wast not a week sure in composing a Copy of Verses in praise
of a Ladies Beauty?


Tom. No indeed, I was not Will; I wonder how thou hapenest to ask such an
impertinent Question?


Will. How do you make it an impertinent Question? did you not say, that you
bid the Gentleman come that day week, and he should have his Poem?


Tom. Yes, I did say so, and do say so still, and say the truth too, Mr. Will,
and yet that is no good ground for you to say that I was a week in making them;
I Will swear if you were not my Brother Poet, I would call thee Fool. Why, do
thou not know that I had a Guinny?


Will. Yes, I do remember you told me so, but what then?


Tom. What then, why art thou ignorant still? Do thou think that the Guinny
would not require some time in spending?


Will. It Is right Tom, I blame my present dullness of apprehension in not
understanding thee at first; I must confess that I might have imagined that
thou could not rest, or settled thy self to any thing till the Guinny was
consumed and melted away.


Tom. Yes, as thou say Will, I did melt it in a shore time, but not all at
one time; for I would study and compose three or four Lines, then to the Tavern
for half a pint of the best Canary, and having drunk up that, I could make a
shift to go home and compose two Verses and a half more, and then to the Tavern
again. But now I think on it, this Wine that stands by me, will be flat if it
stands any longer, therefore Will, here is to thee.


Will. What again? why sure enough I shall be troubled to get thee home by and
by.


Tom. Yes, it may be so. Here Drawer, Boy.


Drawer. By and by, Sir, I am coming. Did you call here, Sir?


Tom. Yes; Prithee bring us a Bottle of the same Wine, and bring a Chamber Pot
with thee.


Drawer. You shall have it, Sir.


Tom. We shall have the other Bottle, shall we not Will?


Will. Yes, it seems we must have it; now you have called for it.


Drawer. There are Musicians below, Gentle men, who desire to know whether you
will permit them to play to you or no?


Will. Hang 'em Rogues, we have rothing to do with Fiddlers, our Sack will make
us more merry than their scraping.


Tom. Thou say right Will, and now I love thee, and here is ^o thee.


Will. Come drink Tom, and let me hear what Verses thou made the young man
for his Guinny, I know thou have a foul Copy of them about thee still, have
not, Tom.?


Tom. Why, what if I have or have not, must I needs tell you Will; or is there
any necessity that I should show them to you, if I have 'em about me?


Will. No, no, Tom, I do not Command you to show me, but I desire that kindness
of you; therefore don't be angry.


Tom. No, no, Will, angry, I scorn to be angry; Come here is to thee.


Will. Well, but will you show me the Poem that you made for the Gentleman.


Tom. No, in troth will not I, but I Will read it to you, if that will fatisfie you,
if not, you must defist to ask me further, for I will not part from them out of
my own hands to never a man in England; yet I must confess, that I love you
well Will, but you must pardon me for that.


Will. Why are they such excellent ones that you are afraid that I should take
them away, and so make use of them, some other time upon the same occasion?


Tom. It Is no matter for that, if you will hear them you shall Will.


Will. Well, prithee, let us hear 'em then.


Tom. Why, you shall; but here is to you first, I begin to be dry.


Will. Well, prithee drink, and read 'em if thou will, or say thou will not.


Tom. Yes, I will, and these they are, pray give attention:

Madam, your Beauty, hang me, like an Elf,
I need not praise, for that will praise it self:
I cannot flatter you, yet must confess,
That I could love you well, if you had less.
For what I love you for, I know you guess.

Will. How Is that? How Is that?


Tom. Nay, if you interrupt me, I have done.


Will. Proceed.


Tom. I love you, Madam, more than Pig or Pie,
And if you love me not, I Will sit and cry,
And curse my cruel fate and destiny,
until I waste, and pine away, and die;
And if my Mother ask the reason why,
Then Madam, you must bear the shame, not I,
Because you work my woe by cruelty;
But if you are kind and grant my suit, I Will fly
Into your arms with joy, and there I Will lie,
And kiss and hugg to perpetuity,
And nothing want that is underneath the Sky;
Then be not coy, nor softly say, fie, fie;
If that I lie, as close as Pig in Stie.

Will. Oh, wonderful, wonderful Wit! I never heard the like in all my life; so
many Rhimes of one sort I never heard in my life time.


Tom. That Is the rarity of it, Will.


Will. Yes, so I perceive Tom. What did you conclude you Elegant Poem after
this manner?


Tom. No, there is two Lines more, and that is all; which are these:

Thus Mistress, hoping you will not count me rude,
Until anon I see you, I conclude.

Will. Oh, admirable Tom! I could not have thought that any man alive had had
so much wit in him; Well, go thy way for a Composer of Poems: so excellent a
Fancy, I never heard before.


Tom. No nor no body else, except it came from those that are good Sack
Drinkers like my self: Come here is to thee Will, let us drink a little touch now.


Will. I Will pledge thee Tom, a brimmer: Drawer, bring the the other Bottle, and
tell us what is to pay?


Drawer. You shall have it, Sir.


Tom. Come Will, prithee tell me what new thing thou have made of late, speak
Will, and briskly, to be dull I hate.


Will. This Sack has witty Charms I do perceive,
It fools inspires, I aptly do believe.

Tom. Then give us Sack, give us Sack,
It Is pity, we should ever lack.

Will. Drink stoutly Tom, thou shall not want,
I find it helps the ignorant.

Tom. Come, Drawer, quick, and bring some smoke;
To drink more Wine it will provoke.

Will. I value not the Indian Funk,
It rather causes to be drunk.

Tom. Fie Will, none can be drunk but Sots,
That in an Alehouse tope black Pots:
Wine only does transform our Souls;
A Block-head's witty with full Bowls.

Will. I Am apt to think, thou tell me true,
Then prithee Tom, take thou thy due:
Thy Guinny Poem wanted Wine,
Thy muddy Brains for to refine:
Let Us cease to Rhyme ex tempore,
We'll drink and laugh and merry be.

Tom. Thou say true Will, we had better leave off Rhiming in vain, for why
should we waste our stock of Wit upon each other when we have no occasion for
it; we have enough to study our Brains when we have a Gninny Subject to work
upon. In troth Will, I begin to be troubled with a short Cough, I don't know
what they call it; Prithee give me another Class of Sack, and try what that
will do with me.


Will. Ay, ay, the the other Glafs, prithee drink it off, and begin an other to
me, that we may make an end, for it begins to be late.


Tom. Thou say true Will, and here is to thee.


Will. So now, we'll call for a Reckoning. Here Drawer, What Is to pay?


Drawer. Eight shillings Wine, and six pence Tobacco.


Will. Here Is nine shillings, take thou the remainder.


Drawer. Your Servant, Sir, you are welcome Gentlemen.


Tom. Well fare thee well Will, the next Treat shall be mine.


Will. Adien honest Tom, let me see thee sometimes. Farewell.


DIALOGUE VI. A merry Dialogue of Love betwixt an Old Rich Guff and a handsome
br^^k Damsel.
Old Man. MY Cocky, My pretty Nancy Cock, how do thou my Sweeting? in troth
Law; I am glad to see thee with all my heart. Come, how have thou done this
great while? what, art thou married yet my Girl? have got thee a good Husband
yet?


Maid. Your Servant Sir, I hope your Worship's in good health.


Old Man. Yes, in good truth Girl, I thank my God, I am in good health, and am
as lively and lusty, as e're I was in all my life: But prithee tell me Nancy,
art a Wife or a Maid? Tell me truly, don't blush.


Maid. I am a Maid, an't please you, Sir.


Old Man. In goed time, my Sweeting: But I wonder thou have not got thee a
Husband all this while.


Maid. I hope he is got already, Sir.


Old Man. Well, well, pretty one, you know my meaning: I tell thee; I wonder
such a pretty sweet-fac'd Rogue has not a Husband yet.


Maid. Because I can get no Body to have me, Sir; however I think it is time
enough yet, for I am young in years, and may be brought too soon to know the
sorrows of a wedded life.


Old Man. Be not mistaken Sweetest; there are no pleasures in the world like to
those which married people receive when they are joined together by free
consent, and where there is no want of an Estate to keep Love warm; for I must
confess that Poverty often makes Love grow cold, and want of Necessaries makes
Quarrels arise; But where there is a sufficiency and plenty of all things,
together with a loving and kind Husband, I think that woman is in a happy
condition: What thinks't thou of this my Nancy, come answer me now Girl?


Maid. Why truly Sir, such Husbands are hard to be found; but if I knew where
to have such a man, I should be willing enough to alter my condition; for I
must confess that I have had a longing mind this half year to be a married
wife; for something, but I know not yet for what, I had so strong a desire.


Old Man. Alas, poor Rogue! pretty innocent Girl, The truth on it is, I do
believe that thou art a pure Virgin, and by'r Lady, my Cocky, I will give thee
one Salute.


Maid. How Sir?


Old Man. Nay, my Cocky, be not ashamed; Nay, prithee don't blush.


Maid. Pray Sir, what do you mean? I hope you will not degrade your self so
much as to kiss such a one as I: Pray Sir, forbear.


Old Man. I feck Huffy, thou art a sweet-lip't Rogue, and let me tell thee,
that I must do more than kiss thee.


Maid. I hope you are not in earnest; you will not as me any harm, will you
Sir?


Old Man. Hurt thee? No my Chuck, I do not intend to hurt thee; I love that
sweet face of thine too well to hurt it.


Maid. Nay then I care not Sir what you do to me, so you don't hurt me; pray
tell me then what you mean to do?


Old Man. Why, I intend to love thee.


Maid. To love me! and what then Sir?


Old Man To kiss thee, and hag thee, and to lie with thee all night.


Maid, Marry God forbid that I should lie with a man; in deed Sir, I dare not
do such a thing for all the World; for my Mother has often told me, that I must
not lie with a man, except I had a Husband.


Old Man. Ha, ha, ha, my pretty thing, no more; thou shall not he with any man
but thy Husband.


Maid. Why Sir, you are not my Husband, and yet you talk of lying with me.


Old Man. Well said, sweet Face: But what do think of being my wife? could
thou find in thy heart to love me, and prove a virtuous, true, and kind wife to
me all days of thy life: Now Cocky speak, for in troth Law, I am in earnest,
and do love thee above all other Maids in the whole world.


Maid. Do you so Sir: But you are old, are you not Sir, pray tell me?


Old Man. Why, what if I am, Child.


Maid. Why then you will die before me, Sir, and I shall love you so well when I
am married to you, that it will break my heart, if you should die before me.


Old Man. Pretty heart, say thou so: Is that all thou do object against me?


Maid. Is not that enough Sir, what would you have me say more?


Old Man. I must confess, dear Heart, that I am older than thee; but you must
know, Cocky, that we all must die, both old and young, but we cannot tell who
shall die first; therefore be not discomforted upon that account, for thou
may die as soon as Is if not before me.


Maid. Would you not cry then Sir, if I should die be fore you?


Old Man. Yes, Pretty Rogue, I should be sorry for thy death, but those things
must be left to the disposal of kind Heaven, which orders all things of that
Nature in its own due time and season.


Maid. Say you so Sir, but you are older than I, and I very much fear --


Old Man. What do thou fear, pretty One? Speak holdly, do not fear to tell me.


Maid. Why Sir, cannot you guess.


Old Man. Why Yes, fair One, perhaps I may.


Maid. Pray tell me, what you think then?


Old Man. Well, I believe, thou think that because I am in years, I may not
be capable of those Duties which belong to a new Marriage Bed.


Maid. Why what are those, Sir?


Old Man. Pretty Innocent: well, thou shall know when we are married, and till
then thou must rest contented.


Maid. Well Sir, I shall be contented: But pray till me, if we must marry, how
I shall be maintained, for my Mother will not look after me then.


Old Man. Preity Fool, take no care for that: I have got more Gold and Silver
than thee and I shall ever spend whilst we live, and when we die shall leave
enough for our Children after us.


Maid. What must we have Children too?


Old Man. Two? Yes, three or four, I Will warrant thee: although I am old in thy
eyes, yet I am as youthful and vigorous in those concerns, as a young Man at
one and twenty; the enjoyment of thee will make me forget my Age, and become a
Boy again.


Maid. Nay then, I care not Sir, for I shall love to see you look young.


Old Man. Come and kiss me then, my Nancy.


Maid. With all my heart Sir. And now I Will sing you one Verse of a Song.


Old Man. Come let us hear it, Girl.


Song. When a young womdn to an old Dotard is wed,
Let her honestly live if she can,
It Is a thousand to one but with Horns he will be sped,
Iy some pretty wanton young man.
Then his wife with disgrace he ever will shame;
But the wisest young Gallants will fiee her from blame.
Maid. Pray how like you this?


Old Man. Very well, very well, Nanny; Prithee, who taught thee this Song.


Maid. My Mother Sir, and she said it was a very true one.


Old Man. No, no, fair One, it is not true; there is no honest woman will wrong
her husbands bed, though she have never so great temptations.


Maid. I hope you will not be jealous Sir, I Will promise you I will live as
honestly as ever I can; what would you have me do more?


Old Man. No, no, thou say Well, Girl, I will not be jealous, and I fancy
that I shall please thee so well, that thou will have no cause to make me a
Cuckold; and we will live together as merry as Cup and Can.


Maid. Well, what would you have me say more, Sir, pray speak, and tell me
quickly, for I am weary of this Discourse, I had rather be in action.


Old Man. I commend thee, my Lore, and so had I too; Well, tell me, then will thou have me to be thy Husband?


Maid. Yes, if you please, Sir.


Old Man. Enough, now I have my desire, and thou shall have thine, I Will warrant
thee; now I will go and make preparation against too morrow, which shall be our
VVedding-day; and with this kiss, at present I take leave.


All things prepared, they married were in haste,
The Old Man fails, and Cuckold is at last.
DIALOGUE VII. A Merry Dialogue betwixt a young Gentleman and an old Widow.
Gent. MAdam, the various Reports that go abroad in the World concerning
Matrimony, make me ambitious to try an Experiment upon the same, and having
heard so great a Fame of your Ladyships good life and conversation, have
presumed now to tell you, that I am Madam, Your humble Servant.


Wid. Sir, I can do less then give you thanks for your Civility toward me, but
I wonder that you should attaque me with the matter of love. I suppose you
understand my present state and condition, how that of late I have buried a
good Husband; how therefore can you think that I will admit so soon of a second
address: In the first place, you must either think that I had but small
kindness for my former Husband, or etherwise you must imagine that I am a fond
old doting Fool, apt to be carried away with every wind of Doctrine that is
preached to me by every simple Idiot, that has only a prospect into my Estate
or Fortune, but has no regard to my person. Come, young Gentleman, these things
will not take.


Gent. Madam, I hope I have given you no offense; if I have, I most humbly beg
your pardon.


Widd. I am no Pope Sir.


Gent. But Madam you must give me leave to tell you then, that if Love can be
called an offense, I must confess that I have offended; for now and evermore I
must tell you that I love you, and none but you in the whole world; therefore
dear Madam, look not scornfully upon me, but grant me my humble request; which
is to give me love for love.


Widd. Why sure young man you are not in earnest.


Gent. Yes Madam indeed I am, and so you shall find me.


Widd. Why what would you have me to do, would you have me match my self to a
young Boy?


Gent. Madam you will find a lusty Boy of me, methinks I begin to write my self
man -- being now about twenty; I Will warrant you Madam a good Bedfellow.


Widd. How shall I know that?


Gent. Try Widow, try, there is nothing like it; faith never fear it, I have
that you want, come let us grow familiar now.


Widd. Are you in earnest Sir?


Gent. Yes by this kiss I am.


Widd. Nay hold you are rude, fie for shame; what again?


Gent. Again, yes and again and again too.


Widd. Why sure you will not, young man, you will be tired anon?


Gent. No, no, Widow, I shall never be weary of well-doing.


Widd. Do you call this doing well?


Gent. Truly I must confess there is not much action in this; for it is only an
invitation to a farther bliss or happiness, which the Wits of our Age call
enjoyment. Ah Widow Enjoyment, Enjoyment; that is all.


Widd. Prithee what do thou mean by Enjoyment, I don't understand ye?


Gent. Well well, Widow, I shall speak in plain English, when you and I are
in bed together; however I am fully persuaded that you know my meaning by
Enjoyment, though you have had but little; for I am sensible that your Husband
was a silly feeble Sot, and scarce ever showed you what Enjoyment was; but I
Widow, I Will clear the case, and show you what it is immediately, if you
please.


Widd. Why you will not surely, will you? methinks you are a little too hasty
for me; and yet --


Gent. And yet I know that cannot well be; for having once but smelt of the
Spit, you will love a good not flatter you, but proceed according to the old
Song, which is this:

Song.
He that will win a Widows heart,
Must bear up briskly to her:
She loves the lad that is free and smart,
And hates the formal woer.
She loves the lad that is free and smart,
And bates, etc.
What think you of this Widow?


Widd. Well, well, young man, you may go on, and see what you will get by it.


Gent. Go on, yes so, I intend, and get you by^.


Widd. What do you mean by getting me?


Gent. Why I mean by the way of Love to make you my Wife Widow; what do you
think of that Lady?


Widd. Why sure you don't think so; are you and I an equal match?


Gent. Match; ha, ha, ha, yes Widow I Will match ye I Will warrant ye; come
give's your hand, is it a bargain or no?


Widd. What you are in haste then?


Gent. Yes, yes, in great haste Widow.


Widd. Very well; but do you conceive that my age and yours agree.


Gent. Yes, yes, we and our ages too will agree well enough; suppose I am
twenty and you are forty, what a business is that? Let me tell you Widow,
that if you join with me, our Ages shall be both equal.


Widd. How can you make out that Sir?


Gent. Why thus Widow, by way of infusion; for let me tell you that I shall
infuse so much young blood into you, that in one weeks time you will become
twenty years younger: Do you hear me now Widow, what think you of this?


Widd. Go, go, you are a VVagg.


Gent. Yes, yes, so I am, and I Will tumble thee about as long as thou art able
to wag.


Widd. You will not hurt me, will you?


Gent. No, no, you don't fear that Widow.


Widd. Not much I must confess.


Gent. Well then speak freely, will thou be my spouse or no?


Widd. I could find in my heart Sir, but it must be upon certain conditions.


Gent. Well, well name your conditions; they are good ones I Will warrant ye.


Widd. Why these they are: In the first place, whereas I am possessed with an
Estate valued at Three hundred pounds per annum, you shall not have any thing
to do with that Estate, not so much as with the yearly Rent; but it shall be
all at my disposing.


Gent. Very (...) have you any more conditions pray like the first?


Widd. Yes I have one more, and this it is: You shall not take into your
possession any money of mine, either Gold or Silver; nor make any enquiry how
rich I am; but be satisfied and contented with what you have already.


Gent. So, what is this all?


Widd. Yes Sir, upon these Terms I do agree and am contented to become your
Wife.


Gent. Are you so? Thank you for nothing: Fare you well, fare you well Widow.


Widd. Why are you gone Sir?


Gent. Yes I am going forsooth.


Widd. Hark you Sir, stay a little, nay pray stay; come I Will moderate the
business, I know your Disease.


Gent. Well be quick then.


Widd. Will all my ready money satisfy you?


Gent. No, no, Widow, if you will be my Wife, you must give up Life, Body,
Soul, Estate, and all you have into my possession.


Widd. Well come then if it must be so, it must, I cannot deny you any thing;
for I think long to be made young again.


Gent. A Match Widow, now the bargain's ended; come we'll away to the Church,
and be married immediately.


He that a Widow woes must never flatter,
But with a sprightly carriage make up at her.
A brief Description Of TRUE LOVE.
TRue Love is a precious Treasure,
A rich Delight, unvalued pleasure.
Men's hearts like a Maze intwining,
Two firm minds in one combining:
Foe to faithless Vows perfidious,
True Love is a Knot religious.
Dead to the Sins that flaming rise,
Through Beauties soul-seducing eyes.
Deaf to Gold-inchanting Witches,
Loves for Virtue, not for Riches.
Such is True Loves boundless measure,
True Love is a precious Treasure.
This is Love, and worth commending;
Still beginning, never ending.
Like a wily Net ensnaring,
Like a Round shuts up all squaring:
In and out whose every angle,
More and more does still entangle:
Keeps a measure still in moving,
And is never light but loving.
Twining Arms, exchanging Kisses,
Each pertaking others Blisses.
Laughing, weeping, still together,
Bliss in one, is mirth in either.
Never breaking, ever bending:
This is Love, and worth commending.
In Praise and Dispraise of LOVE.
NOw what is Love I will thee tell,
It is the Fountain and the Well,
Where Pleasure and Repentance dwell.
And it is like a Passing Bell,
That toles all into Heaven or Hell.
Now what is Love I will thee show,
A thing that creeps where it cannot go:
A Prize that passes to and fro.
A thing for me, a thing for mo;
And he that tries shall find it so.
EXAMPLES OF LETTERS AND COMPLEMENTS. OF All sorts, both Jocose and Serious,
fitted for business as well as Recreation and Delight.
A Father's Letter to his Son at School in the Country.
Dear Child.
AS it is my Fatherly care to provide for your future good, in bringing you up
to learning: as well as my present endeavors to see that you want nothing in
the time of your Minority; so I expect that you by being dutiful and diligent
should make me amends for all my costs and charges. Be sure you mind your Book,
and consider, that you alone will receive the benefit: let not too much play
steal away your mind from Learning, for you can never receive any good thereby,
but harm does often happen by overheating your self, which will dull your
memory, and make you incapable of attaining what your Master shall set before
you; so that you will cheat both your self and me; your self of time and
knowledge, and me of my Money and expectation. When you have a little leisure
from your Latin, I would have you practice Writing, which will be a recreation
to you; for to be always upon one exercise does dull the senses of any one
whether Young or Old, and it would be a comfort to me to have a Letter from you
now and then to hear of your welfare: be careful how you spend your time, and
you shall want for nothing that I can help you to, that may encourage you to be
a good boy, and the way to be so, is to live in the fear of God, and to keep
his Commandments, then will his Blessings for ever attend you, and you will be
a joy and comfort to me and your tender Mother in our old Age: Both our Loves
remembered to you and your Mistress, I am

Your loving Father, A. B.

The Son's Answer.
Honored Father,
AFter my humble Duty presented to you and my Mother, these may let you
understand, that through the blessing of God I am in good health, and will to
my lives and be dutiful and obedient, to you and my good Mother; taking your
advice and counsel in every thing, knowing that you wish me well both for my
present and future happiness: my Master is very kind to me, and careful of my
welfare in every respect; pray be pleased to accept of my ill writing at
present, and I doubt not but in a short time, I shall mend my hand and write
better, though as yet I have had but little time allowed me, to learn to write.
My kind Love and service to all my Relations and Friends is all at present that
I have to trouble you with who am,

Your dutiful and most obedient Son till death C. B.

A Citizen returning his Friend kind thanks for his entertainment when he was
in the Country.
Kind Sir,
THe great and manifold kindnesses which I have often received from you and
your Wife do ever call upon me, and put me in mind of making an
acknowledgement, as some part of satisfaction; but most of all those infinite
savours which you were pleased to confer upon me when I was last in the
Country must not, nor can never be forgot whilst I live; I know not how to
make you amends to my own content, in no way but desiring your good company in
London at my House, where you may be sure of a welcome from him who is Sir

Your loving Friend and humble Servant, E. G.

The Country Gentleman's Answer to the Citizen.
Sir,
IT is not my business to complement my Friends with fair words and eloquent
Speeches, but to tell them in downright and in plain Language, they are
welcome; and not only to tell them so in words, but to let them find they are
welcome by their entertainment; which if you found worth your acceptance I wish
you had stayed longer, for I Will assure you Sir, your company was most
delightful, and most pleasant to me all the while you were in the Country;
Insomuch that I cannot be contented to be long without it; therefore since you
would not tarry with us, I do intend to come very speedily to London, and give
you a visit where I do purpose to remain till you are weary of my company and I
weary of the City, but how long that may be I cannot tell: in the mean time Sir
I present my Service to your self and good Brother Thomas, wishing you all
health and happiness, I remain,

Your truly loving Friend J. S.

A merry Letter to invite a Friend to the Tavern.
Honest T^m,
FAith I have designed this Afternoon to be merry in, and want nothing that can
be helping to my delight but your good company: my defire is, that you would
meet me at the George Tavern, in White-Fryers about two of the Clock, and I
will get together two or three more of our old Companions, and there we will
soak our Souls with good Sack and Claret, till our Brains are inspired with
that Heavenly Liquor: then will we sing each of us a merry Catch and drink our
Mistresses Health; crying God bless the King, again and again: then toss off a
brimmer of Bacchus his blood, which will make us like Mars be courageous and
valiant: and cause the fair Venus to fall on her back, though the black limping
Cuckold old Vulcan stand by. Never think of the reckoning for I Will pay the
shot, and if I have not Money the Vintner shall trust; thus expecting your
coming I impatiently remain,

Your true Friend and to^ing Comparion D. J.

The Answer.
Honest Soul,
YOu are always so obliging, and your company is so delightful, that you may
assure your self I will not fail to meet so true a Friend; you know my
^^^^sition is ever inclined to Mirth and good (...) Sack and brisk Claret will
command me at (...), to fight under their Banners so long as I can stand, but
if by their charms it happens that I am overcome, one jolly sweet Song sung in
a high strain, will awaken each sense and recover me to Life again; then
cursing the Drawer for being so slow, instead of calling for one Bottle we will
make him bring up a dozen together, till at length we are fitted for Venus
indeed, then high for a Mistrest, a Girl of the Game, that by her rare Art will
easily quench those flames in one half hour, which we have been kindling with
the Spirits of Bacchus the space of a whole day, all which being done, we will
seek our repose by sleeping a while to regain us fresh courage; and with this
resolution I Will be sure to meet you, who am

Your now too sober Friend, H. B.

A Gentleman to a young Lady whom he courted to marry.
Honored Madam,
SInce last I had the happiness to see your fair face, Cupid has wounded my
heart with those Arrows which he borrowed from your eyes, and unless you will
be pleased to give relief to my miseries and pain, which I thereby do undergo
both night and day, alas I shall be of all Men most miserable: my humble suit
which now I beg is this, that you would be pleased to make me for ever happy by
giving me admittance into your sweet Company, and meet my honest and lawful
desires with smiles upon your Brow; I shall not court you our of complaisance,
but tell you Madam honorably and plainly, that with your good liking I intend
to make you my Wife, which if you accept of my serious proposition, I shall for
ever be bles^, and you Madam I hope will never have cause to repent your
choice: thus expecting your kind reply; I for this time begging your pardon, do
humbly take my leave and remain, Madam

The humblest of your Servants, W. G.

The Ladies Answer.
Sir,
I Cannot but bless my self with admiration that so wise a Man as your self,
should talk so idly to say, that my Eyes have wounded your Heart: I must needs
tell you I think you talk of impossibilities, and that want of rest occasions
this distraction of mind; you pretend to be no complemental Courtier, yet
appear to be the greatest that ever I met with by this your Letter you sent me.
I must confess according to equality of Fortunes you outdo me, and I am not of
Birth so highly descended, therefore you may presume, that a few words from a
person of so much Worth as your self may win so silly a Woman as I am, but
flatter not your self with that, for I Will assure you I think as well of my
Virginity as the best of them all do, and shall be as loath to part with it
except it be upon a good consideration; therefore if you are real as you
pretend concerning Marriage, your suit may be accepted, but if otherwise, you
take your aim amiss: this till I know you better I hope may suffice from her
who is,

Your Servant on honorable terms, S. B.

A Country Farmer's Son to one of his Neighbor's Daughters.
Dear Betty,
I Must confess ever since you and I drank together last Warm-love Fair, I have
had a great affuction for you, insomuch that I cannot rest at night for those
sweet kisses we then had together, when we drank the last half pint of
White Wind and Sugar: I then perceived that the company of a Womankind, was
far better than a Man's; and truly now I begin to think my self Man sufficient
to have a Wife, and if you think so well of me, as I do of you, we will make no
long business of it, for to tell you the truth I am a little in have, having
ever since I saw you, had some strange thoughts and fancies, fits of Love I
suppose they be, if not, I Will swear I cannot tell what to call them: Sometimes
I dream too, and to be sure it is of you; therefore I think the best way to
give me ease is to marry quickly, and after we have seen one another once more,
I think it will be time for the old Folks to meet to consult about the bargain,
in the mean time I swear I love you dearly, who am

Your loving Friend R. L.

Betty's Answer.
Honest Ralph,
I Must confess you were very kind to me at our last and I took it so, yet I
would not have you think me fond, for a young Maid as I am may go to the Tavern
with a Neighbor's Son at a public Fair, and kiss a little too, and yet not be
accounted fond I hope: to tell you truly ever since that time I have found a
strange alteration in my body and mind, for when I think of you (which is very
often) I cannot forbear sighing, insomuch that our folks take notice of me,
asking me what is the matter, but indeed they ask me more then I can answer
them; only now you put me in mind on it I am verily persuaded that it is Love
that people so much talk of; yes it must be Love I am sure of it: I also dream
in the Night, and such strange dreams, that I hall not name till we are
married, which if the old Men our Fathers do agree, shall be as soon as you
please, till then I am,

Your loving Wise in conceit, E. L.

A Letter to court a young Widow, who had lately buried her Husband.
Honored Madam,
TO say your beauty only moves me to love you, would only be to flatter you, or
to say you Wisdom was a second cause, I should belie my sel^ though this I
needs must tell you Madam, that I know you are both fair and wise, and that
beyond an ordinary comparison, both which are excellent ornaments of Nature;
but I look further, Madam; into your actions and find them carried on and
guided by that precious Jewel called Virtue, the beauty of the Soul, an
excellency by far transcending all endowments; and for that Madam I love and
honor you. It Is pity Madam so much youthful worth should any longer be
clouded under mourning Weeds, what though your Husband was a kind and loving
Man to you in his Lifetime, the memory of him ought not to be a trouble to you
after his Death, for he receives the comfort of all his good deeds which he did
in his Life as a due recompense of a good Christian; therefore Madam your
sorrows ought to cease, because he rejoices in another World; revive your
Spirits Madam, and bethink your self that we must live by the quick and not by
the dead; therefore we ought to make the best use of our time, not knowing how
soon we may be called aside, and it would be a great pity, that we should die
and leave the World behind us without some enjoyment of those delights for
which we are created to partake of. My humble suit is Madam that you would be
pleased to accept my honest Love, and grant my request, which is, that you
would think so well of my person as to smile upon my reasonable demands, which
are that you would become my Wife, and throw aside all these melancholy
thoughts of your dead Husband, and for my further satisfaction Madam,
concerning your affections, I beg that you would send me my sentence either for
Life or Death, in the mean time I remain,

Your desperate Lover, T. W.

The Widows Answer.
Sir,
I Must confess you began to court and complement me very Learnedly, and in my
opinion (if I may be my own Judge) in the beginning of your Letter, you writ
nothing but the truth: for my beauty cannot move any one to love me, neither
will my Wit or Ingenuity be attractive to any Man that is endowed with such
super-excellent Wisdom, and with so quick an apprehension as your self: yet I
have so good an opinion of my self as to think that I have beauty enough to
serve any Man's turn, that is less handsome then I am, and wit enough to know
when I am flattered, and how to avoid the deluding temptations of the
flatterer, and that I count sufficient for any Woman of so ordinary a quality
as my self; as for my Virtues I hope I have my share amongst the rest of my
Sex, for which I give God the praise; neither am I proud, that you think or
call me virtuous, however I have thus much knowledge as to understand that
virtue is an ornament far excelling all beauty or any other natural parts which
are but momentary and like a shadow which now appears, and on a sudden vanishes
away. It Is true my former Husband which is now dead was ^an honest Man, that
you, and all the World that knew him must confess, which is a rare principle
amongst you Men to be so, as well as so to be accounted: but I knew more then
this, he was to me both loving and kind, as well as honest, and so kind that I
scarce believe that he has left his fellow behind him, therefore do not think
that sorrow sits so slightly on my brow, as to be blown off with two or three
fair promises; Oh no, I cannot so suddenly forget so good a Man, and pitch my
mind upon a sec^^^ Husband, though I must confess that my youthful Age will not
permit me to dany my self a second Husband, but whoever that shall be, that
likes me so well as to marry me must stay a while longer, and then without
doubt I may be easily entreated if I like the Man, which I know nothing to the
contrary but that you may be he. if I find you love me as you say you do, I am
Sir

Your Servant in Sorrow, S. T.

A Merchant to his Factor in the West Indies.
Mr. Johnson,
I Have sent you over some goods for you to dispose of in the Ship called the
Woodstrange, Captain Stout Commander; you will find the particulars and the
prizes of them, in the Bill herein enclosed, I hope you will give me no
occasion to doubt your care in putting of them off to the best advantage;
however I think it behooves me to advise you, to have a quick eye to find out
how the Markets go with you, and if there is not many of those sorts of
Commodities arrived at Virginia (as I hope there is not) then I do not question
but you will sell mine at a good advantage; therefore pray be diligent and make
an enquiry after those concerns: for in your good management of my affairs in
those parts depends my whole livelihood, I would have you traffic them away
for Tobacco only, and return my venture back by the same Vessel, this with my
prayers for good success is all at present,

Your loving Friend, W. P.
London, November 15. 1675.
The Factor's Answer.
Honored Sir,
I Have received those Goods which were mentioned in the Note which you
enclosed in your last Letter dated the twenty fifth day of November, one
thousand six hundred seventy and five, they came safe to my, hands without the
least da^ (...) and I have disposed of them according to my best judgment, I
hope you do not question my best care and double diligence in serving you, who
repose so much confidence and trust in me. It happened to be just as you
imagined, and wished, for there was very few of those sorts of Commodities
arrived at our Port at the time you sent yours, therefore I had the opportunity
to put them off at a good rate, and with great advantage: according to your
desire, I have returned you back by the same Ship five hundred Hogsheads of
Tobacco, which I hope will come safe to London, and if they do I know there
will no small profit arise to you by them, thus Sir trusting them to the
protection of the Almighty, and the Mercy of the Seas, I rest

Yours always ready to serve you faithfully, E. Johnson.

A Letter to dissuade a Friend from marrying.
Loving Friend,
I Am informed by a friend of yours and mine also, that you are about to commit
Matrimony, I mean to betake your self to Housekeeping, and to furnish your
house with that monstrous piece of Household Stuff called a Wife, which if true,
I am wonderfully sorry for you, that for want of better judgment, or at least
without more consideration and consultation, you will put your self to that
unnecessary charge, truly in my opinion one of those Utensils or Commodities
which you please to call them, may very very well supply three or four
Families, and you living amongst such good Neighbors it is no question but you
might borrow one of some of them, for without doubt when you are marri^^ they
will make bold with you upon the same account for conveniences sake; thus far
I think I have spoke to the purpose, now let me advise you a little farther
before you undertake this bold attempt and give you some strong reasons to
diswade linking your self to such a Serpent that will bite you a thousand ways;
to name them particularly would be a task too great, for me to undertake, that
is to say, all of them one by one, but some few of them I will demonstrate to
thee as a dear Friend: First, her Tongue will command your Will and your
humor, and if there should be any opposition to her desires, then she studies
how to plague you by her actions; first her commands will be for Money, and
more then a necessary sum must be had for such uses as you must not know of,
and if you make an enquiry, there shall be no peace in the house for a Month
together; Perhaps her lascivious desires may lead her to some merry Meeting,
with some of her Neighboring Gossips, and with them having a while pretty well
booz'd, and soaked their Souls with good brisk Wine, then in steps a Man of the
times, a brave Gallant, who seeing your Wife to be young, and something
amorous, amongst the rest of this jovial crew he singles her out, and taking
her into some more convenient place; where with a few flattering words he
entices her to make you a Cuckold, which he calls being kind to him; and thus
she revengeth her self on you for not submitting your self to her will in every
thing: and it is forty to one but she being full of youthful desire does from
that very hour conceive with child by her lusty Gallant, and you forced to
Father the Brat of another Man's begetting. But to judge more favorably upon
that score, suppose that she amongst that small number of her Sex should prove
honest, yet you must be sure to expect from her a certain charge and trouble,
but an uncertain profit and contentment: You must be sure to maintain her fine,
and in gay Apparel beyond her quality and the strength of your purse; else will
she turn her backside to you in bed at night, and if she be not given to scold
and rail, then will she be sullen and dogged a whole Week together, and will
not speak but frown upon you till you grant her request; Women for the most
part being as proud as Lucifer, must be decked up with gorgeous Apparel, to be
accounted fine and handsome by the rest of their Neighbors, not regarding how
mean and sluttish they are clothed when they are at home with their Husbands.
Then for your House though it be made never so convenient for your use, yet
when the Wife comes she pretends to espy a thousand faults in it, and will not
let you rest till you have made such alterations as she shall think fit, though
it be to the pulling down of the third part of it, and so build it again
according to her Form; and then for your furniture, alas it will appear too
mean for her Ambition; she must have Tables and Chairs, and Bedsteds with
Curtains, and all manner of Household goods after the new Mode, and if you deny
to do it, she will pick your Pocket and buy them her self, or do something else
that is worse. Thus as a Friend I thought fit to admonish you, hoping that you
will take it friendly from me; more might be said upon the same subject, but
let this suffice from

A Well-wisher of your happiness, S. T.

The Young Man's Answer.
Honest Tom,
IN good earnest I am sorry to hear that thou have so great an Aversion to
Matrimony, and can give no greater, nor more substantial reasons why thee and
I both ought not to marry and live honestly; In my opinion thou might have
bestowed thy time a great deal better, then to have wrackt thy brains (as I
imagine) no less than a whole days time if not more, to frame a debauched
Argument, against an honest and Virtuous Woman called a Wife, and under
pretense of giving me good Advice and Gounsel, thou rather do admonish me to
practice that rude course of Debauchery, adulterating other honest Men's Wives;
but dear Tom have a care of those things, for I cannot think otherways by thy
Letter but thou art guilty of that crime which thou so readily perswadest me to
commit; and now to acquaint thee with certain News, I must tell you that I am
married, and therefore can the better confute thy too silly suppositions,
knowing of a certain that all those fictions which thou have raised against
Marriage, are false and of no moment; Therefore for thy better Instruction, I
shall desire thee to give a diligent attention, whilst I soberly vindicate a
married Life and contradict thy foolish Objections gradually as thou have
stated them. First, I say her Tongue cannot, neither is it desired that it
should command my will, no further then I shall upon all occasions think fit
and reason, if it happens at any time that there is a dispute between us about
the management of any small concern, and she perhaps thinks her way best to
effect it, and I think mine best; she presently then replies, prithce
Sweetheart do it how thou please, I only thought good to tell thee my
opinion of it; with these and such like expressions she submits to my will,
which I think is far from commanding or usurping authority as you term it, but
I rather receive comfort by her Tongue then suffer damage, besides Tom I must
tell you that my Wife sings well and pronounces her words with such a becoming
Grace, that she never speaks nor sings but she ravishes my Soul: So much for
the Tongue, and now concerning Money a little touch, be it known to you Sir,
she never wants that, for she has the keeping of all I have, therefore has no
occasion to ask me for any, neither does she go to Taverns with Gossips, for we
have Wine in our house, and every honest Neighbor is free to drink of it, and
thou Tom shall be welcome to a glass of brisk Claret, or what Wine thou likest
best if thou will come and see me, neither am I in the least jealous of being a
Cuckold, for I am sure I please her so well my self, that she will have no
occasion to try and other Man; it is enough for old Men, or those that are
feeble and sickly to be jealous of their Wives honesty, because they know
themselves not able to give them their due benevolence; I cannot believe that a
Woman will make a lusty young Man a Cuckold, if she does in my opinion she
deserves to be hanged. So much for that, and now to sum up all the rest of thy
objections which thou have made against Marriage, in few words I must tell
thee, that my Wife and every other honest Woman is contented with her condition
in every respect, and will not covet new fangles as thou believe, but is well
satisfied with what is decent and comely according to her Husbands quality, and
let me acquaint thee Tom with what I have experienced since I have been
married, that there is so much comfort, so much delight and pleasure in a Woman
when once she is made a lawful Bedfellow that I would not be unmarried again
for all the World; thus hoping thou will follow my example, I am

Thine to my power J. B.

An angry Letter sent to his Friend for an affront given at their last meeting.
Sir,
I Know not what reasons moved you to be so uncivil when you were last in my
company, I am sure I gave you no occasion to be so rude, nor to abuse me in
such scurrilous Language before all the company that was there present; I
expect that you should give me satisfaction by acknowledging your fault, or
else show me the grounds whereon you founded your opprobrious discourse, which
if you do I may still continue the same good opinion of you as I have hitherto
had, but if otherwise you remain perverse and will make me no satisfaction for
what is past, from hence forward I do proclaim my self to be your utter enemy,
and shall endeavor to make my self amends the next time that you and I shall
meet let the place be where it will, expect no favor from his hands, who is

Yours as you deserve C. B.

The Answer.
Sir,
WHen I opened your Letter it looked so big upon me, that had I not had as good
a heart as he that writ it, it would have frightened me into a desperate fit of
the Ague; but considering a little with my self and plucking up my spirits
instead of trembling, my blood began to burn, and with as great a fury as your
self I took my Pen in hand to let you know that what I said at that time was
only in a merry humor to recreate my self, and you sitting next to me it seems
happened to be the object of my discourse, some of which I am apt to think was
very true, the rest was only Jocose; but be it true or false, or what it will I
am not much concerned about it; if this answer will not give you satisfaction,
you must expect no other from me; however I shall not fear to come into your
company at that place where I used to find you,

Yours as you please to think R. S.

A Letter to chastise a near Kinsman who is given to Extravagancies.
Cousin John,
THe daily noise which rings about the Country of your extravagancies and great
debaucheries, causes me at present to write to you, not in anger but by way of
advice; desiring that you would see your own folly and learn to be wiser before
it be too late: I had thought truly that the University had qualified you
better then I perceive it has, for instead of growing better as you grow older,
you now grow worse since you went to London; I must confess I have nothing to
do with your concerns, only as a Relation and instead of a Father, which indeed
you want, to give you good counsel, and to desire you in time to forsake bad
company, for they in the end will ruin both Soul and Body; and truly your
Estate will soon decay; if you hold on spending as you begin, though at present
it is large enough; I wish that Women and Wine be not your Master, which if you
avoid I shall not doubt in the least but you will do well enough: How many fine
young Gentlemen have I seen that by over-drinking themseives have been brought
to ruin and untimely deaths? For when their brains are intoxicated, and the
blood inflamed with high drinking, then are they fit for all manner of vice;
some in that mad humor run to common Strumpets, where they get the foul
Discase, sometimes uncurable; to their everlasting shame and disgrace: others
in that heat of blood engage themselves by oath to kill the next Man they meet,
he not giving them the least affront, which brings them deservedly to the
public place of execution to suffer death, the due reward of such crying fins:
Therefore dear Cozen let the thought of these things reflect upon your Soul,
that you may appear odious and terrible, in your eyes and apprehension, and
that God may turn your heart, and let you see the evil of your ways is the
prayers of

Your ever-loving Kinsman R. W.

The young Man's Answer.
Good Cousin,
I Received your Letter wherein I hear you find scandalous reports of me in the
Country, I admire who should be the Messenger that brings this ill news to
you; I find my reputation is very much abused and if you will be so kind to me
as to let me know the Author of it; I shall make bold to require such
satisfaction of him as shall become a Gentleman to demand. I am apt to think
that you ground those ill characters you give me upon suspicion; for certainly
no Man nor Woman can be so audacious as to blaze abroad such infamous and
undeserved calumnies without the least ground for their so doing; however I am
not the first that has been abused in this Nature. I thank God I know my self
clear of those great enormities which are alleged against me and laid to my
charge, which is a real satisfaction to my self, though not to you and the rest
of my friends; and if I may be believed before those insinnating Sycophants who
value not to stain a Man's Reputation for a meals Meat: I think I am as little
given or addicted to keep ill company as any Gentleman in Town, I cannot deny
but that I do drink Wine and will do if I can git Money to buy it, and I hope I
shall not want so much as will purchase a bottle or two of Wine all my
Lifetime, but if perchance I do I must then leave it off and not before; yet
thus much I can safely say, that I never drunk so much, that I was thereby
deprived of my senses though I know there is too many which are guilty of that
crime. But as for a common Whore or Strumpet as you call them, I defy and hate
like the Devil; neither am I a great admiver of any Womankind though never so
honest, therefore free from those debaucheries you lay to my charge; However I
give you many thanks for your good admonition and desire that you will be
satisfied that I am not the Man that report says I am,

But your loving Kinsman, J. S.

A Letter from a Country Shopkeeper to a Grocer in London for Commodities.
Sir,
I Received the last goods you sent me but they were not so good as I expected,
whether I must impute it to be your fault in not sending the best, or whether
those sort of commodities are not generally so good as they used to be some
other years I cannot easily resolve my self; however I am not willing to
harbor an ill opinion of you presently, but am resolved to try you farther,
therefore I would desire you to send me down by the next return of our Carrier
four hundred weight of the best new Raisins of the Sun, two frails of Malago
Raisins, and the same quantity of each sort of Spice as you sent me last, pray
let them be all very good else you will quite disoblige me for dealing with you
any more; I have not sent you any Money, but do intend God willing to be in
Town my self about a Month hence, and then I will bring Money and clear all
concerns between us; no more at present but that I am

Your loving Friend and honest Chapman D. F.

A Letter from the London Grocer to his Country Chapman.
Loving Friend,
I Received your Letter, and according to your desire I have sent you down
those Commodities you writ to me for, they are all of the very best and I doubt
not but will give you very good content; as for those which I sent you formerly
which you find fault with, I was not to be blamed for they were the very
choicest I had then in my Shop, and I dare boldly say as good as any Man had in
London at that time, though I cannot say they were as good as these are which I
have sent you now, you need not question but my care shall be to serve you to
the best of my power; as for your Money you need not so much as mention it, for
I know your pay to be very good and will trust you as far as you shall desire
your self: I would desire you to keep account in your Book what Goods you
receive from me, that when we come to reckon there may be no difference betwixt
us; thus wishing you good Markets, I rest

Your friend to serve you to the utmost of my power, R. W.

A Letter from a Citizen to his Friend in the Country to send him up an
Apprentice.
Loving Countryman,
I Being now made a Freeman of London, have taken a House and Shop, and my
greatest want at present is a Country Lad that would willingly put himself an
Apprentice to our Trade, I do not question that if you will be pleased to make
a small enquiry amongst some of your Neighbors; but that you may hear of an
honest Boy that will be for my turn, the usual rate which we commonly have is
forty pounds and seven years service, ours being a good Trade and not very
laborious; besides for our credits sake we must keep our Servants in no
ordinary Apparel as some other small Trades do. I leave it to your discretion
to give such a Character of me as you shall think I deserve, and none I think
can give a better account of my Life and Conversation then your self, you
having known me from my childhood. When you write to me, direct your Letter to
be left for me at the Windmill in St. John's street, thus with my Love to your
Wife and self I am

Your ever-loving Friend, T. R.

The Countrey-man's kind Answer.
Loving Friend,
I Am glad to hear that you are settled in the world, and according to your
desire, I have made a diligent enquiry for a boy to serve you as an Apprentice,
and now at last I have heard of one that I hope may be for your turn, he comes
of very honest Parentage, and seems to be a sober Lad; his Father has brought
him up to Learning all his time, insomuch that he is reckoned a very good
Scholar of his Age, he is sixteen years old and pretty well grown, but all that
they scruple at is about the Money, they like the Trade well enough but are not
very willing to give forty pounds with him; however they are resolved upon that
good Character that I have given you, that the Boy shall come up next Week and
be a while with you upon Trial, and afterward if the Boy like you and the
Trade and you approve of him; I do not much question but they will agree with
you upon those terms which you have proposed; no more at present but wishing
you prosperity I am

Yours in all friendly kindnesses, S. D.

A Letter of advice for health.
Kind and loving Friend,
I Am very well satisfied that you are seldom well in health whilst you live in
London, and if I may be a competent Judge, I suppose I know the grounds and
reasons of your sickness which are twofold, in the first place, I imagine that
the City Air is not agreeable to your constitution, and not only with you, but
it is disagreeable to thousands more, and especially to those that are not
naturalized in it, and bred up there, it choaks them up. Another reason is that
because you have but little or no employment, you are forced to be continually
in company which draws you to drinking either at the Tavern or the Alehouse by
reason whereof you loose your Stomach, that you seldom have an Appetite to cat,
which much disorders your body; therefore let me advise you for your healths
sake to betake your self to a Country Life, you know you may be welcome to me
at all times, who am

A well-wisher to you upon all accounts S. F.

The Gentleman's Answer.
Most dear and loving Friend,
I Must censess that you have always been so generous and obliging to me, that
now it remains on my behalf to study some way to gratify all those unmerited
favors which I have received from you and your good Wife, and truly I am apt
to think that you like a skilful Doctor have found out the principal causes of
all my grievances, and have prescribed a most safe and courteous remedy for my
cure, and should I refuse to make use of your kind and free prosser I should be
found injurious to my self, and basely ungrateful to so good a Friend;
therefore so soon as I have dispatched some small concerns here in Town and
taken leave of my Friends, you may expect me in the Country, let me beg the
favor of you to send me up a Horse, for I cannot endure to ride in the Coach;
thus with my hamble service to your self and second self I am

Your most obliged Servant, F. S.

A Letter to his Friend in praise of his Mistress.
Honest School-fellow,
LOng time have I rambled about this vain World, and have visited most of those
Nations and Islands to which our Merchants traffic, and the chiefest of my
business has been to find out a Woman that I could like well enough to make
her my Wife, to tell you a long Narration of my Travels and of the dangerous
Voyages I have undergone, where I have seen grim death come tumbling to me in a
monstrous Wave ready to devour me in a moment; or if I should tell you of a
thousand more difficulties which I have escaped 'twould fill a Ream of Paper
instead of one sheet: therefore omitting all those dolesome Histories for
brevities sake (though had I a convenient time they would be worth repeating) I
shall only proceed to tell you that at length I have obtained a Mistress, one
that I intend to marry and make my Wife, and now I will begin to make a
description of her beauties: She is a Woman and a fair one too, and so fair she
is that all that ever saw her admire her beauty; her Features in her Face are
so excellent, that should the best of Painters strive to draw them out to the
life, he would wrong her beauty much; for all his Art could never form so rare
a Creature: her Cheeks with red and white so neatly decked that you would think
the Lilly and the Rose did strive in them which should have the Victory, till
at length they both being conquerours conjoyn together, and center there to
make one perfect beauty: Her eyes like two refulgent Diamonds are placed above
to cast a splendant luster on her sweet comely face: Her Coral Lips that close
her pretty Mouth are of an equal size, neither too thick nor yet too thin; Her
Teeth more White then is the Ivory, like to two Rows of inestimable Pearl stand
in a decent order in her Mouth, none striving for pre-eminence above their
fellows. Her Hair which on this Globe of Wisdom grows more White then is the
best of Flax by far, and softer then the unwrought Silk that comes from the
Bowels of the laboring Silkworm, like to the smallest threads of Silver hangs
two handfulls down below her slender Wast; Her Neck an Ivory Pillar is on which
this Globe does stand, but whiter is by far, her Arms two branches are, which
do proceed forth from the bottom of her Neck for to defend and keep secure that
curious piece her Face: Her Breasts like to two little Hills are placed on
either side of a most fruitful Valley; Her Belly round and smooth but not too
big, and underneath, oh there dear Jack, oh there the place of pleasure grows;
but hold rude Pen forbear to nominate or once to mention any more of that, for
fear great Jove should be my Rival too, and on his Ganymede come hovering down
and take away my Jewel of such worth. Now last of all to let you understand
this lively Fabric is not mute nor dumb, she has a Voice that should you hear
her sing, ravished with Admiration you would think the Spheres conjoined with
Heavenly Harmony to lend you Music to delight mankind: Thus take her
altogether I leave you to judge, whether she may not compare with Venus if not
excel her, this is the Mistress of my Heart and Soul; and though I have tarryed
long to find her out, yet I cannot choose but think my time well spent having
met with this fair Jewel now at last: and now dear Jack to consummate my
happiness, I invite you to my Nuptials where you shall take a view of my all
charming Bride, and for once bless your self at the sight of Natures most
adored Masterpiece: Next Monday we have appointed to be our happy Wedding Day
that we may begin our joys in the beginning of the Week; I shall expect your
good Company, therefore pray do not fail me, for I shall think my self much
honored in your presence; thus with my humble service presented to your dear
self with the rest of my good Friends that live with you, I begging your pardon
for this tedious Epistle, do take my leave and subscribe my self,

The humblest of your slaves T. R.

His Friend's merry Answer, praising his foul Mistress by the contraries.
Dear Tom,
I Received your large Epistle wherein I understand that you have been a great
Traveller, sine? I saw you to search after a handsome woman that you could
fancy well enough to make her your Spouse, I am heartily glad that you have
been so successful at length to meet with such an Angel-like Beauty, which if
all be true as you have reported to me she is to be admired above all the Women
in the whole world, but however if she should not be altogether so amiable and
glorious as you relate her to be, I cannot so much blame you; for it is but
verifying the Proverb which we use here in England, which is, that Old Men and
Travelers may Romance by authority, I will not say lie Tom for that is a gross
word, and I very well remember that my Master once did whip me severely for
giving one of my School-fellows the lie, which will be a memorandum for me as
long as I live, for you know that according to another Proverb the burnt Child
dreads the fire, so much for that: Now I will also give you a full description
of my Mistress which I have picked up in your absence if you will: I did not go
far to seek her, for she had such a monstrous love for me that she began to
declare her affections to me first after this manner; Kind Sir quoth she,
though it is not the custom among us English women to make our application to
Men for any thing, though we have never so much mind to it, yet I think it is a
great wrong to our whole Sex; for we may stay long enough before you will
proffer us any kindness now a days, I am sure I can speak with sorrow upon my
own account that I have been marriageble above these twenty years, and never
yet was asked that reasonable question by any Man, I know not what should be the
reason of it, I am not so much deformed but that I may be beloved; however what
I want in beauty, I am sure I can make good in Estate, for I have Lands and
Livings with Baggs of Gold and Silver innumerable; therefore my suit to you
dear Sir is that you would be pleased to take pity on a distressed Virginity,
by making of me your lawful Wife for now I begin to hate a single Life. I
hearing of this Voice which did something imitate that of a seriech-Owl, and
looking in her ruful face know not at present what answer to return my
Gentlewoman, at length Tom considering of those infinite number of Baggs of
Gold and Silver, besides a visible Estate in Houses and Land, Isaith, I began
to make much on her, and taking her to a Tavern I treated her with a small
collation where I could perceive that she would tope stoutly, however to
prosecute m^ design concerning the baggs Tom, I humored her in every thing?
insomuch that I promised her Marriage upon these turns; that she would make a
full discovery of all the Baggs, and give (...) me in my own keeping, and also
that she should give me a clear possession of all her Houses and (...) the next
Court-day, delivering up all Writings into my cuscady all which she willingly
granted, and after the Court was past and I made Possessor of all she had, the
next day I married with her privately, giving the World leave to laugh at her
deformity whilst I make merry with my pretty young Doxy abroad. But to show
that I am not ashamed of her Tom, I Will describe her shape and features to you,
and afterward you may compare (...) can Spouse with mine if you can: Her
pretty Cheeks not round nor red nor white, but long and broad inclining to the
yellow: Her rouling Eyes like those of a fine Calf which I have seen of six
weeks old but bigger: her Nese in comely wise like to the beak of a lovely Owl
beads down unto her Neck, which well (...) searc^^ can per^^^, for her ^^ing
So^^ers do support (...) Breasts like to the well ^^teir'd ^^^gs of (...)
Father's old ^y'd Cow, (...) at (...) with a full bagg: Her (...) Pe^ly (...)
are -- that when I went to bugg her both my Arms (...) my prets (...) And (...)
her Belly ^^m (...) -- for I know you will long to have a touch at that: Oh there
is pleasure Tom! such pleasure just as Ixion had when he embraced a Cloud: And
now dear Tom, I have acquainted you with all her excellencies, if you long for
any part about her, come over and take it freely; for I will be sure to come to
your Wedding, where I shall expect the same freedom,

Yours in all Love J. D.

A Letter full of Complements.
Most worthy Friend,
I Being so infinitely obliged to you for those innumerable favors which you
from time to time have been pleased to confer upon me, in common gratitude can
do no less but make an humble acknowledgement in token of my great thankfulness
(...) those unmerited kindnesses; having no other way to retaliate them at
present but by telling you, that your unworthy Servant will be always ready at
your command to obey and serve you to the very utmost of my poor power and
ability, my daily prayers shall be that you may be ever prosperous in this
World, and that you may receive the due reward of your Charitable Acts and good
Hospitality in the World to come; what else I can say or do which may conduce
to your happiness and add to your contentment, I ever shall be ready to act and
pray for; thus desiring that at present you will be pleased to accept of my
well-wishes and this small Token which I have sent you, which is a Barrel of
Oysters; I heartily recommend you to the protection of the Almighty, who is the
only keeper and preserver of all Men and all things, I take my leave presuming
to write my self,

Yours to serve you by night or day, W. W.

The Sommerset-shire Man's clownish Answer in their own Country Language.
Zir,
I Received a piece of Paper from you, which I think Volks call a Letter, but
when I pulled it open I am zure I could not tell wone letter in it; I gave it
to wone of our Neighbors; that is to zay, wone of our Town; that is to zay,
wone that dwells within two or three doors of our door a little thick way; and
he being a better Scholard than my present zelf made hard shift to pick out the
words, but the Devil a bit of zense can I vind in it, you talk of obliging and
vavours, in my Conscience Zir you be not like me wont jot, nor do I vavour you
at all; you also talk of gratitude and merits: I Will zwear I do not know what to
make of your Lingua, my Neighbor tells me that it is Latin and I wonder that
you would write Latin to me, you know I cannot stand under it; and in truth you
shall be no zervant of mine; I will have no zuch zervants: as for your writing
our Volks put it in the Virt, and vor those shells you zent I know not how you
call them, I even mended our do or with them, and zo I thank you vor em, when
you come again you shall be welcome to your old Friend,

Dick Downright.

A loving Letter sent to a Gentlewoman.
Madam,
IN what a multitude of sorrows I am involved since you went out of Town no
Tongue is able to express, nor Pen to write; Had you commanded me with open
breast to have stood before you whilst you had took my own Sword and had
pierced my now bleeding heart, I could then more willingly have suffered a
death by your hand, then thus long to undergo a continual torment for want of
your good company: Ah Madam! you know my Heart is with you, how can you be so
cruel to make me heartless? live thus long without you, can you forget those
pleasant Evening hours which we together spent beguiling time which gently slid
away; the silent night not daring to disturb our harmless mirth and innocent
delight; whilst on my knees you sat, my loving Arms did circle round and
gently grasp your small and tender body, you sometimes would ravish all my
senses with a Song, whilst I amazed at your warbling Notes charmed to a
silence, and gazed upon your powerful sparkling eyes, whose double luster would
pierce a heart more hard and more obdurate then is the Adamant: Then Madam,
then stealing of a kiss was not content but robbed you still of more; I kissed so
long that I at length perceived my self to be the looser; for all that time my
heart and soul departed from my breast and vowed they would possess a nobler
Room; then into your sweet bosom both did fly and begged an entertainment which
you gave, and seemed to cherish them with warm desire: I was content, and was
glad they had made choice of you to he their Guandian; provided I might be a
visitant to come and see they no disorders bred within your quiet breast. But
now alas dear Madam! you have left me comfortless, I am left to sigh and and
breath my passion out unto the open Air without redress; and cannot comfort
find till you return: Then Madam on my knees I beg, return, and give me ease,
unless you do intend to be my death by staving longer from me; thus to the
powers above I do commit you, desiring you to pity him who is

Your languishing Lover R. T.

The Gentle-womans kind Answer.
My sweet Soul,
LEt not your passion overmuch disturb your rest and quiet: sleep secure and
know that I an equal sharer of your grief, do sigh and mourn in private all
alone, not daring to disclose my unknown waes unto the open Air, far fear some
blast should whisp (...) this my discontent; I am therefore forced to bide my
mistries, and for a time conceal my Inward pain (...) then undergo the angry
s^owns of an unkind Father; whom I fear would count my loving you a
disobedience; My study is to run a safer course, and by degrees to penetrate
the Breast of my indulgent Mother; telling her the noble love which I bear in
my b^som is placed on you, and none but you alone shall make her Daughters
Bride, then on my knees I Will beg of her to mollify the fury of my too rigurous
Father, who has forgot since be first trod the paths of youthful love: My
hopes are still that she will moderate his strict severity and make him yield
to gratify our loves by his good will and make us ever happy with his
blessing; who knows but these my hopes may take effect? My Mother loves me with
a tender love, and when she sees my resolution fixed to marry you, and with no
other Man, I know she will never rest till she overcome my Father with entreaties
to be kind; Then will our meeting be again with joy: But if at last my
expectations sail and that my Father will not give consent we should enjoy each
other, yet be sure I Will never leave my Dear until cold Death shall seize my
body, and from thence divide my Heart and Soul which are not in his power: them
I Will bequeath to thee my dearest Love, for they indeed already are thy own; I
know I have thy loving Heart and Soul within my Breast, where they shall safely
dwell: My Father's cruelties shall not molest their happy being, neither will I
long detain them at this distance from my Love: For let my aged Parents frown
or smile, within this Month I Will fly into thy Arms and never part till floods
of joyful tears have washed away all sorrows from our hearts and hands; that
naught but Death shall part us, In true constancy

I remain thine alone. S. V.

A Letter from a Gentlewoman to her Husband, who had buried her Child in the
Country.
Loving Husband,
I Must now acquaint you with sorrowful and I suppose unexpected news, if tears
and sighs of a broken hearted Wife will give me leave to write to you; which
is, that cruel death who favors neither infancy, youth nor old Age, has
deprived us of our pretty sweet boy, which was the only joy and comfort of our
lives; and truly grief has almost done its worst with me, for I bewailing of
this our great loss am brought so low, that I think I shall scarce recover my
self to be able ever more to come again and see thee; his sickness held him but
three days before he died, else I had sent you word; but now it is too late,
for we shall never see him more: I borrowed Money of my Landlady (where I am)
to bury him in a decent manner, therefore I would desire you to come down as
soon as you can and bring Money with you to discharge what here I stand engaged
for, no more but that I am

Your sorrowful Wife R. W.

Her Husband's Answer.
Dear Wife,
I Must consess this unerpected News goes nigher to my heart then if I had lost
all that ever I had or am like to have in this World; that having but one sweet
Child we should be deprived of him so on a sudden, however we must be contented
with those afflictions that God is pleased to lay upon us, let me desire you to
bear it as patiently as you can, and cast not your self down with grief; for
now he is gone, all the sorrow and mourning in the whole World will avail us
nothing, nor stand us in no stead, for he is gone to him that first gave him
^^s, and cannot be reached by mortal Man; therefore prithee be comforted and
rest thy self contented, and I will come down as soon as possibly I can, and
bring Money with me to discharge what there thou owe, and do intend if thou
art able to travel to take thee up to London with me, in the mean time I rest

Thy disconsolate Husband T. W.

A Letter to congratulate a Friend's happy return from his long Journey.
Loving Friend,
A Thousand welcomes to your Native Country, where every heart during that
redious time which you were absent selt no little grief, but every one lamented
their great loss in missing you our true and faithful Friend: Your presence
caused an awful reverence, and made the vicious and obnoxious Man to creep and
slink away his head in private; and now again we on the self-same score who are
your friends, at this your safe return are blessed with joy and gladness: But I
above the rest of your wellwishers have double cause to thank auspicious
Heaven, who safely has conducted you at length to this our Shore; where being
arrived each creature does congratulate your safe return; I now can say I have
a Friend and Father to give me counsel when I stand in need of it, this Letter
does but serve dear Friend to let you know that now I have notice of your happy
arrival, I would not only by my Pen bid you welcome home, but by my words and
actions in your presence express my joy and humble thankfulness to Heavens
Divinity in taking care of so much Loyalty and bringing back our Captain, which
having missed and been without so long, we your poor Soldiers languishing
betwixt hope and despair did fear you had been lost; but now you are come, the
Bells in a loud harmony shall ring your welcome home all day and night; the
Martial Drums shall beat aloud your Fame; The Silven Trumpets with shrill Notes
shall sound your praise forth with honor and renown, thus shall you ride
Triumphant through the streets until you come to your most sumptuous Castle
long desolate for want of your abode, where at your approach the deep mouthed
Canon with their thundering voice shall bid all hail to you their valorous
Master; thus praying Sir for your continuance with us, I take leave at present
and remain

Your much comforted Friend R. D.

The Captain's thankful Answer sent to his friend expressed with many Complements.
My well beloved Friend,
YOu cannot be more joyful at my safe return, then I am glad to hear that yet
you live, and living are in health, that once again we may embrace each other
with true Love and Friendship, such as is inseparable, had I been a Woman and
unknown to you; your Rhetoric would have given me a sufficient cause to think
and suspect that you had flattered me; but being a Man and knowing well your
former friendship and true affection which you ever did bear to me, unworthy of
so great favors; must needs imagine that your joys are real, and since that
blessed Heaven now at length has safely brought me to my Native Country; the
chiefest of my studies shall be to render my self worthy of those praises which
you have been pleased to put upon me, and make my presence acceptable to my
honest Contrymen; and more especially to you my dear Friend whom I long to
see; for friendship at a distance though never so real cannot enjoy it self,
with that true happiness and sweet content, as that which mutually conjoyns and
meets together; then let me beg of you to make no delay, but let me have your
company at my Castle, where you shall be my guest for one six months; I also
must entreat you not to come alone but let your virtuous Bride accompany you,
with your good Son, where you shall be sure to find the same welcome as you
give me at this my safe arrival; And when we are together, I will give you a
true and persect account of all my travels, what dangers I have escaped and
what recreations I have had ever since I left you and departed from my dear
Country, thus expecting your coming I at present remain

Your Friend in expectation S. F.

A hasty Letter to his Cousin.
Good Cousin,
I Am informed that you intend to let your house and put off all your stock,
and betake your self to a private Lodging; I much wonder what you mean and
intend by so doing, I doubt you go unadvisedly about those concerns; I know not
how the case stands with you: However I imagine that a little good counsel in
this matter would have done you no harm but good; you know it is an old saying,
that it is good to look before we leap, and not to run precipitously hand over
head, and not regard what you are going about: However if it prove well I shall
like it well, and all will be well; but if it succeed contrary to your
expectation, blame not me nor any body else, but your own self. However now you
cannot contradict but that according to the Latin Proverb Praemonitus,
praemunitus: Forewarned, forearm'd; and that is all that I can say to you at
present who am in have,

Your loving Cousin, W. V.

The Answer in haste.
Good Kinsman,
IN haste I thank you for your hasty Letter, and though my present business be
in have concerning my hasty removing from my house, yet not quite so hasty as
not to consider what I am about to do: I do not much question but that I have
had the approbation of as wise Men as your self concerning the management of
this business, and they with me do all of them agree that I have enough to live
upon, without incumbring my self with a multiplicity of business, and get but
little by it; besides if I should continue Housekeeping, I should be ruined,
for there is such a gang of flatterers and dissemblers of my kindred, and
others that haunt my house, that in a short time they would eat me out of house
and home; therefore I think it is better to betake my self to a private Lodging
in have, then by delays to stay longer where I am and be undone by them; I am

Yours hastily in have R. Hastings.

A Letter sent to a Friend condoling his long continued sickness.
Dear Friend,
I Am very sorry and much grieved to hear that you thus long have lain
languishing on the bed of sickness; my heart participates of your dolorous
miseries, feeling by way of sympathy the self same torment which you undergo;
but that alas I doubt will not give you ease, though it is a seeming comfort (or
rather I may say a satisfaction) to be pittyed by our Friends. Let me admonish
you to take the advice of the best Learned and most eminent Physician that you
know of; and be not concerned for parting with your Money, though sickness I
know is very chargeable, yet well you know now by sad experience that the
perfect enjoyment of your health is far more pleasant and delightful then baggs
full heaped with Gold and Silver; therefore be not sparing of your Coin, so far
as it may be available and conducing to the procuring of your welfare: and that
you may recover your former strength shall be the Players of

Your most affectionate Friend in sorrow S. T.

The sick Man's thankful Answer.
Dear Friend,
THe very sight of your most cordial Letter did give somi ease to my distressed
miseries, for which you have the kind and hearty thanks of a sick and almost
dying Man; it is long since I considered that worldly wealth is but dross,
neither do I esteem of it as any comfort only to procure those necessaries,
which while we live on earth we stand in need^^; for well I know that when my
breath is departed from me, and my blood grown cold, and death has brought my
body to the Grace; that then the wealth of Croe us will not avail me any thing,
nor stand me in any stead: My heart is fixed now upon a better subject; which
is, that after Death my Soul may find rest and comfort in another World whither
now I am going, endeavoring to repent of all my past sins, consulting with my
Maker concerning my happiness; for he is the best and only Physician that can
give ease to those my sore afflictions: this as a farewell to you I do send, who
am

Till death gives ease your friend in torments B. D.

A Letter to persuade a Friend to betake himself to business.
Loving Friend,
When I consider the many inconveniences that are incident to those that live
remisly and have no employment, it puts me in mind of your Life and
Conversation; and to deal plainly and honestly with you like a Friend, I am
very sorry to see that idleness has taken such possession of your mind that you
will betake your self to no business; but just like a Swine you eat and drink
what is set before you, but never endeavor to get Money to buy more: Suppose
you have enough barely to live upon in time of your Families health; that ought
not to be all the care that you should take, for it behooves every Master of a
Family to provide and lay up something against a rainy day as they say; that
is, against sickness or any other casualty that may happen to you before you
die, besides already you have two Children pretty Babes, and it may please God
to send you more; which when they come to bigness and ripeness of Age will
expect that you should give them a portion according to their education, which
must be Gentily for your own repute and credits sake; all which will cost you
no small sum of Money, and when your Estate comes to be divided amongst three
or four it will be but a slender maintenance for them all; my advice is
therefore that you forthwith employ your stock of Money in some honest way
which you understand, and that will improve your fortune by careful industry
with some small pains, which will be very advantageous for your bodily health;
for always to sit still and do nothing but eat and drink, and sleep; corrupts
the blood and will impair your health. I know you understand the way of malting
well, now I should think that it would be a fine recreation to you for to ride
up and down the Markets to buy in Corn at the best season of the year, and so
keep Men to manage your business at home; thus might you busy your self and
reap the fruits and benefits of your own labor; besides it would be mighty
commendable and credible for you to be accounted a Man of business, and if
perhaps this way of dealing does not answer your expectation as to matter of
profit; you may soon lay it aside and betake your self to something else that
you fancy will be more advantageous to you; for there is a thousand ways for a
Man that has ready Money to improve it, and gain more by it then at the rate of
six per Cent to let it out to Usury; besides if you got never so little by your
employment, yet I would have you follow it, for it will keep you from idleness
which is the Mother of shame and beggary; more might be said of that, but I
suppose you understand enough of those things, if you would but practice
according to your knowledge; be sure to give your Children learning, and when
they are big enough put them out to Apprentice, for then they may live without
your assistance; where they have gotten a good Trade if they prove good
Husbands they may obtain great preferment: this for your Father's sake I advise
you, for indeed upon his Deathbed he desired me to give you good Counsel who am

A greater friend to you then yon are to your self F. G.

His Friends Answer in short.
Dear Friend,
I Kindly thank you for your good advice whether I am guilty or not guilty of
what you task me with; Nevertheless I judge charitably of you and your
well-wishes, that I think no less but that you write to me out of pure love; I
must confess that hitherto I have not settled my self to any public business
nor have I been concerned much in worldly affairs, being something cautious how
I dispose of my Money, but since it is your wise opinion that it will be for my
advantage to put my self into some manner of dealing; I Will show my willingness
in being obedient to your commands, and next acquit my self of that ignominious
and reproachful companion called Idleness, for it in it thing I hate, had I an
employment whereby I might busy my self, for I have an active, not a sluggish
Soul: as for my Children, Sir, it behooves me to take care of their welfare, and
it was always my purpose to bring them up to Learning, and afterward to put
them to good Trades, however I thank you for your friendly admonition, and
remain,

Your obsequious friend to serve H. I.

A Letter from an Elder Brother to the Younger reproving him of Extravagancies.
Loving Brother,
It Is strange to me to see you run these courses: except a Man was mad, surely
he would not make all the have he could to his own destruction; you are wise
enough to know that those extravagancies will certainly ruin you if you
proceed and do not give a timely check to your immoderate and immodest desires,
for shame leave off your drunkenness before it be too late, whilst yet you have
something left to maintain you like a Man, for when all is gone, you then
perhaps may with sorrow sigh and wish you had been wiser and not misspent your
time and Money, but you will find no redress nor pity from any body, as for my
own part if you will not take up and become a sober Man I will not own you for
my Brother, neither will I countenance nor assist you in the least in any thing
that you shall take in hand, but if you mend your Life you shall assuredly find
me to be

Your Friend and Brother J. K.

The younger Brother's Answer.
Good Brother,
I Am so far from thanking you for your advice that I must needs tell you, that
I am wonderful sorry for your ignorance; I bless God for those natural parts he
has given me, and next I thank my good old Father (which I bope is now in
Heaven) for bringing me up to Learning, that now I can see above the reach of
such illiterate Asses as your self: alas for you! that which you call
drunkenness and extravaganty, I can make appear is the better part of Man; his
very Life and Soul, it is to converse with such Men that are aerie and brisk,
those Men are full of Wit, Reason and right understanding: We over two or three
Bottles of brisk Wine can compass round the spacious Earth, or when we please
can give a reason how to fathom the deep gulf of the Red Sea; or soar aloft
with reason and sound judgment, and take a view of those Heavenly
Constellations, taking the circumference of the broad faced Sun, and track his
pale faced Sister in her nightly paths, and give the substantial grounds of her
monthly mutability; taking the exact magnitude of every Star; and tell you
which are fixed Planets, and which are moveable; calling them all familiarly by
their Names: This we such drinkers can perform and more, which should I name,
you would think me mad indeed: and but only that you are my elder Brother, I
should scarce forbear to call you Fop or Fool who envy at those who practice
that which your shallow brains are never able to attain to: but just like a
Carriers horse you have but one pace, a softly jogging on in the self same
Road, which you have trod in ever since your Infancy: Neither will you be put
out of your Road nor pace, but will continue at the old rate in spite of
reason and discretion, who are your utter enemies, insomuch that you cannot
abide them, but hate them with a perfect hatred; nor will you suffer them to
come within your doors: Oh blind stupidity! it is well my Father left thee a
good Estate; else had thou been left to live by thy Wits, I am sure thou must
have starved the first week after his decease: but he was a wise Man that did
foresee those infirmities that hou wast born to, and so prevented poverty from
coming to thy doors; yet thou with fear of want can scarcely rest, and
without cruse do thou pinch thy self and thy Family, not having Wit enough to
know one half of that Estate which thou have left thee, nor how to make the
best use of it; that so thou will miserably live to thy Lives end, though
indeed thou can not want: prithee Brother let me advise thee to leave thy
babbling in pretending to give me counsel, and I think the better way will be to
come and live with me, or let me come and live with you, and leave but the
management of thy Estate to my disposing, I Will warrant thee we will live like
Princes, and never want any thing else that Money can obtain: and this I am
sure will be the best for thee to live at content, for now I know you live in
fear; thus wishing that you would take my counsel is all at present from

Your Jovial Brother R. K.

A Letter sent from a London Quaker to one of his Country Brethren.
Friend George,
IN the breathings forth of the Spirit I write unto thee, to let thee know that
blessed be the God of all power, I and my Family with the rest of our dear
Brothers and Sisters of thy acquaintance are in sound and perfect health, and
do enjoy our meetings with peace and quietness, free from the disturbance of
the enemy; our Assemblies do increase exceedingly: Our Friend John has been
much with us of late, being wonderfully carried forth in the Ministry to the
Conversion of many Infidels; thou know that he is a precious heart, and in
the Spirit of meekness does overcome their perverse Natures: Salute me to our
dear Friend thy Wife, poor innocent Soul my Bowels do yearn toward her, and
verily I have a great affection for her; she is a pretty Lamb and I long to
visit her, for truly that last kindness which she showed unto me when she was
last in Town, cannot, nay must not be forgot; prithee dear Friend send her to
Town again, and I shall be very free to entertain her who am

Thine in the Lord, A. S.

The Country Quaker's Answer.
Dear Abraham,
I Am rejoiced at these tidings which thou have sent me in thy sweet Epistle,
for it is a great refreshing to my inward parts to hear of the welfare of our
Friends and Brethren, with our Holy Sisters; but more especially I do rejoice
that truth increases so much amongst you, I know our Friend John is very
powerful in the Ministry, and verily we want him much amongst us, having not
seen him this six months; insomuch that the Sisterhood about us do bewail his
absence thus long: for they thou know are often troubled with failings, and
want to be strengthened daily with powerful Men; however I know he cannot come
until the Lord does send him, and then he will not tarry: I question not honest
George, thy kindness to my Wife, for she indeed has signified so much to me
and does speak of coming up to London within six days: Salute me to thy Wife
and Family and to the rest of our Friends, and that is all at present from

Thy Brother in the Lord, G. D.

A Letter of excuse.
Sir,
I Must beg your pardon that I could not be so good as my word in waiting on
you yesterday, for an extraordinary business of great importance sell out just
as I was coming to you, and prevented me of the great happiness of seeing you
and enjoying your good company; however I know your good Nature will forgive
what I could not perform, and on that I rely; giving my self an assurance of a
smile and not a frown when I see you next, which shall be the very first
opportunity I can steal from my urgent affairs, having no greater felicity then
to be in your good company, and do take it as a great favor that my unworthy
presence is thought acceptable to a person of so great honor and worth as your
self, but that is your humility to condescend to my undeserts: But lest I
should seem to be too prolix and tedious in making my Apology, I for this time
humbly desist and write my self

Your humble Servitor R. C.

The Gentleman's Answer.
Kind Sir,
YOu need not have given your self the trouble to make Apology for your not
coming to me according to your promise, for I have had too large an experience
of your love and friendship toward me, to believe that any frivolous concerns
could have detained you from making good your ward; neither am I so injudicious
but that I know full well that business must not be neglected to visit Friends,
nor would I be so injurious to your interest, to disoblige or hinder you from
prosecuting your earnest affairs, though I must confess that I take a great
delight in your company; therefore I desire of you to be so kind to me, as to
let me enjoy you as often as convenience will permit and give leave; I design
next Wednesday if health continue to go down to my Countrey-house and hunt a
Buck; and if you have leisure from your own occasions, pray favor we with your
pleasant Society, your welcome I hope you will not question from

Your loving Friend T. R.

A Letter sent to a Gentleman in way of Petition.
Honored Sir,
AMongst the rest of your charitable Acts and deeds, I humbly beg that you
would be pleased to grant me one small boon, and for ever make me happy, and
obliged to pray for you; which is, that you would accept of me your unworthy
Servant so well, that I may succeed my Father in that Office, which whilst he
was living did enjoy, who is now dead and buried; and I question not but that I
shall officiate and behave my self so well, that you shall not hereafter repent
you, that you did countenance and show me any kindness in this matter, but with
all humility I shall carry my self obliging toward you and the rest of those
worthy Gentlemen that are therein concerned. I know Sir that it lies in your
power to stand my friend in this business, and I hope you will be pleased to
think me capable of what I make my request to you for, being brought up and
educated under my Father in the same way; my industry and diligence with humble
gratitude shall ever attend you, whilst I am Sir,

Your Servant in all thankful acknowledgement P. Q.

The Gentleman's Answer.
Honest Peter,
I Am very sorry to hear of your Father's Death, the last time that be and I
were together truly I little thought or imagined that he was so nigh his end,
though I must confess that he was pretty well stricken in years, you may assure
your self that for his sake and your own also I will do you any kindness that
lies in my power, and though the management of this concern does not wholly
depend on my single choice and approbation; there being several other Gentlemen
you know which are equally concerned with me in the same business, yet I do not
question in the least but that they will freely condescend to my propositions
in your behalf, therefore rest your self contented for a while, and doubt not
but that you may succeed your Father in this place, and when we meet together
you may be confirmed according to your desire; no more at present but remain

Your assured Friend, R. S.

A Letter from a Gentleman to a Country Schoolmaster concerning putting his
Son to School with him.
Worthy Sir,
ALthough I have not had the happiness as yet to be well acquainted with you,
yet your good works have rendered you famous to my opinion, having partly
understood some of your excellent qualifications in educating youth by some of
my near Neighbors, who have been concerned with you by committing their
children to your tuition and government; which by evident examples you have
demonstrated that you have taken no small pains and care in order to their
benefits, for I find they have made a good proficiency considering their time
and Age; I have a Son Sir about ten years of Age that I intend to commit to
your charge very suddenly, therefore I would desire you to govern him according
as you shall find him well or ill disposed, not with too much severity nor too
much lenity, and I shall be willing to answer any reasonable demands as you
shall desire both for his board and Schooling; pray send me word if you please
to accept of him, and I will speedily come down along with him, who am

Your Servant unknown, J. T.

The Answer.
Sir,
I Must confess you are a Stranger to me, nevertheless I am bound by the rules
of civility to give you thanks for your good opinion of me; however I hope if
you ever make trial of what you have hitherto but only had by reports, that I
shall make good that Character which your Neighbors have given to your own
satisfaction and belief. If you please to bring your Son down to me Sir I shall
be very careful of him as I am of all others which I take in hand, and I doubt
not in the least but that we shall quickly agree upon terms: I have convenience
enough to entertain him, and we live in a very good wholesome Air; I never had
a Boy that lodged in my house return home sick since I kept School, which is
now about sixteen years since: Yet I have entertained many good Men's Sons; as
for his disposition I shall soon learn and find out what temper he is of, and
accordingly shall have an eye toward him; thus till I see you Sir I remain

Yours in all reasonable service W. K.

A Letter to a Gentlewoman with a Ring sent as as token.
Fairest of Creatures,
I Here present you with the true Emblem of my love, it is a Ring which
represents my Love to you is endless, that though you frown upon me and seem to
slight my proffered services, yet still my Love endures as firm as at the
first; neither can all your angry denyals to my long continued suit alter or
change my loving resolution. This Ring is Gold the purest of all Metals, which
signifies (if that you please to take it so) that my Love is pure, and the
purest of all Love; not tainted nor corrupted with any thoughts of worldly
interest, but it is your love alone Madam that I ask; how can you be so cruel to
your adorer, one that takes no delight in any Creature living, but your self. I
dare not call you unkind nor speak the least ill thing against you, for my love
is so great that I cannot call your disdain unworthiness. Let pity move you to
compassion, which if I find, I shall not doubt but that I shall quickly be a
Conqueror, till then I restless live.

The object of your scorn N. L.

Her Answer.
Sir,
IF that you count it any happiness to be beloved of one so mean as I am, who
hitherto have held you in disdain and laughed at all your discontent with scorn:
Then bless that happy hour when you did buy that Ring you sent me for a token;
not for the value of the Ring I love you, but those your kind expressions which
you writ to me in your last Letter have moved my heart to pity, you then now
may assure your self a Conqueror for I do pity you, and not only so, but I
love you too for your true constancy, had you been fickle and had took denial
in a short time, I never would have granted you what now I do; then now be
comforted my Love, and cast all sorrow from thy heart, for I am thine and will
be to my death: think not of any thing that has formerly past between us, for I
will love thee the better for the time to come, and when you please to come and
visit me; you shall be welcome to her who is

Your affectionate Lover, J. P.

A Letter sent to a Gentleman as a Challenge.
Sir,
YOu may take notice first of the affront you gave me when we were last
together; and secondly that I am not of so mean and low a spirit to pass by
those your rude actions without taking just revenge according to the offense:
therefore you being all Man last night, I hope will not prove your self to be
less to morrow morning about four of the Clock in Lamb's conduit fields with
your Sword in your hand, where we will end the dispute which you contend about,
but if you refuse to meet me at the place and time which I have appointed, I
shall post you up about the Town for an inconsiderable Fool and scandalous
coward, and shall make my self satisfaction some other way; this from

Your present enemy and disobliged Friend F. D.

The Answer.
Good Mr. Huff,
WHat, is that little spark of courage which has lain asleep ever since you was
born awakened now at last? In troth I am very glad that I gave you occasion
last night to rouse it up this morning, and truly had I thought that you durst
have been so valiant as to have taken notice of what I had said, I would have
spoke ten times more to you then what I did; I will be sure to meet your
outrageous self at the place aforesaid, and instead of my Sword I shall only
make use of my Scabbard, and bang your sides sufficiently, sending you crying
home to your Wife, just as you used to do when you saw a couple of Mastiff dogs
fighting in the street hard by your own door, I scorn to defile my Sword with
such cowardly blood as thine is, but shall rather satisfy my self in giving
thee a good sufficient beating, this from

Your derider, S. N.

A Letter desiring his Friend to acquaint him with news that is stirring.
Kind Friend,
KNowing that your affairs in the World are of no small importance, and that
you negotiating your self with Men of Foreign as well as Domestic business
cannot but be acquainted with all the news that is stirring, both at home and
also at places more remote; I should be glad to have some small satisfaction
from you by a weekly Letter, if you would give your self the trouble of
writing, I would be at what charge they should cost you in sending them, that I
might a little please my self in hearing what transactions happen on this our
Earthly Globe of Mortality. For in our Country we hear no news, except perhaps
I hear that our Neighbor Prattle's Daughters belly begins to swell by eating
too many Pease-pottage, or else some body has pricked her there; or else at
present we know not what, this and the like stories is all our divertisement;
no more but remain

Yours, expecting to hear from you N. J.

The Answer.
Good Cousin,
I Must humbly beg your pardon for my long silence, and now at length if
writing upon such an insignicant account as I now have done: had there been any
thing of News abroad worth the relating, and had it come to my ears I would
have been sure to have made you acquainted with it e're this: as for Foreign
businesses and affairs of State I hear no noise, God be thanked the Universe of
Mankind is hushed into a quiet peace for ought I hear, and trading flourishes
indifferent well amongst ingenious Men and good Husbands, but bad Husbands will
always be finding fault of the badness of Trade, when it is their
extravagancies which makes them sink and decline in the World; as for the News
which you tell me concerning your Neighbors Daughter; I think it is almost
Universal, for young Maidens now a days are often troubled with such swellings
but it seldom lasts them above nine months, and then it asswages again,
insomuch that we scarcely take any notice of such like distempers; now of late
I may inform you thus much, that the building of St. Paul's Cathedral in London
goes on most expeditiously, and I am apt to think will be accomplished a great
deal sooner then most men could imagine so vast a structure could be finished:
some other news I can acquaint you with, which though it be a little Jocose yet
it is very certain, that several Men of several minds, of several conditions,
and several qualities; do wear the Bull's Feather upon their heads, and yet
they know not some of them that they wear it there, but others do; and count it
a great ornament, supposing that their Horns were tipped with Gold, neither will
they matter if their Neighbors call them Cuckold, for if they do, they will ask
them to shake hands; all the difference between them being this, the one knows
himself to be a Cuckold, and the other only thinks that he himself is none; and
I believe you have some of this sort of Cattle in your Country: no more but am

Yours upon all occasions R. D.

A dunning Letter sent from a Creditor to his Debtor for Money.
Sir,
COntrary to my natural Will and Inclinations, necessity forces me to give you
a timely summons that you may provide me some Money against the next
quarter-day, for I shall be very much necessitated about that time for Money,
else I would not have troubled you as yet, though I ask you for nothing but
what is my own: However had I not received great loss of late in my way of
Trade, I would not have called in my Money from you, because I know it to be
very secure whilst it is in your hands; therefore pray be pleased not to take
amiss these my lawful demands, but let me have a speedy Answer from you which
may be effectual to my desires, and I will for the time to come be always
studious how I may again be serviceable to so good and sure a Friend as your
self, which may assure you that whilst I live I am,

Yours to the utmost of my power G. R.

His Friend's kind Answer.
Kind Sir,
YOurs I received and am very sorry to hear that you have suffered any loss or
damage in the way of your Trade; I wish you may recover with interest what you
have lost, and am so far from being angry with you for sending for your own,
that I am rather angry with you for questioning that which you might assuredly
know, which was the payment of that Money which you so kindly lent me: However
to show my thankfulness to you for those favors, and my willingness to
gratify so good a Friend, I have sent you by your Cousin all that Money which
I owe you, both interest and principal before the time, not knowing but that
you may have a more sudden occasion for it, then you were willing to discover
to me your Friend; pray cancel the Bond and send it back by your Cousin, and
also send me word whether or no you shall have occasion for any more present
Money, which if you have I will be sure to furnish you with it, being ever as
ready and willing to serve you,

As you have been to oblige me R. W.

A Letter to persuade a Friend to marry.
Loving Friend,
IN considering your welfare, and taking a short view into your present
concerns; I cannot but think that it is altogether inconvenient for you to lead
a single Life any longer, for since you have betaken your self to Housekeeping
and the ordering of a Family, I am sure that it would be very necessary for you
to marry a Wife, whose care (if she perform her duty) will be always within
doors, and see that those Servants you keep do not waste nor make lavish of any
provision, or otherways, what Goods you shall commit to their charge in your
absence when you are abroad about your earnest concerns; expecting all to be
well and carefully minded at home: but alas you may be mistaken in a
Housekeeper or a Servant-Maid, for they oftentimes do combine and have
self-concern with the Apprentice, to the great detriment and almost ruin of
several young Men like your self, who have put confidence in them; this as the
first and no small Argument, I bring to dissuade you from living single, and to
persuade you to betake your self to a Wise: The next reason is this which you
must pardon, because it is not spoken particularly concerning you, neither does
it exclude you; but it may be very properly attributed to any single Man which
is a Housekeeper: Suppose then this, that a young Man as you are does at
sometime or other meet with some of his good friends or former companions
abroad as he is walking about his lawful occasion, and being glad to see each
other, you cannot well part without drinking a glass or two of Wine together
thereby to signify your mutual loves and friendship which you mutually do owe,
and having sat a while in the Tavern one Bottle many times begets two or
three, or may be more and still loath to part, till it oftentimes is seen that
the Wine does predominate over your reasons at that time and you stay late,
being elevated with those charming liquors you at length return home, and
having no body to entertain you there but your Servant-Maid, it may be in that
humor (though not in the least inclined to it another time) you begin to be
familiar with your Maid (and so familiar as is unseemly for me to name though
you may guess my meaning) this Maid perchance though honest heretofore, yet
considering that you are her Master and she but of a low degree or quality
contrary to her natural custom, may submit her self and willingly condescend to
what you shall earnestly desire to enjoy, which being granted you, on the
morrow when it is too late, repent you of the Fact, and may perchance be brought
to open shame quickly after for such your deed as you have committed; or else
forced to marry her whom you have already strumpeted: this cautionally I advise
you of, not that I know you in the least guilty, but I am sure a good Wife (of
which sort there are many) would prevent all these miscarriages of youth, and
be a great comfort to you both night and day, therefore pray take my counsel,
and think never the worse of him who cordially is

Your real Friend, W. P.

His Friend's Answer.
Loving Friend,
I Am apt to think you speak experimentally as concerning youthful vanities and
frailties: However I must confess your advice is good, and I should be
ungrateful if I should not return you hearty thanks for so good admonition, but
yet I must also let you know that I am not guilty of those transgressions which
you forewarn me of: for I seldom am long out of my Shop, but if I should, the
Apprentice could not wrong me much, for I take a narrow inspection into all my
concerns, that I should soon miss any particular parcel that should by any
means be miscarried, and as for being overcome with Wine I think I never was
beyond the bounds of reason, but were I never so much addicted to drinking, I
should never be over-kind to my Maid; for to prevent that danger I keep one
that is well stricken in years, and so deformed that she is a perfect Antidote
against Letchery: However I shall not tie my self from Marriage, could I meet
with a young Woman that was suitable and agreeable to my condition and temper,
descended of honest parentage, and reputed to be a virtuous, civil and honest
Virgin, and one that after Marriage would not defile my Bed, neither had she in
her single condition stained her Virginity by yielding her body to be spotted
with any lascivious companions, but had behaved her self in all her youthful
days unspotted according to the strictest rules of modesty: with such a one if
I could meet, I say it should be the first thing I undertook to marry with her,
but truly there are so many that I find miscarry when they marry, that I am
something fearful how I tie my self for term of life to that thing which for
ought I know may be my perpetual ruin, but as you used to tell me that I must
venture, for nothing venture nothing enjoy, I am therefore resolved e're long
to take your counsel and good example, who am

Yours as my own R. L.

A Letter complaining of such long silence in his Friend's writing no oftener to
him.
Loving Friend,
WHen I consider the ability and strength of your fancy, together with the
dexterity of your Pen in writing; as also the benefit and advantage I reap and
receive in reading your learned and well composed Epistles; I can do no less
but blame you for not writing oftener to your Friend, I am sure and very
confident that it cannot be in the least burdensome to you to take Pen in
hand, and write to me some few Lines that I may hear of your welfare; which
would be very great joy and comfort to your faithful Friend, and a recreation
to your ready Muse: I know not wherein I have offended you, or acted any
unworthy action toward you that you should slack your hand from writing, but
if you will let me know my fault, I will endeavor to make satisfaction for my
misdemeanour; thus desiring to hear from you, I am.

Yours in expectation W. N.

The Answer.
Dear Friend,
YOu must pardon my long forced silence in Letters, for I have been sorrowfully
employed another way, it has pleased God to visit my poor Family with great
and heavy sickness; insomuch that I have buried two of my children the Eldest
and the Youngest, and my Wife now lies desperately sick of a Fever, whether she
may escape or no I cannot tell, for she is very weak; you might imagine that
some extraordinary business or other had befallen me, else I should not have
been so long in silence from so good a Friend as your self. I hope you will not
question the continuation of my wonted custom of writing to you, so soon as it
shall please God to blow away those storms of afflictions that hang over our
house thus long, and cause a Sunshine once again to appear, for be assured
that I am

Yours till Times hour glass is run out J. M.

A cunning Letter sent to a crafty Friend to borrow Money.
Kind Sir,
Your obliging qualities have ever been so great and manifold to me, who have
never merited the least favor from you, that your goodness makes me presume
once more to beg a kindness of you; which is, that you would lend me ten pounds
between this and Thursday next, and accept of my own Bond for your security but
for three Month's time, and you shall then be sure to be repaid it with the
interest as shall be then due, and my humble thanks shall ever require you with
this friendly assurance, that if ever you should stand in need of the same
kindness, though your demands should be ten times more that I shall be proud in
obliging you on the same terms; your answer by this Bearer if without excuses
will be my present satisfaction, and my study for the future shall be for a
requital,

Your faithful Friend to serve you R. N.

The Answer.
Kind Sir,
I Am very sorry that I cannot oblige you according to your expectation, for at
present I have not so much Money to spare by me, nor shall not have any such
sum within the time as you have mentioned, you seldom could have asked me at
such a time, for seldom it is that I am unprovided of so small a quantity, and
if I had it you may assure your self that I would make no denial of it to so
good a Friend as you are and have been to me, but should be glad that I could
oblige you in any thing whatsoever, therefore pray let me beg of you not to
take it unkindly, fer it is my Nature and ought to be the free disposition of
every generous Soul to communicate his assistance to his Friend in every
respect to the utmost of his power, but these your present demands (laying
aside all formal excises and flattering complements) are beyond the reach of my
capacity, however I will subscribe my self Sir

Your assured and faithful Friend S. D.

A Letter to his angry Sweetheart.
My Love,
YOur frowns have so eclipsed my wonted comfort and consolation, that without
the speedy Sunshine of your smiles my future hopes which I promised my self
will be utterly blasted, you know you have my heart and all that ever I could
call my own at your disposing; therefore let me beg of you to be kind before it
be too late, least certainly you hear that I died through your neglect and
cruelties, who am

Your afflicted Lover N. B.

Her short but loving Answer.
Sir,
I Fancy when you wrote to me last you were in a Dream, or else not thoroughly
awake, for how can you task me with unkindness that have no pleasure but in
your content and comfort; if you have undergone any sorrow by your own
imagination I am very sorry for it, for I Will assure you my heart participates
of all your troubles, your Love to me I mutually accept, giving you mine again
with this assurance, that I am

Yours without dissimulation, whilst S. G.

A Letter upon the delay of a courtesy desired.
Kind Sir,
AMongst the rest of my Friends you have had no small share of my good esteem,
therefore I thought you would have had greater care in preserving your promise,
and not have dealt so disingenuously with me, who have been always so ready to
serve you, pray let me desire you not to feed me any longer with fair words,
but let performances speak your mind or frustrate my hopes by a flat denial.

Your dissatisfied Friend, M. K.

The Answer.
Sir,
YOur Friendship I must consess has been variously shown to me, for which I
must give you abundance of thanks, pray call not my delays uncivilities, nor
forgetfulness, for believe me Sir my promises which I made you shall be
speedily performed according to your desire, and the best of my power; and
instead of justifying my self, I beg your pardon for nonperformance, hoping
'twil be granted by your worthy self.

Yours D. F.

A Letter of Counsel from a Father to his Son.
Dear Child,
I Have heard that you are given to Alchymistry, which is a great charge to
many but profits few, employ your time so that you may not lose by the
bargain: what a grief it is to want, I pray God you may never know; therefore
eschew Prodigality which quickly makes a poor Man; I have sent you twenty
pounds, I hope you will make good use of it, and when you need more send to me
for it, after the Term the Vacation will call you into the Country, where
knowing your Father's House you may make your own welcome, you must not from me
expect a flattering welcome, nor take it unkindly that I forewarn you of what
may prove to your prejudice, above all things serve God and keep a clear
Conscience toward all Men: converse not with fools, for in so doing you will
lose your time: beware of drunkenness, for it is a beastly humor: take heed of
Knaves for they are much to be feared, all which my advice if you pursue, you
may expect God's blessing, which is

Your Father's Prayers H. D.

The Son's dutiful Answer.
Honored Father,
AS touching the study of Alchymistry I have heard much, but believe little:
However I will not wast your Lands to make a new Metal; I know it is not long
to the next Vacation, which being come, I will not be long from you, and if at
my coming I find you well, that shall be my best welcome, as I will not flatter
my self with your Love, so I cannot but joy in your kindness, whose careful
counsel I will lock up in my heart as my best jewel: For to serve God is the
duty of every Christian, and no longer let me live then in the care of that
comfort; as for Fools they cannot understand me, and Knaves shall not trouble
me; as for drunkenness never doubt me, for it is a thing most loathsome in my
Nature; as for your Money I humbly thank you, and I hope to bestow it according
to your good liking, thus with my prayers for your long life, health and
happiness I remain

Your dutiful Son till death, H. D.

A merry Letter after the old Fashion sent to a Maid.
AFter my Love remembered unto you, trusting in God that you are in good health
as I was at this present writing, with my Father and my Mother, and my Brothers
and Sisters, and Unkles and Aunts, and the rest of my good Friends thanks be to
God for it. The cause of my writing to you at this time is, that I hear Joan
since my coming from Weston, when you know what talk we had together there at
the sign of the Horns, and how you did give me your hand and swear that you
would not forsake me for all the World, and how you made me buy you a Ring and
a Heart that cost me two and twenty pence, and I left them with you, and you
gave me a Napkin to wear in my Hat and a small Feather, I thank you, which I
will wear to my dying day, and I marvel if it be true as I hear, that you have
altered your mind, and are made sure to my Neighbor Pigsay's Son. Truly Joan
you do not well in so doing and God will plague you for it: and I hope I shall
live well enough if I never have you; for there are more Maids in the World
besides you Joan, and truly I count my self worth the whistling after, I am
sure there are some young Maids about us will except of me, and be glad to leap
at me to have such Honey kisses Joan as I used to give you; therefore be not so
high and so proud Joan and so scornful, for if you will have none of me, I will
have none of you, but will be as stout and as coy as any handsome Maid in
England; for you know my old Grandsir has left my Father good House and Land,
and my Father will give it to me his own Son I am sure, and therefore praying
you to write me your Answer by this Bearer my friend, touching the truth of all
how it stands with you, I commit you to God:

From Willow-green, May 11. 1675. J.S.

Jones Answer.
INdeed sweet John I did not expect such a Letter from your hands, I would have
you to know I scorn it: have I got my Fathers and Mothers ill will for you to
be so used at your hands? I perceive and if you be so jealous already you would
be somewhat another day, I am glad I find you that you can believe any thing of
me, but it is no matter; I care not, send me my Napkin and you shall have your
Ring and your Heart, for I can have enough if I never see you more, for there
are more Batchellors then John, and my penny is as good silver as yours, and
seeing you are so stout, even put up your Pipes, for I will have no more to do
with you; and so unsaying all that ever has been said betwixt us, pray make
your choice where you list, for I know where to be beloved and so farewell.

J. R.

A Letter from a Father to a Son at the university.
Dear Son,
I Am sorry to tell thee that I hear thy diligence does not answer my desire,
and I would gladly wish it otherwise, but I hope a kind admonition will suffice
to work a on good Nature, and therefore will rather hope the best then doubt
the contrary: and in the love of a Father let me entreat thee to avoid the
company of a lewd fellow, as rather an enemy then a Friend. The Feminine Sex
are dangerous to affect, for as they will be a loss of time, so with hinderance
of study they will produce expense: The exercise of thy body I admit for thy
health, but let thy Love be in thy Learning, else will thou never be a good
Scholar, for desire and delight are the best Masters both of Art and Knowledge,
whilst virtuous Reason makes Understanding gracious: Therefore not out of the
bitter humor of displeasure, but the careful Nature of affection I write unto
thee for thy own good, and as nothing can joy the heart of a Father more then
the obedience of a loving child, so can there nothing be more grievous then the
stubborn spirit of an ungracious Son; I speak this to thee knowing thy years
and understanding able to digest the consideration of my desire, which in sum
is my joy in thy good. For let me tell thee, my Estate thou know, and how
much I have strained my credit for thy advancement; to which Learning being a
speedy and an assured good means, I would be glad to see my comfort in thy
profit, in such fruits of thy study as with the blessing of God may hasten thy
preferment; therefore be industrious and diligent for thy own benefit, and thou
shall not want a Father's encouragement to the very utmost of his ability; thus
praying to God for thee, whom I beseech daily to bless thee, with my hearts
love to the Lord's blessing I leave thee; who am

Thy loving Father S. D.

The Son's Answer.
Loving Father,
AFter the bands of humble duty, my good Father I have received your most kind
and loving Letter; in which how much joy I have received I cannot express,
fearing rather your sharp rebuke then loving admonition; but God himself who
can and does work more in some Natures with a kind chiding then in others with
may stripes. I know you are not ignorant of the inclination of youth, and
therefore thus kindly touch the hurt of inheedfulness, for which how much I do
humbly thank you I hope the care of your counsel in time shall pleasingly tell
you, therefore for what ill you have heard grieve not, and of the good you may
hear doubt not but believe me; for I will not abuse your trust whatever vanity
soever I have seemed to effect: My Book has been the Mistress of my Love in
which how much I will labor, and from which what profit. I will gather your
hope shall see in the effect of God's blessing, without the which how dangerous
are many studies to the understandings of ungracious Spirits, I would it were
known in any, and I pray God that none may know it in me. I My preferment I
leave to God's pleasure who best knows how to dispose of his Servants, and for
your contentment that it may be in my obedience. Your health as the worlds
happiness I pray for; mine own moderate exercise with abstinence from excess,
does with God's blessing hold me in good state: and for the Feminine Sex
(though I would be no Hypocrite) I had rather read of then be acquainted with
them; for I allow of your opinion touching them: thus hoping ere-long that you
will receive as much content of my courses as you have ever doubted the
contrary; in the duty of my humble Love I take my leave for this time, but rest
always.

Your dutiful Son S. D.

A Daughters Letter to a Mother.
Honored Mother,
I Mast acknowledge in all duty that your came of me has been so great, that
my prayers shall ever petition Heaven for your long life and happiness; and
will always move in obedience to your commands, I have no other ways to express
my filial duty and love; but by conforming my self in all things to your
commands, and I shall think all the endeavors of my life well bestowed to gain
your blessing and love which I have hitherto enjoyed let me beseech therefore
and beg of you that there may be a continuation of your kind love and good
affection toward me, and I will endeavor all the days of my life more and
more continually to engratiate my self into your favor, whilst I am

Your obedient and datiful Daughter. J. P.

The Mothers kind Answer.
My dear Child,
I Received thy kind and dutiful Letter which was no small comfort to me, pray
God continue thy duty and obedience to thy Loving Mother, and if thou do fear
him I am sure be will incline thy heart to Wisdom, which is to fear the Lord
and to honor thy Parents with humble reverence, and will be the only way to
prolong thy days on Earth, and after Death has seized upon thy body and sent
thee to the Grave, yet thy name shall live after Death to Immortality; and all
that ever knew thee shall lament thy loss after death: saying, thou lived'st
and did die a good Woman and a good Christian, which will be a comfort to
thy Friends that hear it, and an Eternal joy and consolation to thy self in the
World to come; thus to the protection of him that made thee I recommand thee
who am

Thy loving Mother J. P.

A Letter of comfort to a Friend in Adversity.
Sir,
WEakness is presently discomfited when any calamity does befall them, but I
doubt not but you are strong enough to oppose your unfortunate sorrows, and to
make such good use of them, that they shall rather confirm then discourage you
in the way of virtue; I know you can look upon Adversity with an eye of
consideration, discerning therein the hand of Providence; look up then, and see
from whence all troubles do arise, there is a blessing annexed to them, if they
be suffered with patience; your virtue that stands inward may now be made
apparent to the World in bearing your sorrow, misery, or any worldly
affliction, which refine good Men to a greater perfection; I know you need not
my counsel being strong in your self, yet pardon my love, my compassion, and my
counsel, and accept them from

Yours bound to serve you N. C.

The Answer.
Kind Sir,
LIke as the Rain does fall from a wandering Traveller when he comes dropping
in, even so at the receipt of your kind and cordial Letter I felt my sorrows
wast and vanish from me, being presently refreshed by your good counsel, and
all my sorrow is in this my adversity that I have nothing to requite your love
withal but the poor and slender payment of thanks. It is common with others
whom we reckon in the number of Friends, to fall off when they see their Friend
is fallen into any calamity, but such are no more to be accounted of then the
flattering shadow that walks before us in the Sunshine, whilst your Love being
built on the constant foundation of your goodness cannot be shaken with the
unfortunate chances of your Friend; in all Estates your Love does know no
change, and this in the midst of my troubles shall bring me store of assured
comfort, that I am blessed with a Friend so faithful unto him, who is

Your friend in the same fidelity C. B.

A Letter sent to a Friend persuading him that he was a Cuckold.
Honest Charles,
THou know I love thee well and ever have done since our first acquaintance:
In troth I am sorry that I must now write to thee about such news as I believe
will be unwelcome to thee, which to be short and plain I hear tkou art a
Cuckold, neither do I ground my belief upon the vulgar report of others that
say thy Wife is a Whore, but I have seen so much by her own self that thou must
needs be a Cuckold, by those actions which I have observed by her in our Market
Town, she not thinking me to be so near her: watch her a little more narrowly
for the future and I believe thou will soon be satisfied of the truth of this
matter. I do not write this to make thee jealous without cause, but because I
would not have thee rock the Cradle when another Man got the Bastard; this is
all from

Thy real Friend H. E.

The Answer.
Honest Harry,
I Must confess that thou tellest me strange News, neither is it in the least
welcome to me; yet as I would not be too credulous in believing any thing that
may touch or stain the honor and reputation of my Wife, who has been my
Bedfellow thus long, so in like manner I would not be blinded with sair
speeches to believe her honest that is a notorious Strumpet: for as thou say
Harry by that means, I may indeed Father the spurious issue of unknown
Progenitors; yet however I will not be jealous before I find a cause, and when
I have found a cause I will not be jealous long after, for I will watch her as
warily as ever a Cat watched a Mouse, that she shall not stir but I will
Incognito attend her, and then I shall quickly perceive how she behaves her
self abroad, she not mistrusting of my suspicion will not proceed so cunningly
as otherwise she might, but will continue in her wonted course without all
doubt; which if it should be in the ways of wickedness (as God forbid it
should) I should be very sorry, and would soon separate my self from her; and
if I am a Cuckold I am certain Harry you know, and are acquainted with several
others as may shake hands with me. You know it is said that Cuckolds are
Christians; and truly I am apt to think that it is many an honest Man's lot:
and also many a Knave's deserved Fortune to be Cuckolded by his own Wife at
home, at that very instant of time that he is Cuckolding his Neighbor abroad.
As for my part Harry if it be so it shall not much trouble me, but I am
resolved to know the truth on it; for I know thy honest love and kindness to me
is such, that thou would not give me any disturbance without some grounds,
and for thy love I give thee hearty thanks, who am

Thine to my power, C. D.

A Fantastic Letter to a Friend to try both his Wit and patience.
Sir,
I Would be glad to see you for fear of losing my Eyesight, but for hearing of
you, except it be to preserve me from deafness, I assure you it never troubles
me: for when I know no good to expect from you, I wonder what I should do with
you; except to learn ignorance out of idleness, or to make work to no purpose:
yet for old acquaintance knowing this bearer coming near you, I thought it good
to tell you how well I love you: yet lest you should misconstrue my meaning,
let me assure you that he which does truly know you will accordingly esteem
you; but if you know your self it will be the better for you, I am no
Schoolmaster and therefore will read you no precepts, but would wish you to
observe times progress, and to hold a friend as a Jewel and a Fool as loss of
time, which if you take notice of it will be the better for you:

Your downright Friend J. L.

The Answer.
INdeed Mr. Coxcomb you have made a very learned Epistle, only it relishes of a
little too much Maggot which worked so strongly and strangely in your lunatic
Brain, that I find the effects of her laboring and toyling thus long there to
be prodigious; insomuch that she has caused you to write a monstrous piece of
nonsense, which you your self cannot understand, and there is also so much of
fool into the bargaen, that had I not known that you were living, I should have
blessed my self to think from whence it should all come; I verily believe that
thou art no Schoolmaster for thou never learned beyond the Testament, and
whereas thou advisest me to have a care of keeping company with Fools, I shall
take thy counsel in that and be sure to avoid thy company, for I am sure in
conversing with thee, I shall certainly lose time, therefore I bid thee
farewell;

R. C.

A conceited Letter from a Country Schoolmaster, who thought himself to be a
great Schoolar.
Sir,
BY all the Nouns and Pronouns in the eight parts of Speech, if you do not send
me up the eight pounds which you owe me for your young Son Mr. Quibus his
feeding at my Table, and tumbling in my Sheeps Feather-bed with a horum harum
horum, I Will bring you before 'um, where Amo amas amavi, if you do not pay me I
am sure they will not save ye, therefore I say Cave, for Per deum, they shall
have ye; for the Constable with his Fustis, shall take you before Sir Justice.
Sir I do not love to flatter ye nor yet to use many words, for you may remember
that Vir sapit qui pauca loquitur, which for fear you should not understand I
English it thus, That Man is wise who speaks few things or words; I have done
what I can for your Juvenis or young Man which you please to call him,
therefore pray be civil to me your Ludi-Magister or Schoolmaster,

Radolphus Ignosus.

The Gentleman's Answer.
Good Mr. Ignosus,
BE not so fiery for your Money, for I think your Quarter is not out till to
morrow at night; However rather then you should be angry and throw your Latin
about after this manner; I Will hereafter be sure to pay you a week before hand,
and I Will assure you that you shall never have occasion to have me before a
Justice for my Money that shall at any time be due to you from me for my Son's
board: However since I understand by you that he lies upon a Sheeps Feather
bed, which may be Englished a flock-bed; let me desire you for the future to
let him lie upon a Gooses or a Hens Feather-bed: and instead of Vir sapit qui
pauca loquitur, I will have it Vir loquitur qui pauca sapit, which I English
thus, the Man speaks that understands but little; but I do not mean you Sir,
therefore I hope you will not be angry with him who is

Your loving Friend E. Quibus.

A cautional Letter from a Husband to his young Wife in the Country.
Loving Wife,
NOtwithstanding the great distance that is at present betwixt our habitations,
yet the inward thoughts of my heart and mind are continually with you; I desire
that you may be careful of your honor and reputation, for that once lost which
we call our good name, cannot easily be repaired again; I hope you are virtuous
and so guarded with Chastity, that you are always armed against all such
temptations as may be offered to a young Woman as you are, especially having
such opportunities as you have at present: However if you do but call to mind,
first how great an offense it is to God Almighty to adulterate and defile your
self: it being a breach of the Commandment; and secondly, the great and
abominable wrong you do your Husband by such transgressions: I am sure upon
these considerations well weighed, you will be careful of committing any such
notorious crimes; withal assuring your self that those which at any time do
yield and prostrate themselves illegally to their lustful desires, though they
do it never so privately, even when they may think themselves secure enough
being it may be some hundreds of miles from their honest Husbands, who are
careful all their life to maintain them handsomely, and see that they want for
nothing; those I say that do offend in such a manner though never so obscurely,
yet these Actions like those of Murder will at one time or other be discovered
and made known; Fame flies with nimble wing and swiftly spreads abroad the evil
Actions of every bold offender, the very birds will whistle forth the injuries
the Wife commits against her honest Husband; this my dear love I write not that
I am jealous, but only as a caution for thee to take notice of, now thou art so
far from me, therefore prithee be not angry with him who is

Thy truly loving Husband till death A. B.

Her Answer.
Sweetheart,
I Received a Letter with your Name to it, and directed to me; but sure if it
came from you it was never intended for me, but for some other Woman, but yet
not satisfied that you could make such a mistake; I upon a second consideration
do fear that you are fell distracted: for surely had you that natural since
now, that you had when I departed from you; the Letter you sent would not have
been directed to me but to some Mistress or small Harlot of yours, whose
fidelity you so much doubted and feared that she had to do with more Cullies
besides your self; but to come a little closer to the business, I partly smell
out your design when you writ that Letter, you are jealous of me though without
cause, yet fain would hide your jealousy under the pretense of giving me good
counsel; In Troth Husband you know I am young, but not so much a Child but I can
perceive what you aim at: Alas poor Man! what does your head ache before you
have any occasion for it? I am sorry for your mistake; and truly now you have
put me in the mind how brave au opportunity I have here in the Country to make
you a Cuckold, I am like enough to take notice of it so far as to make the best
use of my time and not to let it, slip, for I can judge no less but that you
have got some homely Doxy or other to supply my place during my absence, which
makes you cry out Whore first; but it is no matter for that now I think on it
Husband I will be honest pray think so, I would fain have you think so, and
then it will be the better for my design: I mean honestly indeed I do Husband,
therefore pray believe her who is

Your virtuous Wife J. B.

A Letter to invite a Friend to a Wedding.
Honest Ned,
MY Sweetheart and I have just now considered on it, and have concluded
together to make a jovial Wedding, and in troth I am a little in haste too I
must confess, and know not well how to stay any longer; for I have such pretty
thoughts come into my mind concerning the Wedding-night, and then Ned; and
concerning the Sack-posset and then Ned; and when the Candle is taken away and
then Ned; but what then is to be done I do but guess Ned: but I vow and swear
and will take my Oath on it, that I long till that time is come that I may know
Ned; and 'faith old Soul to make up our merry company I invite thee to come and
see us joined together next Saturday, and thou shall be as welcome as any Man
in England, I would have it on Saturday Ned, because we may lie in Bed all day
on Sunday, and that is all at present Ned but the more is to come.

R. H.

The Answer.
Honest Robin,
I Perceive by your short Epistle, that you now think your self to be Man good
enough to venture on a Woman, and I am glad to hear that you have got one to
your mind; Faith Bob in my mind thon art much to be commended that thou do
not make a foolish long and tedions wooing, for that signifies nothing; when
they have done all they must take one another for better and for worse, as the
Parson says; and if it must be so it must, then high for a Boy or a Girl the
very first night: for I perceive Bob that thou art a little tickled with the
thoughts of it already, by my Mack old Boy thou need'st not question my coming;
for I am resolved to be there, and will pick me up a Spouse of my own if I can,
if not I protest and swear I Will make use of any one that belongs to some body
else and so much for that

Thine E. P.

A Letter of Farewell sent to a Friend, from one that is going a long Journey.
Kind Sir,
SInce for several years we have been convenant together, and have held a great
correspondency together in way of friendship and also business; I could not
leave my Native Country and betake my self to travel without letting you know
of my departure Sir, which will be the next opportunity I can have for
transporting my self and Family into the East- Indies, and I am informed that
we may have a convenience of Shipping within this Month; within which time if I
may be so happy as to see you in Town I shall take it as a great favor, if not
Sir I humbly recommend this to your hands, which will let you know that I give
you a thousand thanks for all kind courtesies which I have received from you,
and if it please God that I return again into England I will be sure to come
and wait on you my self; who am

Yours in all places whilst G. R.

The Answer.
Dear Sir,
Your Letter at first sight did very much surprise me, to think that I so
suddenly should lose so good a Friend, but afterward considering that your
Wisdom would prompt you to nothing but what shall be to your advantage and
preferment, I thought I had no reason to envy at your happiness or to advise
you to the contrary; I am very sorry that I cannot personally appear before you
to make an humble acknowledgement how much I am your Debtor, for all those kind
favor; which I have received from you time after time; I doubt I cannot get so
much leisure from my urgent affairs in the Country, as to come and wait upon
you before your departure; however Sir I shall beg of God for your safe passage
through Neptune's raging Waves, and that in safety you may again return, which
if I live to see, I Will strive to be the first that shall come and kiss your
hand, who am Sir,

Yours where ever I am N. B.

How to begin and end Letters with new Complements.
Sir, BEing sensible of all those former favors wherewith you have obliged me,
I could do no less but make an humble acknowledgement for those unmerited
kindnesses which you have been pleased to confer upon me.

Sir, Since the last time I saw you, abundance of Worldly sorrows have
surrounded me; insomuch that I have been incapable of serving my Friends of
whom I reckon you the chief.

Sir, What ever Tongue can express or Heart can wish of the welfare of any real
and beloved Friend, I wish and desire may always attend you, but setting aside
all ceremonious complements, these may give you to understand, etc.

Sir, I know your discretion to be so great, and your Love so unfeigned that
you will not misconstrue any mistake that I shall make in this Letter:
therefore I shall not be so curious as at other times I ought to be when I
write to those that are more critical, etc.

Sir, In considering your manifold obligations wherewith you have obliged me,
it puts me in mind how much I am your Debtor, and how urable I am at present to
make you satisfaction, thanks is too mean a present for so much worthiness, yet
at present Sir may serve to let you know that I am not ungrateful, etc.

Sir, If I knew which way to gratify you for all those favors which you have
accumulated upon my undeserts, I would not all this while have remained your
Debtor, etc.

Sir, After a recommendation of my good wishes, and my hearty prayers for your
good health and preservation, these may certify you that, etc.

Madam, Your Ladyship I hope need not question my faithfulness in serving you,
but shall ever account it the greatest honor that can be conferred upon me to
be reckoned amongst the number of your Servants, and all my comfort will be in
being obedient to your commands, though at present I must confess, etc.

Madam, If loving you be reckoned and accounted a crime, then I am certain that
I am the greatest criminal in the whole World, yet am I also sure that the
wretch that loves you not must be a Devil, etc.

Madam, In the fresh remembrance of those pleasant charms I gained from your
resplendent eyes at our last meeting, I take bold courage to salute your ears
with these presumptuous words, that I am your Lover, etc.

Sir, Since our last meeting I very well can remember your unworthiness at that
time, pray forbear to say you are my Lover, for I utterly disown your Suit;
your rudeness would have blunted the edge of my affection if I ever had any for
you, but that is more then you ever knew, etc.

Madam, The humble adorer of your excellent beauty has sent these submissive
Lines to kiss your fair hands, which kindness if you smiling please to grant,
the Author of them will presume e're long to wait upon you, and with bended
knees prostrate himself before so much Divinity, etc.

Sir, Vain words will not advance you to your aim, for it is not flatteries that
will avail or work your ends upon her that has past the Age of twenty; Children
may be deluded with fair speeches, but riper years do look for more substantial
performances: therefore pray desist, etc.

Madam, A World of Joys and comfort flows from every word I ever heard you
speak; from every smiling look you ever cast upon me; Madam, look on and speak
again, making your slave more happy then all others.

Sweetheart, I humbly thank you for your last kindness when I was at your
house, and if ever I live to see you again I hope I shall make you part of
amends, etc.

Kind Sir, You need not have given your self the trouble to have writ me those
thanks for those small civilities which you received at our house; all I can
say to you is that you were welcome, and if you are pleased to think your self
so, pray let us have your company again, etc.

Honest Will, Faith you know I love you, and that is better then all the
complements in the World; downright dealing is most acceptable amongst Friends,
for flatteries are fit for nothing but to please Women and Children, etc.

Sir, With humble reverence I submit my self to your discretion, not doubting
but your goodness will order my concerns to the best advantage, being more
capable of discerning what may stand for my future benefit then any other
person living; therefore I wholly condescend to what you shall determine in
this matter, etc.

Sir, Your Wisdom has confounded my second thoughts, therefore I refer my self
to your better judgment, and I Will assure you that on my part there shall no
more disturbances arise that may in any ways be prejudicial to our mutual
society hereafter, etc.

Sir, You may command me upon all accounts to serve you, being always ready to
communicate my assistance to a person so much deserving as your self; therefore
write but your Will and Pleasure and it shall be done, etc.

Sir, Wit in other Men seems to be but a florid way of speaking to set forth a
bad action with the greater luster, but in you it shows it self with so much
gravity that every word which flows from you, appears to me to be an Oracle,
etc.

Madam, Let me beseech you not to condole the loss of your blasted beauty,
since that your better ornament does still remain inviolable; I mean your
virtue which is a precious Jewel lodged in your mind, which time decyphering
wrinkles cannot wrong; but it will abide to perpetuity, etc.

Sir, I must confess the gay and glorious blossom has it is first time which
lasts not long but withers and decays, and then we expect the more substantial
fruit to follow. Youth and Beauty may flourish for a while, but Age calls out
for action to adorn the Mind and Soul of every Man and Woman etc.

Sir, When first I heard of those great disasters which have lately befallen
you, I equally shared in your misfortunes; but since it is gone and past, let me
desire you instead of grief and mourning to accept my consolation, etc.

Sir, Every thing underneath the glorious Sun at one time or other must undergo
and feel the sense of sorrow; some have a larger portion then the rest, and
none can truly say they live in quiet, but those that do enjoy a contented
mind, etc.

Sir, Suppose I angry was at your abuse: 'twas not only that you were injurious
to me but that I might thereby let you see your own folly, which being known I
hope you will amend, etc.

Madam, Let me beg of you to be free and not conceal the Love you bear my
friend any longer: for if Love have not it is natural course and vent, like to
the flames of fire, which being suppressed, may breath and smother undiscovered
for a time, but when it once breaks forth it burns more fiercer, etc.

Madam, You know your powerful charms have no resistance, then be not cruel
when none dares contend but when you find an opposition to your will; then use
what severity shall best become your Sex, etc.

Madam, Nature has curiously framed your outward shape beyond the parallel of
your fellow creatures; then do not strive to stain what she has made by any
immodest and unseemly Action, you know how unkind you have been, etc.

Madam, You have honored me so far that it is beyond all expression, my
obedience to your will shall be my present acknowledgement; and for the future
I will be sure to hearken to your command.

Sir, You have tied me so strong in the bonds of true affection that they are
infringeable to envy it self; though I know I have several enemies abroad in
this malicious World, that would be glad to cause a separation of our
friendship but it is beyond their power. I now must tell you Sir, etc.

Sir, Let me beg of you once more to make us happy with your good company at
London, where you shall find your welcome by your freedom, and we shall know
your acceptance by your continuance, etc.

Sir, Your Letter I received and am glad to hear of your welfare; as touching
the business which you have commanded me to effect, it shall be done according
to your content; therefore rest your self satisfied with my reality, etc.

Sir, Few words amongst friends are best, as for what you have heard, keep to
your self, for it is very dangerous to be a medler in those cases; I have other
business to acquaint you with, etc.

Sir, My humble service I present to you and your Bedfellow, wishing you true
joy, long life and health in this World, and everlasting joys in the World to
come, we are all well at present I bless God, I would desire you to send, etc.

Sweet Sir, I admire that I have never seen you all this while, I hope my looks
did not fright you when you were last at our house, if some of your quality had
but half the invitation as I have given you, I should have seen them often in
this time; but it is no matter, etc.

Ah Madam! Impute not my so long absence to be any neglect of mine, for had I
been at my own disposing I would scarcely have been ever from you; but
sickness, etc.

Madam, If Love be blind as some Men say he is, I wonder how he come to hit my
heart so right, he has wounded me and 'twas in darkness too, and so that none
but you alone can cure, etc.

Sir, I wonder why so many young Men talk of Cupid and his Feathered Darts that
wounds their breasts and yet they know not when. In my opinion they are much
mistaken, for Love proceeds at first from each others eyes; and after that want
of enjoyment of a beauty once seen may cause a kind of troublesome passion to
arise, and this is my belief concerning Love.

Sir, Let me desire you as you love your self to fly from this infected place,
where nothing but Murders and Rapes are daily threatened, I heard but the other
day, etc.

Sir, You may imagine that I love you, else I should not have carried my self
in such a familiar manner as I did last night to you who were so much a
stranger to me, perhaps you may think me wanton but, etc.

Sir, Let me beg of you not to remember my past saults, but forget an I forgive
them all, burying them in oblivion, and for the future I will be more careful
of offending, etc.

Sir, In anger I write to you not to trouble your self with my concerns, but
mind your own business; I believe you will find enough to do at home, it may be
I may find you some employment shortly if you have none of your own, in the
mean time pray let me advise you to bridle your Tongue, or else, etc.

Sir, Let me desire you not to regard the vulgar report of the common sort of
people, for they will say any thing: Neither do they regard who it is they
wrong, exclaiming against any person behind his back whom just before they
applauded before his Face, and this is their common course, etc.

Life of my Soul, Let not my absence provoke thee so far as to be jealous of my
inconstancy for thus much assure thy self, that where ever I am my heart is
with thee, and nothing but death shall alter my resolutions, which are to make
thee my Wife, etc.

Supplements, with choice phrases and and sentences to be used in the middle of
Letters upon all occasions.
WHat else may be added to our good success In proceedings of this Nature, I
leave to your wiser judgment to consider on.

After Madam I have said all I can say, I must leave it to your goodness to
muke a good and favorable construction upon my honest intentions.

I know Sir nothing can be more suitable to my present condition then your good
advice, which I will certainly be guided by; knowing that what ever you
admonish me to act or do, must on necessity be for my present and future
advantage.

You may remember Madam that at our last meeting, you promised me that I should
have a second happiness, by meeting you next Monday morning where we met before.

Let not delays frustrate your design, for you know they often prove dangerous,
therefore let me advise you to strike whilst the Iron ^s hot.

Consult with your Parents first Sir, and get their good wills, and you shall
ever find me to be according to my promise.

Expect no flatteries from your public enemy, for your deserts deserve no
favor but a just revenge shall certainly be your portion.

What I have said is cordial and you may believe it and count me your Friend in
telling you the truth of this matter, whose effects without your care will
prove I doubt very dangerous.

Never doubt nor fear but first of all make Trial; experience is the best
Mistress; I doubt not but that she will be kind, and that all things may
succeed according to your desire.

Thousands you know have miscarried for want of making a quick pursuit in such
concerns as yours are; you know that a place of good preferment is soon caught
up.

Consult with reason first, and be not over-rash in your attempts, lest you
precipitate your whole design.

Love me then as you have begun in spite of all their surious anger, you know
my constancy and dear affections will never alter but remain for ever firm.

I doubt not but you are disposed to Melancholy, therefore let me advise you to
leave that lonesome place, and betake your self to the City; where you will
find diversity of subjects that will expose you to a harmless mirth, and
innocent Recreation.

Exclaim not Madam against your sole admirer, one that adores your very name
like a sacred deity; one that has Atlas strength to bear and undergo the
greatest burdens that affliction or torment can lay upon him for your sweet
sake.

I grant your sure Sir if your love be true, but first you must give me leave
to make trial of your constancy.

I must confess that many have been beguiled by smooth tongues and flattering
speeches, but mine you have no reason to mistrust.

Consent not Daughter to their false delusions, for now a days not one Gallant
amongst ten is to be believed; let your love be grounded on what I shall think
reason, then will you live a happy life hereafter.

My Father's good will, Sir, you first must ask before I shall make my self any
surer to you, yet this I will tell you, if what you demand be according to his
good liking, I can satisfy you, that I sandy you above any other Man.

That Song you sung so ravished all my senses last night, that I shall not think
my self happy till once again I hear it from your mouth.

Then blessed be that hour that first I made the motion, since according to my
desire you have granted my request; for I am obliged in duty Madam to make a
more then verbal acknowledgement.

Your business Sir I have carefully minded, which succeeds according to your
wish, the Man you told me was your chiefest witness I met in Town, and have
secured him till the Trial shall be, and according to his evidence I question
not but that you in your suit will prove victorious.

I had sooner been with you, Sir, had not my Horse tired by the way; insomuch
that I was forced to lie still two whole days, because he was not able to
perform the Journey.

Your Letters of advice, Sir, came too late, for I had then dispatched the
business before their arrival; however if I can serve you in the like nature I
shall gladly be commanded by you.

No more your aged Father's counsel disrespect, least that I count it wilful
disobedience, what I advise you to is for your own advantage, as yet you know
the power is in my hands to make you happy or for ever miserable.

I hope you cannot justly task me, Sir, with disobedience, for rather then I
would prove undutiful to so good a Father, I would make choice of my sharp
pointed Sword to be my fatal Executioner.

I know your clemency and well disposed mind is apter to forgive my faults,
then I can have the considence to ask your pardon; pray Sir, be therefore
satisfied in my protestations that I not only love, but also honor you.

I shall endeavor so to use my time to the best advantage of my future good,
that you my aged Parents may have joy and comfort at all times when ever you
see my face.

Learning I know is a most precious Jewel, not to be obtained without a careful
study and industry; my diligence shall therefore be to the utmost of my power
to acquire to my self so rich a gem which is of that great value.

You know that none shall ever reap the profit of your Learning but your self,
therefore my child seek it and thou shall have it.

I am glad to hear that you are merry, for it is a sign that you are in health,
but let me advise you Child, to have a care, that Vanity take not up too much
Room in your mind and heart, supplying that place which should contain
profounder knowledge, stealing away your thoughts from following better things.

I always, Sir, do consult with reason in my affairs before I pitch upon any
design; therefore after I have had some small time to deliberate my thoughts I
shall be ready and willing to give you my opinion and best judgment in this
matter.

Love is a thing that I never yet studied, therefore you tell me strange news
about it; but I will consider on it, and if I find I can love any Man it shall
be you as soon as any body I know of.

But since our Parents angry are and will not give their consents that we
should marry together, I am resolved if you will agree to appoint a time, when
privately we may make our selves happy though against their wills.

It Is true I love, and that you know full well, but willingly would have our
Friend's good will, yet since you are resolved to take me at a venture, name
but the time and I will surely meet you, for I had rather offend all my
friends, then in the least to prove unkind or fickle to thee my dearest Love
and only joy.

Admire not that I appear to be somewhat strange to your propositions, for I
know that you have ever been unconstant; therefore I shall be careful how I
settle my affections on a sudden.

Stoop not so low as once to condescend to act such folly, for ruin will
attend all those that without consideration match themselves to such
extravagancy.

I heartily could wish the time were come that both our hearts and hands might
be united, I willingly would run a lawful course, yet hardly can endure to stay
so long; why should I be delayed from that sweet enjoyment which every night I
dream on without redress, it is real pleasure that I want my dear.

Conclusions and endings of Letters of all sorts, and upon all occasions.
THus do I take my leave and submit my self to your Lordships pleasure who am,
The humblest of your Scrvitors A. B.

I never thought my self more happy, then when I was busy in prosecuting your
Worship's just commands, therefore let me beg of you to harbor no ill opinion
of him; who is The only admirer of your Worship's virtues B. C.

Thus, honored Sir, do I commit my self to your just censure, knowing that you
will be favorable to Your distressed Servant C. D.

Much might be added worthy Sir upon this same business; but time will not give
me leave any longer to insist thereon; I therefore at this time shall conclude,
and only acknowledge that I am and ever will be to my death, Your faithful
Friend and most humble Servant D. E.

But lest I should seem troublesome in being too tedious in this my Letter; I
shall only add this to my former acknowledgements, that I am Your most obliged
and most faithful Servant E. F.

Consider well on what I have writ you word of, and meditate on it at your
leisure; which is all from Your affectionate Father F. G.

What ever you have writ to me shall so deeply be lodged in my breast, that
nothing but death shall take it from thence, which I hope will be a
satisfaction to you, from Sir. Your dutiful Son G. H.

My dearest-Soul, blame me not for my suspicion and jealousy of thy
unconstancy, but rather pardon it, for it proceeds from the abundance of love
of him who is The only adorer of thy beauty H. I.

And if your suspicion Sir be grounded out of your own imagination and all
without cause, I shall not desire that you should adore me, but employ your
time in learning to be wiser, and that is all from her who is Yours more then
you deserve I. K.

But to sum up all complements in one Line, I am Sir Yours till death, in
death, and after death K. L.

Now since your folly I have pretty well discovered, I think it is time to
leave off at this time, only telling you that I am Your Friend more than you
are your own L. M.

Therefore Sir let me desire you not to question my fidelity in this concern,
but rely wholly upon Your most faithful Friend M. N.

Ah Madam what shall I say more that might move you to compassion, a thousand
Sheets of Paper would be too little to contain the full description of my
sorrows, which night and day I do undergo for want of the enjoyment of your
Love; it is nothing else I ask dear Madam but one smile from your sweet self,
which if you would but grant it would revive Your languishing and disconsolate
Lover N. O.

That which you ask dear Sir I out of pity grant, for it never shall be said
that I should so disturb so likely and so hopeful a Gentleman as your self, in
denying him so small a request, when next you please to see me again, I Will meet
you with a smile, and if that will not do I Will smile again, and so continue till
you shall be satisfied, then I hope you will be pleased with her who is Your
compassionate and most loving Friend M. P.

And Joan I now have only this to tell thee that in good truth I love thee
dearly who am called by the name of Robin Hog.

And that I may end my Letter just as you have done Robin, I must tell you that
I love you as well as you love me which I had almost forgot, but I think such
good words do never come too late; this is all from her who is thine, and
honestly known by my proper name being my Mothers name who was born before me
Joan Sow.

Superscriptions for Letters, suitable for all Degrees and Qualities of Men and
Women.
TO the most High and Mighty Monarch, His sacred Majesty of Great Britain.

Or thus,

To the most Gracious and Victorious Monarch, Caesar Augustus. Salutem.

Nobility.
To the most Illustrious Prince. To his Royal Highness James Duke of York.
But to other Dukes thus,
To the most Renowned Duke. To the Right Honorable Earl of, etc. To the
Honorable Lord.
Gentry.
To the Right Worshipful R. T. Knight Baronet. To the Worshipful R. T. Knight.
To the Worshipful Esquire. To the most Impartial and upright Judges. To the
most wise and most discreet Statesman. To the most pious, most grave, and most
religious Clergyman.
To Professors of Liberal Arts and Sciences.
To the most Eloquent and most florid Rhetorician. To the most Skilful, most
Learned, and approved Physician. To the most crafty and most subtle Logician.
To Poets thus.
To the Muses best adorers. Or thus. To the Laureated Society.
To Lawyers thus.
To the most skilful and most Impartial Friend, etc. To the most skilful and
most aerie Musician. To his worthy and noble, and highly esteemed Patron.
To Kindred and Relations.
To his Honored and Welbeloved Father H. P. To his dear and tender Mother. To
his most affectionate Brother or Sister. To his dearly beloved Wise. To her
dearly beloved Husband. To his loving Uncle. To the honorable Colonel. To the
courageous and most valiant Captain.
To Lovers.
To the Life of my Soul Mrs. A. B. To the Mistress of my best thoughts E. C. To
the fair hands of the Honored Lady. To the fair hands of the Honored Lady,
Madam R. S. To the fullness of my true contentment, Mistress S. L. To the hope
of my Fortunes Mrs. J. P. To my best choice Mrs. P. P. To the only joy of my
heart Mrs. D. D. To my Heaven upon Earth Mrs. J. F. To the fairest and most
Angelical Beauty in the whole Universe Mrs. R. T. To the adored and most
venerable demi-goddess Madam J. K.
To ordinary Friends and Acquaintance.
These to his loving and much esteemed Friend Mr. A. B. These to his true and
trusty Friend Mr. B. C. To his honorable Friend Mr. C. D. To her newly
displeased Friend Mr. D. E. To her best resolved Friend Mr. E. F. To her well
advised Friend Mr. F. G. To his loving and long expected Friend Mr. G. H. To
her most disquieted Friend Mr. H. I. To his respected Friend Mr. J. K. To his
approved Friend Mrs. K. L. To her most worthy Friend Mrs. L. M. To his well
experienced and most esteemed noble Friend Mr. M. N. To his well disposed
Friend N. O. To his much disordered Friend O. P. To his unkind and ill advised
Friend P. Q. To his perjured and lascivious Wife R. S. at her Lodgings in
Moor-fields. To the jealous Pimp and Cuckold my Husband S. S. at his Lodgings
in Whetstones-Park. To his suddenly displeased Friend Mr. S. T. To her worthy
Friend Mr. T. T. adventurer in Barbados. To his true and trusty Friend Mr. V.
W. Factor in Jamaica.
Doctor in Divinity.
To the most pious and most Learned Doctor W. A.
Doctor in Physic.
To the most eminent and most skilful Doctor A. B.
To a Bishop.
To the most Holy, most Learned, most Benevolent, and most Reverend Father in
God, John Lord Bishop of, etc.
To Mrs. Twattle you may easily find the house,
For she at Mr. Woodcock's does carouse.
Posies for Rings, or Motto's fit for Presents.
I Love you well, Your self can tell.
Let Virtue guide, My lawful Bride.
Sure you mistake, That bargain's to make.
My tender heart, Disdain makes smart.
My Love, Shall ever faithful prove.
I moan, Because I lie alone.
Absence never parts, Two loving hearts.
This and the giver, Are thine for ever.
I vow to kiss, Her that reads this.
The Love I owe, In this I show.
No Turtle Dove, Shall show more Love.
As I affect thee, So respect me.
The gift is small, But Love is all.
When this you see, Remember me.
This to a Friend, I freely send.
Well directed, If well accepted.
I Will not express, What you may guess.
When this you see, Think well of me.
Virtue and Love, Are from above.
More near to me, Then Life can be.
Though Friends cross Love, We'll meet above.
It Is Love alone, Makes two but one.
You and I, Will Lovers die.
I seek to be, Both thine and thee.
I am sure to die, If you deny.
In thee each part, Does catch a heart.
My true Love is, Endless as this.
When Cupid fails, The eye prevails.
Your blessed sight, Is my delight.
I wish to have, But blush to crave.
I wish you knew, What I owe you.
My constant Love, Shall never remove.
Take this in part, Of my true heart.
For one sweet kiss, I give you this.
Nothing for thee, Too dear can be.
Desire like fire, Does still aspire.
In troth you know, It must be so.
My Love you know, Then say not no.
If you this foregoe, You are my foe.
I love thee Jone, And thee alone.
I love thee John, Therefore come on.
My mind is bent, And I am content.
I Will venture, Till I find Love's center.
I was an Ass, Should I let you pass.
In midst of grief, Love sends relief.
Where Hearts agree, No strife can be.
I joy to find, A constant mind.
Love never dies, Where Virtue lies.
Love's delight, Is to unite.
Let Friend nor Foe, This secret know.
I must confess, Love goes by guess.
The nigher kin, The further in.
What I have done, Declare to none.
My name is Harry, And Doll I Will marry.
Come when you will, I am yours still.
I Will take my Oath, To part I Am loath.
I Will swear and vow, That I love you.
I hope to meet, Some kisses sweet.
Though this be small, You shall have all.
When I am well, Have at thee Nell.
I hope your mind's, To Love inclined.
Forgive, Or else I cannot live.
You Will ever find, Me very kind.
I am full of Love, Toward you my Dove.
I this present, With good intent.
What more I owe, You Will shortly know.
True Friends, By Love are made amends.
Cupid's command, Who can withstand.
Think well of me, When this you see.
When you see this, Blow me a kiss.
My only joy, Be not so coy.
I love till death, Shall stop my breath.
Unto the end, I Will be your Friend.
A COLLECTION OF THE Nevvest Songs, AND MERRY CATCHES: WHICH Are now sung
either at Court or Theaters.
SONG I.
WHy should so much beauty fear,
Round this Isle the Heavens appear,
Like your own streams undisturbed and clear:
Those beauteous Nymphs unfrightned too,
Not minding what another shows, they do
Their innocent delight pursue.
Why should so much beauty dye,
Or so sweet a Soul deny,
The delights of those keep company:
But whilst it is fresh and blossoming,
Never make delays in any thing,
But grant those joys most pleasure bring.
Your sweet smiles and dimple cheek,
Fatal are to all they meet,
And lay them prostrute at your feet:
Then dear Nymph for once be kind,
Let sighs and skricks be left behind;
Whilst innocent our sport we find.
SONG II.
NOw that the cold Winter's expelled by the Sun,
And the Fields that did penance in Snow;
Have put Madam Natures gay Livery on,
Embroidered with flowers to make a fine show:
Since the Hills and the Valleys with pleasure abound,
Let Mortals bear a part and the Frolic go round.
Hark, hark, how the brids in sweet consort conspire,
The Lark and the Nightingale join;
And in every Grove there is an amorous Choire,
While nothing but mirth is their harmless design:
Since the Hills and the Valleys together abound,
Let Mortals bear a part and the Frolic go round.
Methinks the god Pa^, whose Subjects we are,
Sits and smiles on his flowery Throne;
He accepts our kind offering every one,
Our May-pole's his Scepter, our Garland his Crown:
Since the Hills and the Valleys together abound,
Let Mortals bear a part and the Frolic go round.
SONG III.
THe delights of the Bottle, and the charms of good Wine,
To the Powers and the Pleasures of Love must resign:
Though the Nights in the Joys of good drinking be past,
The debauches but till the next morning do last:
But Love's great debauch is more lasting and strong,
For that often lasts a Man all his Life long.
Love and Wine are the bonds which fasten us all,
The World but for these to confusion would fall:
Were it not for the Pleasure of Love and good Wine,
Mankind for each trifle their lives would resign;
They Would not value dull Life but would live without thinking,
Nor would Kings rule the World but for Love and good Drinking.
SONG IV.
TEll me no more you love,
Unless you will grant my desire,
Every thing will prove
But Fuel unto my Fire:
It Is not for kisses alone
So long have I made my address;
There Is something else to be done,
Which you cannot choose but guess.
It Is not a charming smile,
That brings me my perfect joys,
Nor can I be beguiled
With sighs or craving eyes.
There is an essence within
Kind Nature has cleared the doubt:
Such bliss cannot prove a Sin
Therefore I will find it out.
SONG V. Dorinda's lamentation for Amyntas.
A Dieu to the pleasures and follies of Love
For a passion more noble my fancy does move,
My Shepherd is dead and I live to proclaim
With sorrowful notes my Amyntas his Name:
The Wood-Nymphs reply when they hear me complain,
Thou never shake see thy Amyntas again:
For Death has befriended him
Fate has defended him
None, none alive is so happy a Swain.
You Shepherds and Nymphs that have danced to his lays
Come help me to sing forth Amintas's praise,
No Swain for the Garland durst with him dispute
So sweet were his Notes whilst he sung to his Lute:
Then come to his Grave and your kindness pursue
To weave him a Garland of Cypress and Yew:
For life has forsaken him
Death has o'retaken him
No Swain again will be ever so true.
Then leave me alone to my wretched Estate,
I lost him too soon, and I loved him too late:
You Echoes and Fountains my witnesses prove
How deeply I sigh for the loss of my Love;
And now of our Pan whom we chiefly adore
This favor I never will cease to implore,
That I may go above
And there enjoy my Love
And live more happy than ever before.
The Catholic Lover. SONG VI.
It Is not enough great gods, it is not enough,
That I one single beauty love,
No, no, Eternal powers if you
Envy the peace my mind once knew,
If It be my Fate to be a slave:
If I must love and such passions have;
Let not one Quiver, or one Bow,
One glance, one dart, one Arrow do;
Let many eyes my freedom break,
Let many chains me Captive make,
It Is Caesar-like
From many wounds a death to take.
SONG VII.
LOng since fair Clarinda my passion did move
Whilst under my friendship I covered my Love,
But now I must speak though I fear it is in vain
It Is too late in my Death to dissemble my pain;
In telling my Love though I fear she will deny
I shall ease my sad heart and more quietly dye.
Ah sure by my eyes you my passion might find,
No friendship e're languish'd or looked half so kind;
Though I said not I loved, you might see it too plain,
Friends use not to sigh, nor to speak with such pain:
Each touch of your hand such a warmth did inspire,
My Face was all flamed and my heart all a fire.
My thoughts are so tender, my Tongue cannot tell,
What bliss would be yours could you love half so well;
Let the thing with a Title our property move,
Let him have the show, and let me have the Love:
I have loved you so long that if now you delay,
You Will owe me so much as you never can pay.
SONG VIII.
WHat fighs and groans now fill my breast,
And suffer me to take no rest
For my Carmelia, Oh she is gone,
And left me here to sigh alone:
But is she dead? Then I Will go see
If in her Grave there is room for me.
Oh cruel Fate that so designed,
To take her and leave me behind;
And thou Oh death whose quick Alarms,
Have snatched her rudely from my Arms:
Can thou not find a way for me,
To my Carmelia's breast to flee.
Dye then Anselmio! why do stay,
Since thy Carmelia leads the way?
Oh! die yet faster, do not live,
That dearest Nymph for to survive.
Now dearest Soul I come, I fly
Always to live with thee, I die.
SONG IX.
Why should Friends and Kindred gravely make thee
Wrong thy self and cruelly forsake me;
Be still my dearest Mistress: hang Relations,
Love's above their dull considerations:
Let 'em live and heap up treasure,
Whilst that thee and I enjoy our pleasure.
He that seeks a Mistress in a portion,
Puts himself to use with damned extortion;
If he must be bribed to copulation,
Pox upon his Love it is out of fashion:
Where we like, no matter what the estate is,
It Is not Love except we show it Gratis.
How to see the Miser have I wondered,
Weighing out his passion by the Hundred;
Never consulting Birth nor Education,
Virtue without Wealth's but profanation:
Be she old or ugly it is no matter,
So she is but rich, he will venture at her.
Jointure is a sordid Lay-invention,
Quite beside our Nature and Intention;
When we would agree it makes resistance
Finding tricks to keep us at a distance:
Then who poorly make a new Election,
Suffers wealth to trouble his affection.
SONG X. A Rant.
MAke a noise
Pull it out
And drink about
Brave Boys:
The Other Cup,
Fill the Glass
You sober Ass
Turn up;
Why so sad
We Will have more
Upon the score
My Lad:
Let the Rabble
Prate and babble
Fontre Diable
We will all be mad.
Sing a Catch
Serenade
In Masquerade
The Watch,
Prittle prattle
Tittle tattle
Give 'em battle
They shall find their match.
See they come
Staves and Pikes
Who ever strikes
Strike home:
Come Boys draw
Fairly meet
'Em in the street
Saw! Saw!
Bravely done
Cut and slash
The Weapons clash
They run.
How they wallow
Let us follow
Hoop and hallow
For the day is won:
All Is our own,
Every Crack
Must on her back
Lie down;
Let us muster
In a cluster
Huff and bluster
For we rule the Town.
Play along,
Sing and chant
A merry Rant
Among;
Lay about,
Look you Whores
Shut all your doors
And flout.
All prepare
See the Sluts
Draw up the shuts
Beware
Batts and Cinders
Break the Windows
Nothing hinders
Let 'em have a care
Together clash
In they go,
At every throw,
Dash! dash!
Hark they tumble
How they rumble
Now the Whores are quasht.
Boys dispatch
It Is enough
That we can huff
The Watch:
Back again
To the Sun
Come let us run
Amain;
There we will stay
Roar and drink
And never think
Of day.
Time, with Lasses
Pots and Glasses
Sweetly passes
How it slides away:
Let the Fool,
He that thinks
And sleeps and drink
By Rule;
By a measure
At his leisure
Take his pleasure
And grow wisely dull.
SONG XI.
A Wife I do hate
For either she is false or she is jealous,
But give me a Mate
That nothing will ask, or tell us.
She stands not on terms
Nor chaffers by way of Indenture:
Nor loves for your Farms,
But takes the kind Man at a venture.
If all prove not right,
Without Act, Process, or Warning,
From a Wife for a night,
You may be divorced the next morning:
Where Parents are slaves
Their Brats cannot be any other;
Great Wits and great Braves
Have always a Punk to their Mother.
SONG XII.
BE thou joyful I am jolly
In thy pleasure's my delight,
Art thou inclined to Melancholy
I am of that humor right;
For I can joy; or joys can slight.
Art thou liberal of embraces
I can also lavish be,
Or do thou scorn to yield such graces
I can scorn as well as thee
Of these I can be nice or free.
Do thou Joy I should attain thee
Then I will thy Servant be,
Or if my presence do disdain thee
I will never wait on thee,
For I can love or let thee be.
If to singing thou 'It apply thee,
I can warble Notes to thee,
Or if to sighing, I Will sigh by thee,
To thy passions I Will agree,
For I Am to all thy humors free.
Do thou joy I should come near thee
With a heart both firm and true?
Or do thou fly my sight and jear me?
Unto Lovers that is not new,
For I can stay, or bid adien.
SONG XIII.
OH Celia come tell me how long it will be
Before you will grant my desire,
Is there no end of your cruelty
But must I consume in this fire:
You Will not say you love nor yet that you hate
But delight for to see me languish;
Ah Celia take pity of my desperate state
And remove the cause of my anguish.
Ah Celia remember the pitiful moan
That came from your desperate Lover,
When I was sitting and fighing alone
Nor did I my Celia discover:
The Hills with the Valleys took share of my grief
And Echoed my Lamentation;
Yet Celia unkind will not give me relief
But takes pleasure in my vexation.
A Catch. XIV.
IF Wealth would keep a Man alive
I Would only study how to thrive,
That having got a mighty Mass
Might then bribe Fate to let me pass:
But since we cannot prolong our years.
Why spend we time in griefs and fears?
For since by destiny we dye
And must all pass over the Ferry,
Hang sicknesses and ears
Since we have not many years
Let Us have a short life and a merry.
A Drinking Catch. XV.
COme away, the other Glass
He Is a temperate Ass
That refuses his brimmer of Rhenish,
While our bottles go round
A new way we have found
Both our heads and our veins to replenish:
We Will be witty and brave when our Noddles are full,
While the sober young Fop is but prudently dull:
With Wenches and wine
Our selves we refine,
From the dross of the Puritan City
We care not a Louse
For the dull Coffee-house
It Is the Tavern that makes a Man witty:
In spite of misfortune thus happy we are,
In a jolly brave Soul that is a stranger to care.
SONG XVI.
Were Celia but as chaste as fair,
How could I kiss the snare,
And therein lie
And never be tired with my Captivity:
But she is a Whore, that cools my blood,
Oh! that she were less handsome or more good.
Would you believe that there can rest
Deceit within that breast,
Or that those Eyes
Which look like Friends are only spies:
But she is a Whore, yet sure I lie
May there not be degrees of Chastity.
No, no, what means that wanton smile
But only to beguile,
Thus did the first
Of Women make all Men accursed
I for their sakes give Women over,
The first was false the fairest is a Whores.
A drinking Catch. XVII.
What a madness it is to give over our drinking,
When Apollo is drunk you may know by his winking;
His Face is on flame, and his Nose is so red,
It predicts he is sleepy and goes drunk to bed:
Let him sleep to grow sober while we tarry here,
And drink till the Morning appear.
Despair. SONG XVIII.
MAke a Bed in the deep,
For me discontented poor Lover to sleep,
Till the Cannons like Thunder
Rend the Heavens in sunder,
And fright'ning the Main
Do force me at last to unwaken again.
When the Storms do arise
And with their proud Surges encounter the Skies,
My head finds a Pillow
On the top of a Billow
And I look for a Grave,
Within the cold Womb of a turbulent Wave.
The Wind shall convey
My Prayers unto her I adore every day:
It gently shall move
Her to pity her Love;
And each sigh that he hears
It shall whisper again into Phillis's Ears.
If the Tempest do roar
Then Phillis alone is the Saint I implore,
If she will not appease
The rage of the Seas,
Nor calm the rough Weather
I Will breath out her name and my Life both together.
So the Ocean to me
Shall instead of a Tomb and a Sepulcher be,
And as I do glide
Too and fro with the Tide
Thereby is expressed
That a Lover may dye but he never can rest.
Over Phillis shall hover
The wandering Soul of her martyred Lover,
And if I do find her
To my memory kinder,
Oh then I shall never
Abandon her bosom but tarry for ever.
SONG XIX.
When a Woman that is buxom to a dotard does wed,
It Is a madness to think she will be tied to his bed,
For who can resist a Gallant that is young
And a Man Al-a-mode in his Garb and his Tongue:
His looks have such charms and his Language such force,
That the drowfie Mechanick's a Cuckold of course.
He brings her acquainted with Dons of the Court,
That are persons of worth, and of civil report;
Thus she cannot a kind opportunity want
For he will trusther with no Man except her Gallant:
Yet the confident Fop for her honesty swears
So he grafts on himself the gay horns that he wears.
Thus happy are we that are yoked to a Citt
For when ever we teach him he pays for his wit,
By his Duck that appeared to be faithful and chaste,
He finds himself Cuckold and beggared at last;
And the credulous Fool having drudg'd all his Life,
Proves a Thief to himself and a Pimp to his wife.
SONG XX.
LEt the Bowl pass free
From him to thee
As it first came to me
It Is pity that we should confine it,
Having all either credit or coin yet,
Let it even take it is course
There Is no stopping it is force
He that shuffles must inter-line it.
Lay aside your cares
Of Shops and wares
And irrational fears
Let each breast be as thoughtless as his'n is,
That from his Bride newly risen is
We Will banish each soul
That comes here to condole
Or is troubled with Love or business.
The King we will not name
Nor a Lady to inflame,
With desire to the Game
And into a dumpishness drive all;
Or make us run mad, or go Wive all:
We Will have this whole night
Set apart for delight
And our mirth shall have no corrival.
Then see that the Glass
Through it is circuit do pass,
Till it come where it was
And every Man's Nose been within it,
Till he end it that first did begin it:
As Copernicus found
That the World did turn round,
We will prove so does every thing in it.
SONG XXI.
I Always resolved to be free from the charms
That Love with his subtilty e're could invent,
I kicked at his Deity laughed at the harms
That he could devise to abridge my content:
But now I do find though the Lad he be blind,
The mark he has hit and has changed my mind;
A Boy though he be, yet his Manhood I see,
For with one poor Dart has he conquered me.
I likewise before such beauties did see
With charms in their Tongues and darts in their eyes,
Who thought by their Wiles to intoxicate me
But never before my heart could surprise:
But now I do see that a slave I must be,
To one that before was a Servant to me;
For the angry god's Dart has so pierced my heart,
No Balm that is applied but increases the smart.
And thus being plunged in that loving amaze
The place is a Labyrinth where I reside,
Whose turnings and windings has so many ways
That none can get out without help of a guide:
And my guide is so coy though my Soul I employ,
To lie at her feet, yet my hope she will destroy;
But rather then I Will keep parley with her eye,
To add to my bonds, I am resolved to dye.
SONG XXII.
FAir Clarinda I do owe
All the Woe
That I know
To those glorious looks alone,
Though you're an unrelenting stone:
The quick Lightning from your eyes
Did sacrifice
My unwise,
My unwary harmless heart,
And now you glory in my smart.
How unjustly you do blame
That pure flame
From you came
Vexed with what your self may burn,
Your scorns to Tinder did it turn:
The least spark how Love can call
That does fall
On the small
Scorched remainder of my heart
Will make it burn in every part.
A Pastoral Song. XXIII:
AS I was sitting on the Grass
Within a silent shady Grove,
I overheard a Country Lass
Was there bewailing of her Love:
My Love says she
Is taken from me
And to the Wars is pressed and gone;
He Is marched away
And gone to Sea,
Alack, alack, and a welladay
And left me here alone.
My Love he was the kindest Man
There Is none that is like him in the Town,
He gently takes me by the hand
And gave me many a Green Gown;
With kisses sweet
He would me treat
And often sing a Roundelay:
And sometimes smile
Then chat a while,
That so we might the time beguile
A live-long Summers day.
My Love on May Day still would be
the earliest up of all the rest,
With Scarfs and Ribbons then would he
Of all the crew be finest dressed;
With Morris Bells
And fine things else,
But when the Pipe began to play:
He danced so well
I heard them tell
That he did all the rest excel,
And bore the bell away.
The Man that took my Love away
Was too, too harsh and too severe,
I gently on my knees did pray
That he my Love would then forbear;
I offered too
A breeding Ewe
And Chilver-Lamb that was my own;
Do what I could
It did no good
He left me in this pensive mood
To sigh and make my moan.
SONG XXIV.
When first I saw fair Celia's face
So full of Majesty and Grace,
As potent Armies do attack
The place can no resistance make:
So she by power has made her way
Unto my heart and there does stay
Receiving homage which I pay.
The force of Love who can withstand
It is in vain to countermand,
What envious Cupid has decreed
Then my poor heart must ever bleed:
Till you fair Nymph by pity moved
My passion having once approved
Can love as now you are beloved.
It would be Gallantry in Love,
If Celia would the Act approve;
Where she so long has caused a smart
There to bestow at last her heart:
In doing so (fair Saint) you may,
From your blessed name derive a day,
When Lovers all to you shall-pray.
Against Poets. SONG XXV.
What mean the dull Poets themselves to abuse,
With the pitiful Rhimes of an ignorant Muse;
No more in the praise of a Nymph let 'em prate,
Nor complain of the Stars or unkindness of Fate:
But if they must Rhyme let 'em do it to some end,
And sing us a song of our Bottle and Friend.
They Are in pitiful case with their heart and their flame,
And are puzzled to find a new Mistresses name;
But once in a Stanza they must be in Love,
Then their Protean Mistress must any thing prove:
For their sense and their truth's are but Pimps to their Rhyme,
And their Alphabet helps 'em to words that will chime.
The Mistress they sancy they fit to their mind,
In a minute she is pretty, coy, cruel, and kind;
Thus Women are Deities only in show
While to them they do all their constancy owe:
But in Burgundy we the fond passion will quench,
Or if we must love we will go to a Wench.
A Pastoral Song, XXVI.
O Delia! for I know it is thee,
I know it is thee,
For nothing else could move
My tuneless heart, but something from above;
I hate all Earthly Harmony,
Hark, hark, ye Nymphs and Satyrs all around;
Hark how the baffled Echo faints and dies,
See how the winged Air all gasping lies,
At the melodious sound,
Mark while she sings
How they droop and flag their wings.
Angelick Delia sing no more,
Thy Song's too great for mortal Ear;
Thy charming Notes I can no longer bear:
Oh then in pity to the world give over
And leave us stupid as we were before;
Fair Delia take the fatal choice
To vail thy beauty or suppress thy voice:
His passions thus poor Celadon betrayed,
When first he saw, when first he heard the lovely Maid.
SONG XXVII.
HAng up Mars
And his Wars
Give us drink,
We Will tipple my Lads together,
Those are Slaves
Fools and Knaves
That have chink,
And must pay
For what they say
Do or think
Good fellows account for neither:
Be we round, be we square,
We are happier than they are,
Whose dignity works their ruin:
He that well the bowl rears
Can baffle his cares
And a fig for Death or undoing.
SONG XXVIII.
When I see the young Men play
Young methinks I am as they,
And my aged thoughts laid by
To the dance with joy I fly:
Come a flowery Chaplet lend me
Youth and merry thoughts attend me.
Age be gone, we will dance among
Those that young are, and be young,
Bring some wine boy, fill about
You shall see the old Man's stout:
Who can laugh and tipple too,
And be mad as well as you.
A Tavern Song, XXIX.
COme drink off your Liquor
'Twil make you the quicker
For Rhimes, Songs, Conceits, or for Ballads,
Be the Wine red or yellow
The cups deep or shallow
There Is naught comes amiss to our Pallats.
Chorus.
Then come drink away
Be it night or be it day
The time shall be told as it passes:
The true Hour we shall know
By the Ebb and the Flow
Of the jolly quart Pots and the Glasses.
It stands us upon
To change our Helicon
For Spring it was nothing but Water:
But hence springs a fire
That will quicken and inspire
And tickle our senses with laughter.
Chorus.
Then come drink away
Be it night or be it day
The time shall be told as it passes:
The true hour we do know
By the Ebb and the Flow
Of the jolly quart Pots and the Glasses.
SONG XXX.
DIngenes was merry in his Tub
And so let us be in our Club,
It Is mirth that fills our brains with blood
More then either Sleep, Wine, or Food;
Let each Man keep his heart at ease
No Man e're died of that Disease:
'Twil always keep thy body in health
Then value it above thy Wealth,
It Is sadness and grief that does bring
Diseases in Autumn, and in the Spring,
Then welcome harmless Mirth let us say
For the more we laugh, the more we may.
On a dead Horse, an Epitaph. SONG XXXI.
HEre lies not in, but on Earth's Womb,
An Horse exposed without a Tomb;
No winding sheet, nor his own skin,
Nor laid by any of his Kin.
Yet was no Jade; Death had a race
And took him for a sprightly pace:
Now see his Funeral Exequies
The Ravens in Black do solemnize,
Unto the Skies they him exalt
Being Sepulchred in Airy Vault:
In living Tombs he thus out-prides
MECHA and Egypt Pyramides:
Change now his Epitaph, say not here lies
A Horse but rather here he flies.
Mourn not his Fate my Friends, since thus
The Horse is now transformed to Pegasus.
SONG XXXII.
Where the Be sucks there suck I
In a Cowslip Bell I lie,
There I couch when Owls do cry,
On the Batt's back I do fly
After Summer merrily:
Merrily, merrily, shall I live now
Under the blossom that hangs on the Bough.
Anger, SONG XXXIII.
A Curse upon thee for a slave
Art thou here, and heard'st me rave?
Fly not sparkles from mine eye
To show my indignation nigh?
Am I not all Foam and Fire
With voice as hoarse as a Town Crier?
How my back opes and shuts together
With fury as old Men's with Weather?
Could thou not hear my Teeth knack hither
Thou nasty scurvy mungril toad?
Mischief on thee, light upon thee,
All the Plagues that can confound thee
Or did ever reign abroad:
Better a thousand lives it cost
Then have brave Anger spilt or lost.
SONG XXXIV.
THe Pot and the Pipe
The Cup and the Can,
Have undone, quite undone
Many a Man.
The Hawk and the Hound
The Dice and the Whore,
Have undone, quite undone
Twice as many more.
A Scotch Song. XXXV.
I W'o not go to it, I mun not go to it
For Love nor eer for Fee,
For I am a Maid, and will be a Maid
And a good one till I dee:
Yet mine intent I could repent
For one Man's company.
SONG XXXVI.
HE that marries a merry Lass
He has most cause to be sad,
For let her go free
In her merry tricks
She Will work his patience mad.
But he that marries a Scold, a Scold,
He has most cause to be merry,
For when she is in her fits
He may cherish his Wits
With singing hey down derry.
He that weds a roaring Girl
That will both scratch and fight,
Though he study all day
To make her away
He Will be glad to please her at night.
And he that copes with a sullen Wench
That scarce will speak at all:
Her doggedness more
Then a Scold or a Whore
Will penetrate his Gall.
He that is matched with a Turtle Dove
That has no Spleen about her,
Shall wast so much Life
In love of his Wife
He had better be without her.
SONG XXXVII.
YOu Lovers love on
Lest the World be undone
And Mankind be lost by degrees,
For if all from their Loves
Should go wander in Groves
There soon would be nothing but Trees.
SONG XXXVIII.
WOman who is by nature wild
Dull bearded Man incloses,
Of Nature's freedom we are beguild
By Laws which Man imposes:
Who still himself continues free
Yet we poor slaves must fettered be.
Chorus.
A shame on the Cursed
Of for better for worse
It Is a vile imposition on Nature,
For Women should change
And have Freedom to range
Like to every other wild Creature.
So gay a thing was never designed
To be restrained from roving,
Heaven meant so changeable a mind
Should have its change in loving:
By cunning we could make men smart
But they by strength overcome our Art.
Chorus.
A shame on the Curse
Of for better for worse
It Is a vile imposition on Nature,
For Women should change
And have freedom to range
Like to every other wild Creature.
How happy is the Village Maid
Whom only Love can setter,
By foolish Honor never betrayed
She serves a power much greater:
That lawful Prince the wisest rules;
The Usurper, Honor, rules but Fools.
Chorus.
A shame on the Curse
Of for better for worse
It Is a vile imposition on Nature,
For Women should change
And have Freedom to range
Like to every other wild Creature.
Let us resume our ancient right
Make Man at distance wonder,
Though he victorious be in fight
In Love we will keep him under:
War and Ambition hence be hurled
Let Love and Women rule the World.
Chorus.
A shame on the Curse
Of for better for worse
It Is a vile imposition on Nature,
For Women should change
And have Freedom to range
Like to every other wild Creature.
SONG XXXIX.
STay shut not the Gate
The Other quart it is not so late
As your thinking,
The Stars which you see
In the Hemisphere be,
Are but Studs in our cheeks by good drinking:
The Sun's gone to tipple all night in the Sea, Boys
To morrow he'! blush that he is paler then we Boys,
Drink Wine give him Water, it is Sack makes us the Boys.
Fill up the Glass
To the next merry Lad let it pass
Come away with it,
Let Us set Foot to Foot
And give our minds to it
It Is Heretical Sects that do slay wit:
Then hang up good faces, let us drink till our Noses
Gives freedom to speak what our fancy disposes,
Beneath whose protection now under the Rose is.
Drink off your Bowl
'Twil enrich your Head and your Soul,
With Canary:
For a Carbunkled Face
Saves a tedious race
For the Indies about us we carry:
No Helicon like to the Juice of the Vine is,
For Phoebus had never had Wit that Divine is,
Had his Face not been bow-dy'd as thine is and mine is.
This must go round
Off with your Hats till the Pavement be crowned
With your Beavers,
A Red coated Face
Frights a Sergeant at Mace
Whilst the Constable trembles to shivers:
In state march our Faces like some of the Quorum,
While the Whores fall down and the vulgar adore 'em,
And our Noses like Link-boys go shining before 'em.
SONG XL.
CUpid's no God, a wanton Child,
His Art's too weak, his power's too mild,
No active heat nor noble fire
Feathers his Arrows with desire:
It Is not his Bow or Shaft it is Venus eye
Makes him adored and crowns his Deity.
On a Kiss. SONG XLI.
OH that joy so soon should wast
Or so sweet a bliss
As a kiss
Might not for ever last,
A sugry melting, so soft, so delicious,
The Dew that lies on Roses
When the Morn her self discloses
Is not so precious:
Or rather when I would it smother
Were I to taste but such another,
It would be my wishing
That I might dye with kissing.
SONG XLII.
HOw happy's the Prisoner who conquers his fate
With filence and never on bad fortune complains,
But carelessly plays with his key on the Grate
And makes a sweet Consort with them and his chains:
He drowns care with Sack when his heart is oppressed,
And with that makes it flout like a Cork in his breast.
Then since we are all Slaves who Islanders be
And our Land's a large Prison enclosed with the Sea,
We Will drink off the Ocean, and set our selves free,
For Man is the World's Epitome.
Let Tyrants wear purple deep died in the blood
Of those they have slain their Scepter to sway,
If our Conscience be clear, and our Title be good
To the Rags that hang on us we are richer then they:
We drink up at night what we can beg or borrow
And sleep without plotting for more the next morrow.
Then since we are all Slaves who Islanders be
And our Land's a large Prison enclosed with the Sea,
We Will drink off the Ocean and set our selves free,
For Man is the World's Epitome.
Come Drawer fill each Man a pint of Canary
This Brimmer shall bid all our senses good night,
When old Aristotle was froliek and merry
With the juice of the Grape he turned Staggerite:
Copernicus once in a drunken fit found
By the course of his brains that the Earth did turn round.
Then since we are all Slaves who Islanders be
And our Land's a large Prison enclosed with the Sea,
We Will drink off the Ocean, and set our selves free
For Man is the World's Epitome.
It Is Sack makes our Faces like Comets to shine
And gives us a beauty beyond Complexions mask,
Diogenes fell so in Love with his Wine
That when 'twas all out he dwelt in the Cask:
He lived by the scent in that close wainscotted room
When dying requested the Tub for his Tomb.
Then since we are all Slaves who Islanders be
And the Land's a large Prison enclosed with the Sea,
We Will drink off the Ocean, and set our selves free,
For Man is the World's Epitome.
Though the Userer watch on his bags and his house
To keep that from robbers he raked from his debtors,
Each Midnight cries Thieves at the noise of a Mouse
Then looks if his bags are fast bound in the setters:
When once he grows rich enough for a State-plot
In one hour Buff-plunder what threescore years got.
Then since we are all Slaves who Islanders be
And our Lands a large Prison enclosed with the Sea,
We Will drink off the Ocean and set our selves free,
For Man is the World's Epitome.
Let him never so privately muster his Gold
His Angels will their Intelligence be,
How close they are pressed in his Canvass hold
And long that State Soldiers should set them all free
Let him pine and be hanged, we will merrily sing
Who has nothing to lose may cry, God bless the King.
Then since we are all Slaves who Islanders be
And our Land's a large Prison enclosed with the Sea,
We Will drink off the Ocean and set our selves free
For Man is the World's Epitome.
A Rural Song, XLIII.
NYmph and Shepherd come away
In these Groves let us sport and play,
Let each day be a Holiday,
Sacred to ease and happy Love
To dancing Music Poetry;
Your Flocks may now securely Rove
While you express your jollity.
Chorus of Shepherds and Shepherdesses.
We come, we come no joy like to this
Now let us sing, rejoice and kiss,
The Great can never know such bliss,
1. As this,
2. As this,
3. As this,
All. As this.
The Great can never know such blist.
All the Inhabitants o'th Wood
Now celebrate the Spring,
That gives vigor to the blood
Of every living thing:
The Birds have been billing and singing before us
And all the sweet Choristers join in the Chorus:
The Nightingales with jugging throats
Warbling out their pretty Notes
So sweet, so sweet, so sweet,
And thus our Loves and pleasures greet.
Chorus of all.
Then let our Pipes sound, let us dance and sing,
Till the murmuring Groves with Echoes ring.
How happy are we
From all Jealousy free
No dangers nor cares can annoy us,
We toy and we kiss
And Love's our chief bliss
A pleasure that never can cloy us,
Our days we consume in unenvyed delights
And in love and soft rest our happy long nights.
Each Nymph does impart
Her Love without Art
To her Swain who thinks that his chief Treasure:
No envy is feared
No sighs we e're heard
But those which are caused by our pleasure;
When we feel the best raptures of innocent Love,
No joys exceed ours but the pleasures above.
Chorus.
In these delightful fragrant Groves
Let Us celebrate our happy Loves
Let Us Pipe and Dance, and Laugh and Sing,
Thus every happy livingthing
Revels in the time of Spring.
SONG XLIV.
Farewell thou dearest of my crimes
Be never more the abuser of my times,
Lest that I curse too late
The errors of my Fate
Which made me love thee.
All ye Deities divine
Strengthen this request of mine,
Then may I say
Frail delights pass away
I am ruled by a power that is above thee.
No more shall thy seducing smiles
Thy winning looks, or other sweet beguiles,
Have power to withdraw
My heart from Love, by Law
Sealed to another;
Cupid I thy power defy
Thou art a flattering Deity
And there are none
But say thou art the Son
Of a fair, foolish, fickle, wanton Mother.
SONG XLV.
Augusta is inclined to fears
Be she full or be she waning,
Still Augusta is complaining;
Give her all you can to ease her
Give her all you can to ease her
You can never, never please her.
SONG XLVI.
YOur merry Poets, old Boys,
Of Aganippus Well,
Full many Tales have told Boys,
Whose Liquor does excel;
And how that place was haunted
By those that loved good Wine,
Who tippled there and chaunted
Among the Muses nine:
Where still they cried, Drink clear, Boys
And you shall quickly know it,
That it is not lousie Beer, Boys
But Wine that makes a Poet.
SONG XLVII.
COme you Ladies of the Night
That in silent sports delight,
And see the wanton Moonshine play
To light us in our doleful way:
Come, come, come Ladies come
The Night's not blind though deaf and dumb.
Ladies have you seen a Toy
Called Love, a little Boy?
Almost, naked, wanton, blind,
Cruel now, and then as kind;
If he be amongst you Ladies say,
That he is Venus Runaway.
Marks about him he has plenty
You may know him amongst many,
As his body is on fire
And his breath out-flames desire
So being sent like Lightning in
He wound our hearts but not our skin.
If any here can but discover
Where this winged wag does hover,
For her pains shall have a kiss
When and where her heart can wish:
But she that can but bring him to his Mother,
From Venus and her Boy shall have another.
SONG XLVIII.
SInce we poor slavish Women know
Our Men we cannot pick and choose.
To him we like why say we no
We have no pleasure to refuse:
By our put-offs, and fond delays
A Lovers Appetite we pall;
And if the Gallant stays too long
His Stomach's gone for good and all.
Or our impatient amorous guest
Unknown to us away may steal,
And rather then stay for a Feast
Take up with some course ready meal,
When opportunity is kind
Let prudent Women be so too,
And if the Man be to her mind
Tell her she must not let him go.
The Match soon made is happy'st still
For Love has only there to do.
Let no one marry against her will
But stand off when her Parents woe
And only to their suit be coy,
For she whom jointure can obtain:
To let a Fop her bed enjoy
Is but a lawful Whore for gain.
SONG XLIX.
LEt Fortune and Phillis frown if they please
I Will no more on their Deities call,
Nor trouble the Fates but I Will give my self ease
And be happy in spite of them all:
I will have my Phillis if I once go about her
Or if I have not I Will live better without her.
But if she prove virtuous obliging and kind,
Perhaps I Will vouchsafe for to love her,
But if Pride and inconstancy in her I find,
I Would have her to know I Am above her:
For at length I have learned now my Fetters are gone
To love if I please or let it alone.
SONG L.
FOnd fables tell of old
How Jove in Dana's lap
Fell in a shower of Gold,
By which she caught a Clap:
Oh had it been my hap!
However the blow does threaten,
So well I like the play,
That I could wish all day
And night to be so beaten.
SONG LI.
It Is late and cold, stir up the fire,
Sit close, and draw the Table nigher,
Be merry and drink Wine that is old
A hearty Medicine against a Cold:
Your Beds of wanton Down the best
Where you shall tumble to your rest.
I could wish you Wenches too
But I am old and cannot do,
Call for the best the House may ring
Sack, White, and Claret, let 'em bring,
And drink apace whilst breath you have
You Will find but cold drink in the Grave.
Plover, Partridge, for your Dinner
And a Capon for the sinner,
You shall find ready when you're up,
And your Horse shall have his sup:
Welcome, welcome, shall fly round
And I shall smile though under ground.
SONG LII.
VEnus chanced to love a Boy,
Young Adonis was her Joy,
He once leapt from off her knee
To hunt and take a Humble Be,
Then the bag to her did bring,
She sighed and asked him for the sting:
When he looked and saw her eye
Drop a tear, he straight did cry,
Oh forgive me I will bring
A bigger and a longer sting;
Smiling she cried, pretty Lad,
When that time comes I shall be glad.
SONG LIII.
I Will sing you a Song that was never in Print
It Is truly and newly come out of the Mint,
I Will tell you before hand you will find nothing in it.
On nothing I think, and on nothing I Write,
It Is nothing I covet yet nothing I slight,
Nor care I a pin if I get nothing by it.
Fire, Air, Earth and Water, Beasts, Birds, Fish, and Men,
Did start out of nothing, a Chaos, a Den;
And all things shall turn into nothing again.
It Is nothing sometimes that makes many things hit,
As when Fools amonst wise Men do silently fit;
A Fool that says nothing may pass for a Wit.
What one Man loves is another Man's loathing,
This Blade loves a quick thing, that a new thing;
And both of them in conclusion love nothing.
Your Lad that makes Love to a delicate smooth thing,
Who thinking to gain her with sighs and with soothing
Does frequently make much ado about nothing.
At last when his patience and Purse is decayed,
He may to the Bed of a Whore be betrayed,
But she that has nothing must needs be a Maid.
Your slashing and clashing, and flashing of Wit,
Does start out of nothing but Fancy and fit;
It Is little or nothing to what has been writ.
When first by the Ears we together did fall,
Then something got nothing, and nothing got all;
From nothing it came and to nothing it shall.
That party that sealed to a Covenant in have
Who made our three Kingdoms and Churches lie wast;
Their project and all came to nothing at last.
They raised an Army of Horse and of Foot,
To tumble down Monarchy, Branches and Root;
They thundered and plundered but nothing would do it.
The Organ, the Altar, and Ministers clothing,
In Presbyter Jack begat such a loathing:
That he must needs raise a petty new nothing.
And when he had robbed us in sanctified clothing
Perjured the people by faithing and trothing,
At last he was caught and all came to nothing.
In several Factions we quarrel and brawl,
Dispute and contend and to fighting we fall;
I Will lay all to nothing that nothing wins all.
When War and Rebellion and Plundering grows,
The Mendicant Man is the freest from Foes;
Most happy is he that has nothing to lose.
Brave Caesar and Pompey, and brave Alexander,
Whom Armies did follow as Goose follows Gander;
Nothing can say to an Action of slander.
The wisest great Prince were he never so stout,
Though he conquered the World and gave Mankind a Rout;
Did bring nothing in, nor shall bring nothing out.
Old Noll that arose from high thing to low thing,
By Brewing Rebellion, Nicking and Frothing;
In seven years space was both all things and nothing.
Dick (Oliver's Heir) that pitiful slow thing,
Who once was invested in purple clothing;
Stands for a Cipher, and that stands for nothing.
If King-killers bold are excluded from bliss,
Old Bradshaw (that feels the reward on it e're this)
Had better been nothing then what now he is.
Blind Colonel Hewson that lately did crawl,
To a lofty degree from a low Cobler's stall;
Did bring all to nothing when Awl came to Awl.
Your Gallant that Rants it in delicate clothing,
Though lately he was but a pitiful low thing;
Pays Landlord, Draper, and Tailor with nothing.
The nimble tongued Lawyer that pleads for his pay,
When Death does arrest him and bear him away;
At the general Bar will have nothing to say.
Whores that in Silk were by Gallants embraced,
By a rabble of Prentices lately were chased;
Their courting and sporting comes to nothing at last.
If any Man tax me with weakness of Wit,
And say that on nothing I nothing have Writ,
I shall answer, Ex nihilo nihil fit.
Yet let his discretion be never so tall,
This very word nothing shall give it a fall,
For writing of nothing I comprehend all.
Let every Man give the Poet his due,
'Cause then 'twas with him as now it is with you;
He studied it when he had nothing to do.
This very word nothing if took the right way,
May prove advantageous for what would you say?
If the Vint'ner should cry there is nothing to pay.
SONG LIVE.
Cupid once was weary grown
With Women's errands, laid him down
On a refreshing Rosy Bed
The same sweet Covert harbored
A Be, and as she always had
Aquarrel with Loves idle Lad;
Stings the soft Boy; Pains and Fears
Straight melts him into Cries and Tears:
As Wings and Feet would let each other,
Home he hastens to his Mother
Then on her knees he hangs his head
And cries Oh Mother! I am dead,
An ugly Snake they call a Be
(Oh see it swells) has murdered me;
Venus with smiles replies, O Sir,
Does a Bees sting make all this stir,
Think what pains then attend those Darts,
Wherewith thou still art wounding hearts,
E'n let it smart, may chance that then
Thou Wilt learn more pity toward Men.
Philomel and Charon. SONG LV.
Phil. CHaron, Oh gentle Charon let me woo thee
By tears and pity now to come unto me.

Char. What voice so sweet and charming do I hear?
Speak what thou art.

Phil. I prithee first draw near:

Char. A sound I hear but nothing yet can see,
Speak what thou art?

Phil. Oh Charon pity me!
I am a Bird, and though no name I tell
My Warbling Note will say I am Philomel.

Char. What Is that to me, I waft no Fish nor Fowls,
Nor Beasts nor Birds, but only humane Souls.

Phil. Alas for me!

Char. Shame on thy witching Note,
That made me thus hoise Sail and bring my Boat:
But I Will return what mischief brought thee hither?

Phil. A deal of Love and much, much grief together.

Char. If this be all I am gone.

Phil. For Love I pray thee.

Char. Talk not of love, all pray but few Souls pay me.

Phil. I Will give thee sighs and tears.

Char. Will tears and sighs pay scores?
For patching Sails, for mending Boats and Oars.

Phil. I Will beg a penny, and I Will sing so long
Till thou shall say I have paid thee with a Song.

Char. Why then begin:

Phil. And all the while we make
Our slothful passage over the Stygian Lake:
Thou and I Will sing to make these dull shades merry,
Which else with tears would doubtless drown our Ferry.

SONG LVI.
WHat an Ass is he
That waits on a Woman's leisure,
For a minutes pleasure
And yet perhaps may be
Gulled at last and lose her,
What an Ass is he.
Shall I sigh and die
Cause a Maid denies me,
And that she may try,
Suffer patiently;
Oh no Fate shall tie me
To such cruelty.
Love is all my Life
For it keeps me doing,
Yet my Love and Wooing
Is not for a Wife;
It is good eschewing
Warring care and strife.
What need I to care
For a Woman's favor,
If another have her
Why should I despair;
When for Gold and labor
I can have my share.
If I fancy one
And that one do love me,
Yet deny to prove me,
Farewell, I am gone:
She can never move me,
Farewell, I am gone.
If I chance to see
One that is brown, I love her
Till I see another
That Is more brown than she:
For I am a Lovet
Of my Liberty.
Every day I change
And at once love many,
Yet not tied to any,
For I love to range;
And if one should stay me
I should think it strange.
What if she be old
So that she have riches.
Youth and Form bewitches,
But it is store of Gold
Cures lascivious Itches,
So the Critics hold.
SONG LVII.
I Know more then Apollo
For whilst that he was sleeping,
I saw the Stars
At mortal Jars,
And watery Neptune weeping.
I saw fierce Mars contending
With his bright fiery Face,
Saturn likewise
Threatening the Skies
Cariering with a Grace.
Venus with all her Train
Of Heavenly Nymphs was dancing,
Revelling all night
They vanished quite
And Pegasus left prancing.
Sol hid himself, and Phoebe
Plucked in her Horns for fear,
And Jove did fly
Through the Gallery
But his Messenger did swear.
Astronomers from hence
Might Britains State pourtray,
Our Sun's a sleep
Let England weep
Impiety bears sway.
Meteors, not Stars Eclipse
Our Hemisphere I think,
If they be crowned
The World turns round,
We Are all undone let us drink.
SONG LVIII.
HOld back thy Hours dark night till we have done
The day will come too soon,
Young Maids will curse thee if thou steal'st away,
And leave their blushes open to the day:
Stay, stay, and hide
The blushes of the Bride.
Stay Gentle night and with thy darkness cover
The kisses of my Lover,
Stay and confound her Tears and her shrill cryings,
Her weak denyals, vow and often dyings:
Stay and hide all,
But help not though she call.
SONG LIX.
COurtier if thou need'st wilt Wive
From this Lesson learn to thrive,
If to match it be thy Fate
Let her surpass in Birth and State;
Let her curious garments be
Twice above thine own degree;
This will draw great eyes upon her
Gain her Servants, and thee Honor.
SONG LX.
POor Citizen, if thou will be
A happy Husband, learn of me,
To set thy Wife first in thy Shop:
A fait, kind, sweet Wife, sets a poor Man up;
What though thy shelves be never so bare,
A Woman still is current Ware,
Each Man will cheapen, Foe and Friend,
But whilst thou art at the other end;
What e're thou see, or what do hear,
Fool have no eye to, nor no Ear:
And after Supper for her sake,
When thou have fed, snort, though thou wake;
What though the Gallants call thee Mome,
Yet with thy Lanthorn light her home:
I am confident but will not tell,
Where such a Citizen does dwell.
A Serenade. SONG LXI.
THou joy of all hearts, and delight of all eyes,
Natures chief, and Beauties chief prize;
Look down you will discover,
Here Is a faithful young vigorous Lover;
With a heart full as true
As e're languisht for you,
Here Is a faithful young vigorous Lover;
The heart that was once a Monarch in's breast
Is now your poor Captive, and can have no rest,
'Twil never give over,
But about your sweet bosom will hover:
Dear Miss let it in,
By Heaven it is no sin,
Here Is a faithful young vigorous Lover.
SONG LXII.
CLoris when you disperse your influence,
Your dazzling beams are quick and clear,
You so surprise and wound the sense,
So bright a Miracle you appear:
Admiring Mortals you astonish so,
No other Deity they know;
But think that all Divinity's below.
One charming look from your Illustrious face
Is able to subdue mankind,
So sweet, so powerful a grace
Makes all Men Lovers but the blind:
Nor can they freedom by resistance gain,
For each embraces the soft chain;
And never struggles with the pleasing pain.
SONG LXIII.
When first my free heart
Was inspired by desire,
So loft was the wound,
And so gentle the fire;
My sighs were so sweet,
And so pleasant the smart,
I pitty'd the slave
That had never lost his heart:
He thinks himself happy,
And free; but alas!
He Is far from that Heaven
Which Lovers possess.
In Nature was nothing
That I could compare
With the beauty of Chloris
I thought her so fair;
A Wit so Divine
All her sayings did fill,
A Goddess she seemed;
And I thought of her still:
With a zeal more enflamed,
And a passion more true,
Then a Martyr in Flames
For Religion can show.
More virtues and graces
I found in her mind,
Then the Schools can invent,
Or the gods e're designed.
She seemed to be mine
By each glance of her eye,
If Mortals might aim
At a blessing so high.
Each day, with new favors,
New hopes she did give;
But alas! what is wished
We too soon do believe.
With awful respect
While I loved, I admired,
But feared to attempt
What so much I desired,
In a moment my Joys
And my hopes were destroyed,
A Shepherd more daring
Fell on and enjoyed:
Yet in spite of my Fate,
And the pains I endure,
In a second Amor
I will seek for my cure.
SONG LXIV.
What does the fair Clariza mean,
To tantalize her Servant so?
She frowns, and sweetly smiles again;
Whence these alternate Fancies flow,
Flong to know.
Though they for trivial causes are,
Each glance to me's a several Fate;
My Heart's the Ship, her Eye the Star;
The Port it Sails to, love, or hate,
Which on her wait.
When sad Aurora's clouded dress
Seems to portend a stormy day,
The dying flowers their heads depress
But take new Life from Sol's bright Ray,
I fare like they.
Though Love has made me Reason's Foe
Some weak reflections still remain,
Which her deriding scorn do show,
By which my faults, and her disdain
I see too plain.
Yet let her know that still I love;
If that is presumptuous, I adore:
But if my Fate uncertain prove,
And she mysterious, as before,
I Will love no more.
To all, but that Divinest she
My flame shall ever be unknown:
If just contempt my purchase be;
My ill success I Will never own
To more than one.
Neither favor, nor force, nor fear, nor delight,
Shall make me discover, if she will but Write.
SONG LXV.
BE jolly my friend,
For the Money we spend
On Women and Wine, to our selves we do lend:
The Ladies embraces,
And our Carbuncled Faces,
Will gain us more credit, then the Muses, or the Graces.
Then Sirrah, be quicker,
And bring us more Liquor;
We Will have nothing to do with Physician, or Vicar:
We Will round with our Bowls,
Till our passing Bell toles,
And trust no such Quacks with our Bodies or Souls.
SONG LXVI.
CEase Chloris, cease to wonder why
My cheeks so pale, so dim my eye;
Admire no more my shortened breath,
No more foretell m'approaching death:
For now it only lies in you,
To make your Omen false, or true.
From the Physician you in vain
Inquire the Nature of my pain;
In vain you weep; for, when you please,
You, only you can give me ease:
And none will think you truly grieve
For one you care not to relieve.
By meaner passions you endure
What by a nobler you may cure:
Change but your Pity into Love,
And so the cause in both remove.
This by a strange discovery,
You Will cheat the World, yourself, and me.
SONG LXVII.
AH! fading Joy
How quickly art thou past!
Yet we thy ruin have;
And what too soon would die, help to destroy,
As if the cares of humane Life were few,
We seek out new,
And follow Fate, which does too fast pursue.
In vain does Natures bounteous hand supply,
What pievish mortals to themselves deny.
See how on every Bough the Birds express,
In wild Notes, their happiness:
Not anxious how to get, or spare,
They on their Mother Nature lay their care.
Why then should Man the Lord of all below,
Such troubles choose to know,
As none of all his Subjects undergo.
Chorus.
Hark, hark! the Waters fall,
And with a murmuring sound
Dash, dash upon the ground,
To gentle slumbers call.
SONG LXVIII.
A Curse on the Zealous and Ignorant crew,
That languish all day
And with passion obey
The senceless decrees that Platonicks pursue:
How poor and unhappy
Unhappy are those pretenders,
Who fearless of scandal or vulgarly shame,
Diminish their flame.
But blessed is the Man that with freedom enjoys,
A beauty whose eyes
Like the Stars in the Skies,
Produce new delights till his Appetite cloys;
How happy unhappy
How happy are these pretenders.
Who fearless of scandal or vulgar reproach
Pursues his debauch.
Elizium's a grief and a torment compared
To that we can prove
In enjoyment of Love
Where Lovers in raptures still meet a reward:
The tales of the Ancient
Of future delights are ungrounded,
In loves kind fruition where Souls have access,
Oh there is the true bliss.
SONG LXIX.
A Dieu my Cordelia, my dearest adieu,
No passion more slighted, was ever more true,
No torment severer than this could you prove
To enjoin him by absence that is chained by your love;
Subdued by your charms y'inflam'd my desire,
Till a spark from your eyes, set me all on fire;
O cruelty shown, no offense but Love known
Exiled and out-lawed by a hard hearted Stone.
SONG LXX.
OH name not the day least my senses reprove,
And curse my poor heart for the knowledge of Love;
Ah the ignorant fate of a fearful young Lover,
When a sign is returned not to have Wit to discover:
To delay a kind Nymph from her hour of design
Is to dig for a Treasure and sink in the Mine.
A Musical Instruction for a Young Lady. SONG LXXI.
TO play upon the Vial if
A Virgin will begin,
The first of all she must know her Cliff
And all the stops therein:
Her Prick she must hold long enough
Her Back-falls gently take,
Her touch must gentle be, not rough,
At each stroke she must shake.
She must unto her Bow fly,
And stick close to her Fiddle,
Her Feet must hold the lower end
And her knees must hold the middle:
Two fingers on the Hair must lie
And two upon the Back;
She must ever keep true time,
And with her Feet it pat.
And when she has as she would have
She must it gently thrust,
Up, Down, Swift, Slow, at any rate
As she her self does list:
When by experience she does find
That she grows something cunning;
She Will never be contented in her mind
But whilst the Bow is running.
SONG LXXII.
When first my dear Delia my heart did surprise,
By the attraction of Beauty, and power of her Eyes,
I trembled and sighed, and steadfastly gazed,
Until all my thoughts into raptures were raised:
That Monarch's unworthy who grudges to part,
With Scepter and Crown to attain such a Heart.
SONG LXXIII.
HOw bonny and brisk, how pleasant and sweet,
Were Jenny and I while my passion is strong;
So cagerly each others flame we did meet
That a minutes delay did appear to be long:
The Vows that I made her she sealed with a kiss
Till my Soul I had lost in a rapture of bliss.
I vowed and I thought I could ever have loved
Where beauty and kindness together I found,
So sweetly she looked, and so sweetly she moved
That I fancied my strength with my joys to abound:
For the pleasures I gave she did doubly requite
By finding out ever new ways to delight.
At last when enjoyment had put out my fire
My strength was decayed and my passion was done,
So palled was my Fancy, so tame my desire
That I from the Nymph very fain would have gone:
Ah Jenny said I we adore you in vain,
For Beauty enjoyed does but turn to disdain.
SONG LXXIV.
THey call, they call, what voice is that?
A Lady in despair,
Whose Tears and Sorrows comes too late,
Her losses to repair;
By too much Pride I Have lost a heart
I languish to regain,
And yet I Would kill the Man I love
E're own my pleasing pain:
Some gentle spirit show the Fate,
Of him I love, but fain would hate.
In vain, in vain, thou seek'st our aid
Thy passion to remove,
For see alas the foul event
Of thy too Tragic Love;
See, see, the Crown thou did disdain
Another Brow must wear,
Then sigh and weep no more in vain
But die in deep despair:
May this be all proud Beauties fate
Still to repent their Pride too late.
SONG LXXV.
NAy let me alone
I protest I Will be gone,
It Is a Folly to think
I Will be subject to one;
Never hope to confine
A young Gallant to dine,
Like a Scholar of Oxford
On none but a Loin:
For after enjoyment our bellies are full,
And the same Dish again makes the Appetite dull.
By your wantoning Art
Of a sigh and a start,
You endeavor in vain
To inveigle my heart,
For the pretty disguise
Of your languishing eyes,
Will never prevail
With my Sinews to rise:
It Is never the Mode in an amorous Treat,
When a Lover has dined to persuade him to eat.
Faith Betty the Jest
Is almost at the best,
It Is only variety
Makes up the Feast;
For when we are enjoyed
And with pleasures are cloyed,
The vows that we made
To love ever are void:
And now pretty Nymph it was ever unfit,
That a meal should be made of a relishing bit.
SONG LXXVI.
TYrant thou seek in vain
With her pure blood thy guilty Sword to stain,
Heaven does that sacred blood design
To be the source of an immortal Line:
Death will not dare to touch that heart
Which Love has chosen for his Dart.
Chorus.
Fair Innocence and Beauty are
Of watchful Heaven the chiefest care,
But the devouring Monster shall
A Sacrifice to Justice fall.
Richmond does fly to your redress
Love's Messengers can do no less,
His Sword shall with one blow
Cut off your Fetters, and Tyrants too:
All resistance vain will prove
When valout is inspired by Love.
Chorus.
Tyrants by Heaven and Earth are cursed
They swell with blood until they burst,
But Lovers are wise Natures care
What Tyrants ruin they repair.
SONG LXXVII.
AST was Walking
In a May Morning,
I heard a Bird sing
Cuckoo.
Upon a Tree of choice
She sung with pleasant voice,
Which made my heart rejoice, Cuckoo.
She noddled up and down,
And she swore by her Crown,
Her Friends lived in this Town,
Cuckoo.
All you that Married be
Come learn this Song of me,
And so we shall agree to be;
Cuckoo
Upon a Tree.
SONG LXXVIII.
GOd Cupid's for certain as foolish as blind,
To settle his heart upon people unkind,
His punishment's just for not having regard
To gentle complyers, but ungrateful and hard.
And you will find it for ever like Oracle true,
Love will fly the pursuer, the flyer pursue.
As shadows do follow those who run away,
And fly those that follow, as if 'twere at play;
As Death soonest searches Men fearing to die,
From those who wish for him he farthest does fly.
So you will find it for ever like Oracle true,
Love will fly the pursuer, the flyer pursue.
If a shade you embrace, you will find your hands empty,
If you court a fair face she will nothing but tempt ye:
Reciprocal kindness you will always see missing,
Returning base scorn, as bad as a hissing.
So you will find it for ever like Oracle true,
Love will fly the pursuer, the flyer pursue.
The Lovers hard fate is sure from above,
True love meets disdain, as disdain does with Love,
Or else flesh and blood could never be so cruel
To give gentle flame so dismal a Fuel.
Chorus.
Thus you will find it for ever like Oracle true,
Love will fly the pursuer, the flyer pursue.
SONG LXXIX.
I Would have you quoth he,
Would you have me quoth she,
O where Sir?
In my Chamber quoth he,
In your Chamber quoth she,
Why there Sir?
To kiss you, quoth he,
To kiss me, quoth she,
O why Sir?
Cause I love it, quoth he,
Do you love it, quoth she,
So do I Sir.
SONG LXXX.
WHat shall we do?
When our eyes are surrounded,
With Beauties like you,
Our hearts must be wounded.
If we fly from the War,
Your Darts do o're-take us;
And if we stay there,
Your Captives you make us:
Engaging, or flying, we are sure to be slain:
Then who is so mad, such a Fight to maintain!
And yet, Oh! how sweet
Are the wounds of your glances!
Then nobly we will meet,
Though we fall by your Lances:
When your smiles do evince
That our Death will be pleasant,
Better die like a Prince
Then live like a Peasant:
If engaging, or flying, we are certain to die
It Is courage to fight, and a folly to fly.
SONG LXXXI.
THou art so fair, and cruel too,
I am amazed, what shall I do
To compass my desire?
Sometimes thy eyes do me invite,
But when I venture, kill me quite,
Yet still increase my fire.
Ost have I tried my love to quell,
And thought it is fury to repel,
Since I no hopes do find:
But when I think of leaving thee,
My heart as much does torture me,
As 'twould rejoice, if kind.
I still must love, though hardly used,
And never offer but resus'd;
Can any suffer more?
Be coy, be cruel, do thy worst,
Though for thy sake I am accursed;
I must and will adore.
SONG LXXXII.
Lo! behind a Scene of Seas,
Under a Canopy of Trees;
The fair new golden World was laid
Sleeping like a harmless Maid,
Till alas! she was betrayed:
In such shades Urania lay,
Till Love discovered out a way;
And now she cry's, some power above,
Save me from this Tyrant Love.
Her poor Heart had no defense,
But it is Maiden innocence;
In each sweet retiring eye
You might easily descry:
Troops of yielding beauties fly;
Leaving rare unguarded Treasure,
To the Conquerours Will and Pleasure:
And now she cry's, some power above,
Save me from this Tyrant Love.
Now, and then, a straggling frown,
Through the shades skipt up and down,
Shooting such a piercing dart,
As would make the Tyrant smart,
And preserve her Lips and heart:
But alas her Empire's gone,
Throne, and Temples all undone:
And now she cry's, some power above,
Save me from this Tyrant Love.
Charm alost, the stormy Winds,
That may keep these Golden minds,
And let Spaniard's love be tore,
On some cruel Rocky Shore;
Where he will put to Sea no more.
Lest poor conquered beauty cry,
Oh I Am wounded! Oh I die!
And then, there is no power above,
Can save me from this Tyrant Love.
SONG LXXXIII.
I Never shall henceforth approve
The Deity of Love
Since he could be,
So much unjust by wounding me,
To leave my Mistress free.
As if my shame could leave a Print
Upon a heart of flint;
Can flesh and stone
Be e're converted into one,
By my poor flame alone?
Were he a God, he would neither be,
Partial to her nor me,
But by a Dart,
Directed into eithers Heart;
Make both confess his Art.
Thus being melted with his subtle fire,
Our loves might mingle into one desire.
SONG LXXXIV.
WHy lovely Celia should I fear,
To tell you that I love;
Since I no other shape can wear,
But what you may approve:
What fault can you with my bright passion find,
That must be as immortal as your mind?
It Is secret friendship that I bring,
Friendship the Soul of Love;
A rich, though long a banished thing,
To those blessed Souls above:
Only this just return from you I crave,
As you possess my heart, I yours may have.
The Treacherous, he that proffers bliss,
By glittering joyntures made;
He only the Impostor is,
By which you are betrayed:
How vainly will it by you then be sought,
To gain that freedom, which your Tyrant brought.
The crafty Leopards, so does win,
On herds that fearless lie;
With that enamel of his skin,
Till the surprised must die:
Too late alas! then strives the Captive prey,
From the insulting foe to get away.
A Mad man's Song. LXXXV.
IN Caves sull of Skulls, and rotten old bones,
There she sighs in the day time, and in the night groans;
Amongst Hosts of the guilty for ever she will howl,
And in beds full of Serpents Eternally roll:
But I and rene 'll be merry,
Amongst happy Lovers we'll play;
Ah Charon make have with your Ferry,
Row hard and I Will double your pay.
A Dialogue between Sorrow, and one Afflicted. SONG LXXXVI.
Afflict. O Sorrow, sorrow, say where do thou dwell?

Sorrow. In the lowest Room of Hell:

Afflict. Art thou born of human race?

Sorrow. No, no, I have a furious face.

Afflict. Art thou of City, Town, or Court?

Sorrow. I to every place resort:

Afflict. Why? O why?
Into the World was Sorrow sent?

Sorrow. Men afflicted best repent.

Afflict. What do thou seed on?

Sorrow. Broken Sleep:

Afflict. What take thou pleasure in?

Sorrow. To weep,
To sob, to pine, to groan,
To wring my hands, and sit alone

Afflict. When, O when shall Sorrow quiet have?
Never, Never, Never,
Never till she find a Grave.

SONG LXXXVII.
Whilst Alexis lay pressed in her Arms he loved best,
With his hands round her neck, and his head on her breast;
He found the fierce pleasure too hasty to stay,
And his Soul in the Tempest just flying away.
When Coelia saw this, with a sigh and a kiss
She cried, Oh my dear I am robbed of my bliss:
It Is unkind to your Love, and unfaithfully done,
To leave me behind you, and die all alone.
The youth though in have, and breathing his last,
In pity died slowly, whilst she died more fast:
Till at length she cried, now, my Dear, now let us go;
Now die my Alexis, and I will die too.
Thus entranced they did lie, till Alexis did try
To recover new breath, that again he might die;
Then often they died, but the more they did so,
The Nymph died more quick, and the Shepherd more slow.
The double Health. SONG LXXXVIII.
TUrn off the Glass it is a crime to see it full
Drinking dead liquor, has made us so dull;
Let slaves and Phanaticks be subject to care
Deep thoughts, and affairs our fierce enemies are.
On the Death of Mr. Pelham Humphry. SONG LXXXIX.
DId you not hear the hideous groans
The shrieks and heavy moans,
That spread themselves over all the pensive Plain,
And rend the breast of many a tender Swain;
'Twas for Amyntas dead and gone:
Sing you forsaken Shepherds, sing his praise
In careless melancholy Lays,
Lend him a little doleful breath
For Amyntas, poor Amyntas cruel Death:
'Twas thou that made dead words to live,
Thou that dead numbers did inspire
With charming Voice and tuneful Lyre,
That Life to all but to thy self could give:
Why could thou not thy wondrous art bequeath,
Poor Amyntas, poor Amyntas, cruel Death.
Chorus.
Sing pious Shepherds, sing while you may
Before the approaches of the fatal day;
For you your selves that sing this mournful Song:
Alas e're it be long
Shall like Amyntas breathless be:
Though more forgotten in the Grave then be.
SONG XC.
SUre it is so, then let it go
Let the giddy-brain'd times run round,
Let the Cobbler be crowned,
And Monarchy thus we recover:
Let Fools go and Preach,
And the Apes go and teach,
And the Clown be the amorous Lover.
Let Fortune be blind and Love prove unkind
And a Cobbler as stout as Hector,
Let Diana turn Whore
And Excise-men grow poor,
And a Brewer a second Protector.
Let the great Epicure no Junkets endure,
And an excellent Tradesman go hoop Sir,
Let a Whore-master hap
To want a good Clap
And a Tailor at last turn Trooper.
Let Merchants want gains
And Lovers high strains,
And a Farmer his skill in Cowing,
Let the Lawyer come down
To put off his Gown
And put on his Jacket for Plowing.
Let an Hostler want dung
And an Orator Tongue
And the Poets a sense of framing,
Let a Liar want skill
To have Wit at will,
And a common shark know no gaming.
He that never read nor writ
Shall be the only Wit
And in these and the like disasters,
There will none think me rude
If I boldly conclude
This is a mad World my Masters.
SONG XCI.
'TWas in the pleasant Month of May
On a Morn by break of day,
Forth I walked the Woods so wide
When as May was in her pride;
There I espied all alone
Phyllida and Coridon.
Much ado there was I wot,
He could love but she could not,
His Love he said was ever true,
Nor was mine e're false to you:
He said that he had loved her long,
She said that Love should have no wrong.
Cwydon would kiss her then
She said Maids must kiss no Men,
Till they kiss for good and all
Then she made the Shepherds call,
Their fellow Swains to witness sooth
Never was loved so fair a youth.
Then with many a pretty Oath
As yea and nay, and Faith and Troth,
Such as silly Shepherds use
When they will not love abuse;
Love that had been long deluded
Was with kisses sweet concluded:
And Phillida with Garlands gay
Was crowned the Lady of the May.
SONG XCII.
WHat makes you all so dull
You lively Lads that love,
The pleasures of the Plain
And sport enchanting Jove:
My jolly Muse
Brings other News
And time invites to go,
Fill Nectar's Cup
The Hare is up,
We come to sing, so, ho.
My Pipe is of the pure
Cane of the Winter Corn,
By force of Cynthia's lure
Transformed into a Horn:
Aurora's look
Has changed my crook,
Into a bended Bow,
And Pan shall keep
My patient Sheep
While here we sing, so, ho.
Let us like Swains
That only undergoes,
The pleasures of the Plains
In place where Boreas blows:
And every Night
Take our delight
With our she-friend and so:
Both night and day
We'll sport and play
And merrily sing, so, ho.
SONG XCIII.
THe Glories of our Birth and State
Are shadows not substantial things,
There is no Armor against our Fate
Death lays his Icy hands on Kings,
Scepter and Crown
Must tumble down
And in the Dust be equal laid,
With the poor crooked Sithe and Spade.
Some Men with Swords may reap the Field
And plant fresh Laurels where they kill,
But their strong Nerves at length must yield,
They tame but one another still:
Early or late
They stoop to Fate
And must give up their murmuring breath,
Whilst the pale Captive creeps to death.
The Laurel withers on your Brow
Then boast to more your mighty deeds,
For on Death's Purple Altar now
See where the Victor Victim bleeds;
All Heads must come
To the cold Tomb,
Only the Actions of the just
Smell sweet and blossom in the Dust.
SONG XCIV.
When Aurelia first I courted
She had Youth and Beauty too,
Killing Pleasures when she sported
And her charms were ever new:
Conquering time has now deceived her,
Which her Glory did uphold,
All her Arts can never retrieve her
Poor Aurelia's growing old.
Those airy Spirits which invited
Are retired and move no more,
And those Eyes are now benighted
Which were Comets heretofore:
Want of these abate her Merits
Yet I have passion for her Name;
Only warm and vigorous Spirits
Kindle and maintain her flame.
SONG XCV.
STill to be neat, still to be dressed
As you were going to a Feast,
Still to be Powdered, still Perfumed,
Lady it is to be presumed;
Though Arts hid causes are not found,
All is not sweet, all is not sound.
Give me a look give me a face
That makes simplicity a grace,
Robes sweetly flowing, Hair as free,
Such sweet neglect more takes me:
Then all the Adulteries of Art
They wound mine eyes but not my heart.
Strephon and Daphne. SONG XCVI.
Strephon. COme my Daphne come away
We do wast the Crystal day,
It Is Strephon calls,

Daphne. What would my Love?

Strephon. Come follow to the Myrtle Grove,
Where I with Venus will prepare
New Chaplets to adorn thy Hair.

Daphne. Strephon were I shut in this Tree
I Would rend the Bark to follow thee.

Strephon. My Shepherdess make have
The minutes fly too fast:
Let Us to those cooler shades where I,
Blind as Cupid in thine eye,
Betwixt thy Breasts will ever stray,
In such warm Snows
Who would not lose his way?
Chorus.
We Will laugh and leave the World behind,
Those Gods themselves that see
Shall envy thee and me
And never taste such joy,
When they embrace a Deity.

SONG XCVII.
Why should we not laugh and be jolly
Since all the World is mad
And lulled in a dull Melancholy,
He that wallows in store
Is still gaping for more,
And that makes him as poor
As the wretch that never any thing had.
How mad is that damned Money-monger
That to purchase to him and his Heirs,
Grows shrivel'd with thirst and hunger,
While we that are bonny
Buy Sack with ready Money
And never trouble the Scriveners Lawyers.
Those Gulls that by scraping and toiling
Do swell their Revenues so fast,
Get nothing by all their turmoiling,
But are marks for each Tax,
While they load their own backs,
With the heavier packs
And lie down galled and weary at last.
While we that do traffic in tipple,
Can baffle the Gown and the Sword,
Whose Jaws are so hungry and gripple,
We never trouble our heads
With Indentures or Deeds
And our Wills are composed in a word.
Our Money shall never-indite us
Nor drag our free minds to thrall,
Nor Pirates nor Wracks can affright us,
We that have no Estates,
Fear no Plunder nor Rates
We can sleep with open Gates
He that lies on the ground cannot fall.
We laugh at those Fools whose endeavors
Do but fit them for Prisons and Fines,
When we that spend all are the savers,
For if Thieves do break in
They go out empty again
And the Plunderers lose their designs.
Then let us not think on to morrow
But tipple and laugh while we may,
To wash from our hearts all sorrow,
Those Cormorants which
Are troubled with an Itch
To be mighty and rich
Do but toil for the Wealth which they borrow.
The Mavor of the Town with his Ruff on
What a P -- is he better than we,
He must vail to the Man with his Buff on;
Though he Custard may eat
And such lubbarly Meat,
Yet our Sack makes us merryer then he.
SONG XCVIII.
NO I will sooner trust the Wind
When falsely kind
It courts the pregnant Sails into a Storm;
And when the smiling Waves persuade
Be willingly betrayed,
Then thy deceitful Eyes or Form.
Go and beguile some easy heart
With thy vain Art,
Thy smiles and kisses on those Fools bestow;
Who only see the calms that sleep
On this smooth flattering deep,
But not the hidden dangers know.
They that like me this falsehood prove
Will scorn thy Love,
Some may deceived at first adore thy Shrine,
But he that as they Sacrifice
Does willingly fall twice
Dies his own Martyr and not thine.
SONG XCIX.
BEauty and Love once fell at odds
And thus reviled each other,
Said Love I am one of the gods
And you wait on my Mother:
Thou have no power over Men at all
But what I gave to thee;
Nor are thou longer fair or sweet
Then Men acknowledge thee.
Away fond Boy, then Beauty said,
We know that thou art blind,
But Men have knowing eyes and can
My Graces better find:
'T was I begot thee, Mortals know,
And called thee Blind Desire;
I made thy Quiver and thy Bow
And Wings to kindle fire.
Love then in anger flew away
And straight to Vulcan prayed,
That he would tip his shafts with scorn
To punish this proud Maid
Thus Beauty ever since has been
But courted for an hour,
To love a day is now a sin
Against Cupid and his power.
A Dialogue betwixt Neptune and Apollo occasioned by the death of the Earl of
Sandwich. SONG C.
Apol. I Charge thee Neptune as thou art just resign,
The most admired Sandwich, which is mine,
Whose loss creates a discord in the Spheres
And turns our melody to groans and tears.

Nept. Forbear to ask what is unjust to grant,
Thy charge and my desins are dissonant;
He Is mine by conquest what is thy pretense?

Apol. In Music his unequaled Excellence.

Nept. Heroic parts, I gave him, taught him how,
With thundering Canon; and a furrowed Brow;
To rule the surface of my Realm.

Apol. And I
By a Magnetic power in Harmony,
Made him a Conqueror to overcome,
All Souls that loved or liked Elysium.

Nept. Thy Seat is pleasant there all sweets do dwell,
But mine with rage and horror only swell:
Which lately is increased since Sandwich sent,
So many Religions to my Element,
Whose Emulation to a Princes Throne
Makes me keep Sandwich to preserve my own.
Chorus.
We'll sing his Requiem by some murmuring Brook,
On which as the Emblem of our grief we look:
And with our tears increase it to a Main;
Then sigh and weep till Sandwich come again,
Or else we never, never will refrain.

The Quakers Song, CI.
YE she-friends and he-friends whoever inherit,
Infallible Light in dark Lanthorn of Spirit,
Come prick up your Ears and behold I will fit ye,
With an Hymn that is called by the Wicked a Dirty.
In the scuffle we lately have had with the Baptist,
Wherein both our honor and interest wrapped is,
Though our Logic perhaps be too weak to dispute 'em
We hope by a Ballad at least to confute 'em.
For though Fiddle and Organs are both Babylonish,
Wherewith the Profane delighted alone is,
Yet in such a case Inspiration may haunt
Even us which are perfect to warble a chaunt.
Then let us a while our trembling lay by;
And quit our still meetings to set up a cry,
Let Us challenge and Rant, talk loud and be bold
For the Spirit at present does move us to scold.
It Is time to exclaim as receiving the wrong,
And take up that carnal Weapon the Tongue;
For if we delay, our whole party must sink,
And our long boasted light go out in a stink.
Our juggling's so plain, will appear that each eye
Through the Mask of our holy pretenses will spy,
And see that a Quaker when stripped of his paint
Is nearer of Kin to an Atheist than Saint.
Then let us equivocate neatly and lay
A plausible meaning on all that we say,
And the very same Art that serves to excuses
At once shall condemn all those that accuse us.
This being done we point time and place
And come full prepared to bandy the case,
In the Barbican first we gave them a meeting,
And never was seen such a Bear-Garden greeting.
A Rabble thrust in from each end of the Town
And before half an Argument could be laid down,
In less time then a Man can a pot of Ale swallow
'Twas confirmed with a hoop, and denied with a hollow.
The place like a Hot-house appeared, and by hap
some Friends might be cured here of a Clap;
And if it were so I cannot but say
'Twas the best effect of our meeting that day.
For once more have at 'em, for without doubt
If we cannot confute we must tire them out;
And therefore sent word they were cowardly Lubbars,
If they would not in Spittle-fields venture a Rubbers.
Four hours and more we dispute in and out
To know what it was we should dispute about,
Which yet at the last was never agreed
But no matter for that we resolved to proceed.
'Twould have made Puss laugh, or Child in the Chrisomes,
To hear us chop Logic and talk Syllogisms;
That Spiritual Cantings of Naylor and's brood
Should Apostatize thus into Figure and Mood.
To see holy seed so grand a designer
As to turn Yea and Nay into Major and Minor,
Use Language o'th Beast Concedo or Perge,
And tickle their Tobies at length with an Ergo.
At first they came on like huffing Philistines
And needs would attempt to prove us no Christians:
When most by our wranglings already thought much
To believe that in truth either of us were such.
All Dialogues we cried down as profane
Though diverse of us had writ in that strain;
But that by a Figure must be understood
Making things bad in others, in us to be good.
But let Friends take notice how basely they wrong us.
By suggesting a Papist God bless us among us;
For there was no need of that I must tell ye,
Since each of us carries his Pope in his Belly.
Our selves to be Christians we loudly declare
But avoid the contest to prove that we are:
For we find that our interest does better agree,
To be counted Christians then truly to be.
Yet inveigl'd at last by a kind of a Wile
We were drawn into what we had shunned all the while;
But still we are safe (though shrewdly put to it)
For when all things fail, Inspiration can do it.
To this then we fly though certain it be,
Old Mahomet had as much claim to it as we;
However it serves to ward off a blow
For who shall refute what no Man can know.
For if Folks would have Wonders or Miracles done,
We confess we can instance at present but one,
That so many should Scripture and reason forsake
And in our ridiculous whimsies partake.
But though in good Form we would argue no more,
We went on with bawling as high as before,
For we knew that the Crowd would the glory afford,
To him that spoke loudest and had the last word.
To prove that we did our Antagonist beat
It Is enough for to say that we made them retreat,
And charged them bravely when we had done
In the Bear with an Echo they run Friends they run.
And to show that our Ammunition of Lungs,
Was yet not all spent nor weary our Tongues,
After this we began another new quoil
And fell all a Preaching in Rank and in file.
Thus in brief a strange clutter we kept and a stir
But what good came on it if I know I Am a Cur,
Only people went home some sick and some lame,
But all of them just as wise as they came.
SONG CII.
THou fair Usurper of my Fate
Tell me what my Lot shall be,
Must I languish at this rate
Without hope or help from thee;
And am I damned a slave to be,
Unto a truckling destiny.
Or is your Love that poison grown
Which inflicts those fatal Darts,
Which the god of Love alone
Did form for false rebellious hearts:
And must none then approach thy Love
But those who Martyrdom will prove.
Had thou thy liberty preserved
And still a nobler Sovereign been,
At what a rate had thou been served
When all thy Slaves had Rivals been;
Nay gods themselves had quit their sway
Proud of the glory to obey.
But stay, my passion grows too bold
Seeking your honor thus to stain,
It shows that Loyalty grows cold
When Subjects for reward complain:
Henceforth my passions shall declare
No perfect Love without despair.
SONG CIII.
Man. WHy Phillis to me so untrue and unkind,
Remember the Vow which you made,
Though Love cannot see, let not honor be blind
Whereon is the other betrayed.

Woman. Though Sir to your Bed true Allegiance I vowed,
I am not obliged by that Oath:
No longer then you keep both constant and true,
The same Vow obliges us both.

Man. Fair Nymph did you feel but those passions I bear,
My Love you would never suspect;
A heart made of steel must needs love the fair,
And what we love cannot neglect.

Chorus.
Then since we love both
Let us both be agreed
And seal both our Loves with a kiss;
From breaking our Oath
We shall both then be freed,
A Princess shall envy our bliss.
SONG CIV.
SInce Coelia's my Foe
To a Desert I Will go,
Where some River
For ever
Shall Echo my Woe;
The Trees will appear
More relenting than her,
The Morning
Adorning
Each Leaf with a Tear.
When I make my sad moan
To the Rocks all alone,
From each hollow
Will follow
A pityful groan:
But with silent disdain
She requites all my pain,
To my mourning
Returning
No answer again.
Then Coelia adieu
When I cease to pursue,
You Will discover
No Lover
Was ever so true:
Your sad Shepherd flies
From those dear cruel eyes
Who not seeing
His being
Decays and he dies.
But it is better to run
From the Fate we cannot shun,
Then for ever
To endeavor
What cannot be won:
What ye Gods have I done,
That Amyntas alone,
Is so treated
And hated
For loving but one?
SONG CV.
DIsputes daily arise and errors grow bolder,
Philosophers prattle how greedy's the Miser;
The more we should know then by being the older,
But plainly 't appears there is no body wiser:
He that spends what he has and wisely drinks all,
It Is he is the Man Mathematical.
SONG CVI.
NO, no, it is in vain
Though I sigh and complain,
Yet the secret I Will never reveal;
The wrack shall not tear it
From my Breast but I Will bear it
To the Grave where it ever shall dwell:
Oh would that the gods had created her low
And placed thee poor Hylas above,
Then, then, I a present might freely bestow
Of a heart that is all over Love.
Like the damned from the Fire
We may gaze and admire,
Yet never can hope to be blessed;
Oh the pangs of a Lover
That dares not discover
The poison that is lodged in his Breast:
Like a Deer that is wounded I bleeding run on
And fain I the torture would hide,
But Oh it is in vain, for where ever I run
The bloody Dart sticks in my side.
SONG CVII.
HAd Daphne Honor, Wealth or Fame,
Thou had some color for thy flame;
Or were she young she might excite
Thy lustful thoughts to appetite:
Were she or beautiful, or good,
She unawares might fire thy blood;
But being neither rich, young, chaste, nor fair,
To love is Dotage, Frenzy to Despair.
SONG CVIII.
NO Joys like to those of a new married Bride,
Who freely does make her own choice,
Where nothing but innocent Love does abide
Whilst with her kind Bedfellow she does rejoice:
Long may they continue in such pleasant charms
With faithful embroces in each others Arms.
The spritely young Bridegroom tastes of this bliss,
The day with their Friends they do spend;
At night with great freedom they hug and they kiss,
Both thinking that night will soon have an end.
Long may they continue in such pleasant charms
With saithful embraces in each others Arms.
The fruits of their pleasure they both do desire,
Which after nine Months they may find;
Both hope for an Offspring just like the own Sire,
And pray to Lucina that she will be kind.
Long may they continue in such pleasant charms
With faithful embraces in each others Arms.
He never is pleased when his Bride's out of sight,
She likewise his presence does crave,
So great is their Love and so sweet their delight,
One absent, the other no pleasure can have:
Long may they continue in such pleasant charms
With faithful embraces in each others Arms.
A happy success to so faithful a pair,
Can never be wanting be sure;
Much wealth and great honor to such as they are,
Will flow in a pace and for ever endure:
Long may they continue in such pleasant charms
With faithful embraces in each others Arms.
Long life will attend them till hoary old Age
Does call them to lie down to rest,
Cold Death with cold blood, then will gently engage.
And send them to the Grave and their Souls to be blessed.
Thus still they continue secure from harms,
Both lie in one Coffin in each others Arms.
That couple is blessed, who thus happily meet
Prosperity hedges them round,
Their embraces are pleasant, their kisses are sweet,
Delights of all sorts all their Life will abound.
Long may they continue in such pleasant charms
With faithful embraces in each others Arms.
But those that do marry for Money, not Love
Will never have peace in their mind,
They unto each other a sorrow will prove
And troublesome days they for ever will find:
May those never meet, who do marry for Gold
Where Love at a price in a Market is sold.
In discord and envy they ever will live,
Each day will beget a new strife;
Whilst angry words they to each other give
The Wife blames the Man, and the Man blames his Wife.
May those never meet, who do marry for Gold
Where Love at a price in a Market is sold.
She cries he don't love her, he swears she is a scold,
She finds his affections are dull,
Which causes her love in like manner grow cold
She vows to be pievish as he to the full:
May those never meet, who do marry for Gold
Where Love at a price in a Market is sold.
And since from her Husband she finds no delight,
It makes her abroad for to range,
She resolves in her heart to keep out of his sight,
For Women by Nature are subject to change:
May those never meet, who do marry for Gold
Where Love at a price in a Market is sold.
Then jealous he grows which perplexes his Soul,
And out of revenge she does horn him,
Whatever he says she resolves to control,
And replies with a frown, he is a fool and she scorns him.
May those never meet, who do marry for Gold
Where Love at a Price in a Market is sold.
SONG CIX.
COme all you Gallants that live near the Court,
Unto the brisk Dames of the City resort;
There Is none of your Misses can show you such sport,
As we, who for you do complain.
Some of our Husbands do live such dull lives,
So plunged in care, and for Wealth so contrives;
That scarce one Night in ten lie close to their Wives,
Which makes us so much to complain.
Betimes in the Morning abroad they do run,
Leaving their Wives in their beds alone,
Not minding that business which should be first done,
Which makes us so much to complaio.
Though many have Dullards, yet I have got one,
That keeps a young Miss who has his heart won,
For she sucks the Marrow, and I pick the Bone,
Which makes me full sore to complain.
Since so he disdains me, a Miss for to keep,
Soon into the favor of Gallants I Will creep;
Who shall the fore-room of Love's Treasury sweep,
And then let the Cuckold complain.
I Will buy me new Towers, laced Gowns of the best,
To the view of kind Lovers lay open my breast;
So by that they may know my mind to the rest:
And my languishing eyes shall complain.
I care not to tell you the place where I dwell,
But I go by the name of, Bright Madam Bell;
Because I love Clappers that makes me sound well,
Of which I will never complain.
When I by my Art had learnt the right way,
With Gallants and Tradesmen to sport and to play,
I Will tell you how many there came in one day;
And I had no cause to complain.
The first that attempted my Love for to win,
An old Gamester at Court long time he had been,
For he knew the right way to play at Inn and Inn,
Who made me leave off to complain.
When from me he went, a Sword-man soon got,
A sight of my Face, and if I Would deny not,
He would venture a pass if he died on the spot,
And I had no cause to complain.
As pretty an Archer as ever had been,
Made me stand for his Butt, and thought it no sin;
Quite up to the Feathers to shoot his Dart in,
Then I had no cause to complain.
Another brave Archer, a swaggering Spark,
Though the Curtains were draw'd, and I lay in the dark,
Yet he took such aim that he hit the right mark;
And of him I will never complain.
The next that approached was a Surgeon of Spain,
Who drew out-his Lancet to open my vein,
Which neatly he did, and never put me to pain;
And I had no cause to complain.
A very rich Merchant gave me Jewels fine,
With many choice dainties and good store of Wine;
To let him once dig in my hidden Mine,
And of which I cannot complain.
My passionate Landlord would not be content,
Until he had gained his Tenants consent,
He had one minutes pleasure for fifty weeks Rent,
No Cuckold of that can complain.
A Gentleman came that did once live at Bow,
He out of my Shop vowed never to go,
Until he had been in my Warehouse below,
And of which I could not complain.
A lusty stout Captain laid siege to my Fort,
For he knew by my looks I loved the sport,
And he had a Gun gave such a report:
That I could not at all complain.
The last was a Doctor well skilled in the Law,
I enflamed his blood, which made him to draw;
But my young Man peeped through the Keyhole and saw,
Which made me to fear he would complain.
When his Master next Morning was gone to the Strand
For to make him amends I quickly began,
For I let him do, as did the last Man:
Then vowed he would never complain.
And now to conclude I bid you all adien,
For I never will yield to love above two,
The Master, and Man, which my business can do,
For more I will never complain.
SONG CX.
GOd Cupid for ever,
I desire thy poor Quiver
And will never regard thy weak Bow;
Thy Arrows cannot hit me
Nor a Woman out-wit me
I am free from that pitiful woe:
Since my Jenny proves false, all her Sex I defy,
And I Will riot with Bacchus all night,
And laugh at the power of thy blind Deity
Full Glasses shall be my delight.
It Is a great piece of folly
For to live melancholy
And with whining young Lovers complain,
If a Miss prove unkind
I can alter my mind
And another more loving obtain.
To a pievish young slut I will never be confined
Whilst liberty I may enjoy;
No generous Mortal was ever designed
His freedom that way to destroy.
Then blessed be the hour
I was freed from the power
Of Cupid that silly young Boy,
Yet I will not deny
But sometimes by the by
The short pleasures of Love I Will enjoy:
That minutes delight being past, I am gone
And free from the Nymph and her charms,
Then happily meeting some other alone
I pleasantly die in her Arms.
Had Jenny been Loyal
I had never had the Trial
Of any but she all my Life,
Full often have I told her
Which made her the bolder
That I purposed to make her my Wife:
But she like a Wanton must needs be a Whore
So eager and hot was her flame,
Which made me to swear I would love her no more
But laugh at her folly and shame.
SONG CXI.
OH Caelia come tell me now
Why you your own pleasures delay,
How often have you heard me vow
That I loved you both night and day:
You seemingly grant my desire
Yet just at the push you're unkind;
Which kindles an amorous fire
And tortures a generous mind.
If that your love be such
That will with my humor agree,
I know you will not grutch
To venture your self with me:
You will me shall equally share
The delights we together create;
Why should we then longer forbear
Enjoyment often happens too late.
Then may you wish in vain
For what you do now refuse,
Then must you bear the pain
Because you did reason abuse:
Take it then whilst you may
The present time's always the best;
What hinders but that this day
With joys be ever blessed.
Nature does now command
To take our sweet delight,
How can you her withstand
Who says it must be this night:
Love does affirm the same
And reason does make it appear;
To delay our sport is a shame
What causes you then to fear.
Come by this kiss you shall
Nay prithee now be not coy,
By my life now or not at all
We Will try for to get a boy:
I by your Eyes can descry
Though faintly you bid me forbear;
That you love it as well as I,
Therefore pretty Rogue forbear.
Calia's Answer. SONG CXII.
I Have heard your amorous Tone
And now I do understand,
If that you had me alone
You Would make me obey your command:
Those kindnesses which I do grant.
May make you expect I Am a Whore;
Those favors treaster you will want
For I Will never be kind any more.
My Love to your person is such
That it will not with your humor agree,
And I fear I have loved you too much
Except you had more honesty;
Now that which you call a delight
Pray keep to your self and be hanged;
If by force you do put me to fright
I Will swear you shall soundly be banged.
I never shall wish for that
Which afterward I shall repent,
I know what you fain would be at
But without it you must be content:
I am not in the mind for to take
That thing you would so willingly give;
There Is another bargain to make
For honestly I will live.
Nature says no such thing
Nor will she so basely command,
That I such dishonor should bring
On my self, since I can you withstand;
But Love may do much I confess
Where folly does reason blind;
But I never to you did express
That I was so foolishly kind.
Go, go you are wantonly bent
And I hate for to hear you swear,
Except I do find you repent
Your company I shall forbear;
Your mark you have taken amiss
Believe me when truth I do tell;
Be thankful for this one kiss
And so pretty fool farewell.
Latin. SONG CXIII.
NUnc bibito totum
Nam est been notum
Quod pocula plena de vine;
Cor faciunt jucundum
Si fuerit immundum
Sic Romulus dixit Quirino:
Rex Vivat laetanter, vos omnes clamate,
Qui non vult habebit in sinum,
Jam bibe, tunc singulis vitrum date,
Cantabitur ad Mutatinum.
English. SONG CXIV.
NOw drink it all off
For it is known well enough
That brimmers of excellent Wine,
Will make the heart glad
Be it never so sad
So Romulus said to Quirine:
Now merrily all cry, God bless the King,
He that drinks not shall have it in's breast,
To every one see a full Glass you bring
And we'll sing till the Morn without rest.
A Catch. SONG CXV.
COme come bonny boys
Come away, make haste, come away,
We Will prove that our joys
Can admit of no tedious delay:
To the Tavern let us go and be merry,
With White Wind, brisk Claret and Sherry;
Our Dads are in Heaven we need not to fear
Because they have left us some hundreds a year.
Latin. SONG CXVI.
PLus scio quam Apollo,
Nam illo dormitante
Vidi aftra
Pugnantia,
Vulcano lachrymante.
Mars Venere concubuit
Muliere libidinesa:
Vulcanus vidit,
Illam deridet,
Tunc fuit ^diosa.
English. SONG CXVII.
I Know more then Apollo,
For whilst that he lay sleeping.
I saw the Stars
At mortal jars,
And Valcan he lay peeping.
And Mars he lay with Venus
A pretty wanton Woman,
But Vulcan saw
And did her claw
That now she is fit for no Man.
SONG CXVIII.
GReat Love to thy Deity, praises I Will sing,
A Requiem to sorrow because thou did bring;
Thy power I Will own, for why thou have freed me
From those desperate passions the Fates had decreed me:
A Heart hard as stone and conquering beauty
Must bend to Love's bow with Allegiance and duty.
Love's secret embraces who ever has known
When the bloods young and warm, and youth's blossom new blown,
To the god of that Love will certainly pay
His humble Devotious by night and by day:
A heart hard as stone, and a conquering beauty
Must bend to his bow with Allegiance and duty.
Loves humble and meek, Love's gentle and sweet,
Not moved with fresh passion when frowns he does meet;
He conquers by favors and wins by degrees
He Is partial to none for no Mortal he sees:
A heart hard as stone and conquering beauty
Must bend to his bow with Allegiance and duty.
The attraction of beauty may charm for a while,
And Man of his freedom does often beguile;
Admiring those features which do but ensnare
Till at length to our Foes sure Captives we are:
But a heart hard as stone and conquering beauty,
Must bend to Love's bow with Allegiance and duty.
When beauty presumes and resolves for to slight
All offers of Love and in Pride takes delight,
The sighs and the groans of a desperate Lover
With cruel disdain she endeavors to smother:
But a heart hard as stone and conquering beauty
Must bend to Love's bow with Allegiance and duty.
Fair Venus Love's Queen does his Arrows prefer,
Before the keen Sword of the great god of War;
Mars conquers but boa^es, but Love's darts they are such,
Those Souls they subdue which they happen to touch:
A heart hard as stone and conquering beauty
Must bend to Love's bow with Allegiance and duty.
The scornful young Nymph that will searce take a kiss,
But counts her disdain a peculiar bliss;
Poor Strephon alas does so wound by her hate
That Cupid takes pity and she now is his mate:
Thus a heart hard as stone and conquering beauty
Must bend to his bow with Allegiance and duty.
Those great Men of War who do count Love a toy
And to amorous Courtship do ever seem coy;
Yet at one time or other they are forced to yield
And think kisses more pleasant then the Ensigns in the Field:
Thus hearts hard as stone and conquering beauty
Must bend to Love's bow with Allegiance and duty.
The Country Swain that is always in labor
And never knew no Joys but a Pipe and a Tabor,
Now at length casts an Eye on some Joan of his crew
Then Love slips betwixt them and both does subdue:
A heart hard as stone and conquering beauty
Must bend to his bow with Allegiance and duty.
The Man of old Age who death does expect,
And all the Worlds vanities strives to neglect;
Yet often we find him with Love to be caught,
Then to a young Damsel he needs must be matched:
For a heart hard as stone and conquering beauty,
Must bend to his bow with Allegiance and duty.
Let the old and the young ones, the rich and the poor,
The name and the power of Cupid adore;
Since none can escape or be free from his darts
Which cunningly he does convey to our hearts:
A heart hard as stone and conquering beauty
Must bend to his bow with Allegiance and duty.
SONG CXIX.
WHen youth do agree
To be merry and free,
Let no one repine their enjoyment to see;
For equal's the pleasure which is to be had
Betwixt a young Lass and a lively young Lad.
Time swiftly does run
And old Age it will come,
Our days are half spent e're our pleasure's begun;
The present time's best, therefore take it whilst you may,
Who knows but out sorrows begin the next day.
He that always is sad
Must expect to be mad,
Good Wine and good company make the heart glad;
The daily fruition of which will create
Desights, and prevent our complaining of Fate.
It Is folly not Fate
Does troubles create
Then let us avoid it before it is too late;
Be jolly dear hearts for our Life's but a span,
And a hundred years hence we may love if we can.
Then give me a Lass
And good Wine a full glass,
The drousie Mechanick's a temperate Ass:
He studies to get but he knows not for who
Thus daily his trouble he seeks to pursue.
Perhaps when he is old
And his blood is grown cold,
He weds a young Whore, a Thief, and a Scold;
Who spends all he has and is ever at strife,
And calls him old Cuckold though she be his Wife.
Which makes him complain
But alas all in vain
For no better content he is like to obtain;
Then sighing he cries, oh the fault was my own
For to pass by the pleasures I once might have known
I may sit and repent
But must be content
Since now it is too late what is past to prevent;
This happens to greedy Curmudgeons who spend
Their youth to hoard up for their ruins in the end.
SONG CXX.
THe World is grown mad and turned upside down,
And to all that have sense it it easily known;
Their Words and their Actions do daily declare,
How far from civility moved they are;
The custom of Wedlock some would turn out of door,
And argue it is better to trade with a Whore.
What offspring then may we expect for to meet,
When Men pick up Wenches they meet in the street;
For a groats worth of Brandy or Alebeing wild,
The silly young wanton is gotten with child:
Then with a great confidence swear to your face,
That they have best luck who are Bastards by race.
Thus do they proceed to the fourth generation,
The spurious issue of base reprobation;
Just Cat after kind, like Father and Mother,
They take their debaucheries one from another:
Till Tyburn at last puts an end to their game
For thither they are Carted together with shame.
Now those that are guilty I fain would advise
To take my good counsel and learn to be wise,
You young Men wed Lasses of equal degree,
Then may you expect ever happy to be:
For those who live honest are blessings in store,
But curses for such as do Trade with a Whore.
A Wife that is honest, virtuous, and fair,
Is a Jewel whose worth is beyond all compare;
All day she is a comfort, and in bed a delight,
Her company's pleasant by day and by night:
Your Children with joy you may ever behold
They Will honor you both if you live to be old.
But he that does Company keep with a Whore,
Shall never be happy but ever be poor;
And for one Minutes pleasure if it be to be found,
The whole days delight in that minute is drowned:
For she still will crave till no more thou can give,
Thus with her in sorrow thou ever wilt live.
SONG CXXI.
HAppy is the Man that takes delight
In banqueting the senses,
That drinks all day and then at night
The height of joy commences:
With bottles Armed westand our ground
Full bumpers crown our blisses
We sing and roar the streets around
In Serenading Misses.
Pleasures thus free and unconfined
No drowsy crime reproaches,
No Heaven to a Frolic mind
No pleasures like debauches:
Whilst rambling thus, new joys we reap
In charms of Love and drinking;
Insipid Fops lie drowned in sleep
And the Cuckold he lies thinking.
SONG CXXII.
HOw severe is Fate to break a Heart
That never went a roving,
To torture it with endless smart
For too much constant loving:
I bleed, I bleed, I melt away,
And I wash my watery pillow;
I range the Woods alone all day
And I wrap me round in Willow.
SONG CXXIII.
HOw cruel is Fortune grown
To turn all my hopes to despair,
From bliss I am headlong thrown
And banished the fight of my Dear:
Grant me some pity kind Heaven
To my sorrows afford some relief;
Or let my poor Soul be given
A Martyr unto my grief.
SONG CXXIV.
A Curse on impertinent Age
The pleasures of youth to invade,
The cheats that have long been broke
Have impudence still to Trade:
Awake my fair Celia betimes
Before the sweet youth's undone;
Come show thy delights in a breast
Will yield thee a thousand for one.
I Will bring thee hot youth and love
Come mingle thy fire with mine,
We'll serve for the Stars above
And make them ashamed for to shine:
Come down to my plentiful Feast
Lie picking of Bones no more;
The scraps of a dish ill dressed
Or the leavings of many a Whore.
SONG CXXV.
POor Corydon thy flames remove
I pity thee but cannot love,
Yet I find there is something in every Vein,
Which moves me to love could I meet with a Swain
Were honest and kind
Were loving and kind
I could love him again.
SONG CXXVI.
NEver more will I protest,
To love a Woman but in jest,
For as they cannot be true,
So to give each Man his due;
When the wooing fit is past
Their affections cannot last.
Therefore if I chance to meet
With a Mistress fair and sweet,
She my favor shall obtain
Loving her for Love again;
Thus much liberty I crave
Not to be a constant slave.
For when we have tried each other
If she better like another,
Let her quickly change for me
Then to change am I as free;
He or she that loves too long
Sell their freedom for a Song.
SONG CXXVII.
AS Amoret with Phillis sat
One Evening on the Plain,
And saw the charming Strephon wait
(...) tell the Nymph his pain;
(...) danger to remove
She whispered in her Ear,
Ah Phillis if you cannot love
The Shepherd do not hear,
The Shepherd do not hear.
None ever had so strange an Art
His passion to convey,
Into a listening Virgins heart
And steal her Soul away;
Fly, fly, betimes for fear you give
Occasion to your Fate;
In vain quoth she in vain you strive,
Alas! it is now too late,
Alas! it is now too late.
SONG CXXVIII.
BEss black as Charcoal
Was found in a dark hole
With Kit at the Cat and Fiddle,
But what they did there
None safely can swear
Yet Gentlemen Riddle my Riddle.
Troth I would be loath
Were I put to my Oath
To swear Kit with Bess did engender,
Yet it would tempt a Man
Bridle all that he can
His present well wishes to tender.
But 'twas found at last
E're a twelvemonth was past
That Christopher Bess had o'remaster'd;
For her Belly betrayed her
And so she down laid her
And brought him a jolly brown Bastard.
SONG CXXIX.
AS Chloris full of harmless thought
Beneath the Willows lay,
Kind Love a comely Shepherd brought
To pass the time away:
She blushed to be encountered so
And chid the amorous Swain;
But as she strove to rise and go
He pulled her down again.
A sudden passion seized her heart
In spite of her disdain,
She found a pulse in every part
And love in every Vein:
Ah youth quoth she, what charms are these
That conquer and surprise;
Ah let me! for unless you please
I have no power to rise.
She faintly spoke and trembling lay
For fear he should comply,
But Virgins Eyes their hearts betray,
And give their Tongues the lie:
Thus she who Princes had denied
With all their pompous Train.
Was in the lucky minute tried
And yielded to a Swain.
SONG CXXX.
A Young Man lately in our Town
He went to Bed one night,
He had no sooner laid him down
But was troubled with a Sprite:
So vigorously the Spirit stood
Let him do what he can;
Oh then he said
It must be laid
By a Woman, not a Man.
A handsome Maid did undertake,
And into the Bed she leapt;
And to allay the Spirit's power
Full close to him she crept:
She having such a Guardian care
Her Office to discharge,
She opened wide, her conjuring Book,
And laid her leaves at large.
Her Office she did well perform
Within a little space,
When up she rose, and down he lay,
And durst not show his Face;
She took her leave and away she went
When she had done the deed,
Saying if it chance to rise again
Pray send for me with speed.
SONG CXXXI. A Pastoral Dialogue betwixt Strephon and Phillis.
Phil. STrephon what envious Cloud has made
All over thy Face this sullen shade?

Strep. It is the Index of my grief;

Phil. But say, admits it no relief?
Thy now neglected flock does stray:
The Wolf securely takes his prey.
And thy discarded Pipes lie by,
While thou under some Beech does lie,
Or Myrtle in the shady Grove,
And sigh and pin'st like one in Love.

Strep. Ah Phillis! thou have touched me now,
I cannot my passion disavow;
At that word Love, my heart does rise,
And with it strangely sympathize.

Phil. But who did thus your heart surprise?

Strep. It was the Shepherdess, whose eyes
Are brighter far, than any Ray
The Sun disclosed on May Day.

Phil. Who was it Strephon, tell me true?

Strep. Ah dearest Phillis it was you!

Phil. Strive not false Shepherd to deceive
A Nymph, too easy to believe
A passion which she likes so well,
Such falsehood would deserve a Hell.

Strep. May the gods for whom fat Lambs I feed,
That on their smoking Altars bleed,
All my devoutest prayers despise;
And all my humble Sacrifice:
Or what is a greater cure, may I
Find naught from thee but cruelty;
If I do love my Phillis less
Then my own greatest happiness:
If truth does not in Swains reside
Where is she in the World beside.

Phil. I cannot distrust so loved a troth
Delivered by so sweet a youth.

Chorus of two.
Let Us join our hearts and hands, and we'll outvye
The Gods themselves with our Felicity;
Let those that in deceitful Courts do dwell,
Delay their joys and tedious suits pursue:
Voices.
Our honest words, their Courtship far excel,
Amongst unambitions Shepherds love is true.
SONG CXXXII.
A Maid I dare not tell her Name
For fear I should disgrace her,
Tempted a young Man for to come,
One Night for to embrace her:
But at the door he made a stop,
He made a stop, he made a stop;
But she lay still, and snoring said,
The latch pull up, the latch pull up.
This young Man hearing of her words
Puil'd up the latch and entered,
And in the place unfortunately,
To her Mothers Bed he ventured:
But she poor Maid was sore afraid,
And almost dead, and almost dead,
But she lay still and snoring said,
To the truckle-bed, to the truckle-bed.
Unto the truckle-bed he went
But as the youth was going,
The unlucky Cradle stood in's way
And almost spoiled his wooing:
When after that the Maid he spied
The Maid he spied, the Maid he spied;
But she lay still and snoring said,
The other side, the other side.
Unto the other side he went.
To show the Love he meant her,
Pulled off his clothes courageously
And falls to the work he was sent for:
But the poor Maid made no reply,
Made no reply, made no reply;
But she lay still and snoring said,
A little too high, a little too high.
This lusty Lover was half ashamed
Of her gentle admonition,
He thought to charge her home as well
As any Girl could wish him:
Oh now my Love I am right I know,
I am right I know, I am right I know;
But she lay still and snoring said
A little too low, a little too low.
Though by mistakes at length this youth
His business so well tended,
He hit the mark so cunningly
He defied the World to mend it:
Oh now my Love I am right I swear,
I am right I swear, I am right I swear;
Then she lay still and snoring said,
Oh there, oh there, oh there, oh there.
SONG CXXXIII.
A Maiden fair I dare not wed,
For fear I wear Acteon's head;
A Maiden black is ever proud,
The little one is ever loud:
The Maiden that is tall of growth,
Is always subject unto sloth;
The fair, the foul, the little, the tall,
Some faults remain amongst them all.
SONG CXXXIV.
IN faith it is true I am in love,
It Is your black eyes have made me so:
My resolutions they remove,
And former niceness overthrow.
The glowing Charcoal's set on fire
A Heart that former flames did shun,
Was an Heretic unto desire,
Now Is judged to suffer Martyrdom.
But Beauty since it is thy fate
At distance thus to wound so sure,
Thy virtues I will imitate
And see if distance prove a cure.
Then farewell Mistress, farewell Love,
Those lately entertained desires;
Wise Men can from that Plague remove,
Farewell black Eyes and farewell fires.
If ever I my heart acquit
Of those dull flames, I Will bid a Pox
On all black Eyes, and swear they are fit
For nothing but a Tinder-box.
SONG CXXXV.
HOw happy art thou and I,
That never knew how to love;
There Is no such blessings here beneath
Whatever there is above:
It Is liberty, it is liberty,
That every Wise man loves.
Out, out upon those Eyes
That think to murder me,
And he is an Ass that thinks her fair
That is not kind and free;
There Is nothing sweet, there is nothing sweet
To Man but liberty.
I Will tie my heart to none,
Nor yet confine my eyes,
But I will play my game so well,
I Will never want a prize:
It Is liberty, it is liberty,
Has made me now so wise.
SONG CXXXVI.
WHere ever I am and what ever I do,
My Phillis is still in my mind,
When angry I mean not to Phillis to go,
My feet of themselves the way find:
Unknown to my self I am just at the door,
And when I would rail I can bring out no more:
Then Phillis too fair and unkind,
Then Phillis too fair and unkind.
When Phillis I see, my heart burns in my breast,
And the Love I would stifle is shown,
Asleep or awake, I am never at rest,
When from my Eyes Phillis is gone:
Sometimes a sweet Dream does delude my sad mind,
But when I awake and no Phillis I find,
How I sigh to my self all alone!
How I sigh to my self all alone!
Should a King be my Rival in her I adore,
He should offer his treasure in vain;
Oh let me alone to be happy and poor,
And give me my Phillis again:
Let Phillis be mine and but ever be kind
I would to a Desert with her be confined;
And envy no Monarch his Reign,
And envy no Monarch his Reign.
Alas I discover too much of my love
And she too well knows her own power:
She makes me each day a new Martyrdom prove,
And makes me grow jealous each hour;
But let her each minute torment my poor mind,
I had rather love Phillis though false and unkind:
Then ever be freed from her power,
Then ever be freed from her power.
SONG CXXXVII.
ARm, arm, arm, arm, the Scouts are all come in,
Keep your Ranks close and now your honors win;
Behold from yonder Hill the Foe appears,
Bows, Bills, Glaves, Arrows, Shields, Swords, Pikes, and Spears.
Like a dark Wood he comes, or Tempest pouring,
Oh view the Wings of Horse, the Meadows scouring,
The Vant-guard marches bravely, hark the Drums, Dub, dub;
They meet, they meet, and now the Battle comes:
See how the Arrows fly
That darken all the Sky,
Hark how the Trumpets sound:
Hark how the Hills rebound, Tara, tara, tara,
Hark how the Horses charge, in boys, in boys in, Tara, tara:
The Battle totters, now the Wounds begin,
Oh how they cry, oh how they die:
Room for the valiant Memnon armed with Thunder,
See how he breaks the Ranks asunder;
They fly, they fly, Eumenes has the chase,
And brave Polybius makes good his place;
To the Plains, to the Woods,
To the Rocks, to the Floods,
They fly for succor, follow, follow, follow, Hey, hey,
Hark how the Soldiers hollow:
Brave Diocles is dead,
And all his Soldiers fled;
The Battles won and lost
That many a Life has cost.
SONG CXXXVIII.
I Found my Celia one night undrest,
A precious banquet for languishing Love;
The charming object a flame increased,
Which never, ah never, till then I proved:
Her delicate Skin and Starry Eye,
Made me a secret bliss pursue;
But with her soft hand she put it by,
And cried fie Amintor, ah what would you do.
Her words and blushes so fired my heart,
I pulled her to me and clasped her round,
And though with cunning she played her part,
Yet fainter and fainter, her threats I found;
But I least thought or least desired,
My Love a forbearance should allow;
A touch of her hand my heart inspired,
My passion was melted I know not how.
Which when fair Celia's quick eye perceived
And found by my dullness my passion decay,
Her fate she inwardly seemed to grieve,
That fooled her and cooled her so basely away:
She sighed and looked pale to see me dull
And in her heart this Oath she swore,
She never again would slight an address
Nor the critical minute refuse no more.
SONG CXXXIX. The Country-man's Prophecy.
MY jolly good Friends who to mirth are inclined,
Give car and I Will tell you a piece of my mind,
For what I declare you will find clear as the Sun,
When Covetousness out of England shall run.
When Men beget Women, and Women get Men,
And Men they do bring forth Children again;
When Coventry steeple cracks Nuts with its thumb,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Hares sit in the high way to pick a Man's purse,
And the Man in the Moon put his child out to nurse;
And when Shooing-horns learn to beat on a Drum,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Bears they wear Breeches of Silver and gold,
And go to the Barbers for to be Poll'd;
And Monkeys do wait on them till they have done,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When a Conjurer's frighted to see a black Cock
And wenching Gallants are afraid of the Smock;
When Coats Linsey Wolsey by Ladies are spun,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When the Church of St. Paul has got Wings and Legs,
And upon London-stone does fit and lay Eggs;
And when Capons and Cocks of that breed do come
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When old Men graft Pear Trees on Cedar-stocks,
And Owls at Noonday do fly up in flocks;
When Cuckooes at Christmas amongst us do come,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Tailors forget to throw Cabbage in Hell,
And shorten their Bills that all may be well;
When Horses can speak that have ever been dumb,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Beggars marry Ladies, and Women leave scolding,
And Neighbor to Neighbor shall not be beholding;
When Misers their Money lend out by the Tun,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Lawyers are willing to plead without Fees,
And Pens, Ink, and Paper does grow upon Trees;
And all is well ended that e're was begun
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Millers refuse any Tole for to take
And those that have Agues don't shiver and shake,
When old Mother Damnable once does turn Nun,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Whetstone-Park Ladies live honest and chaste,
And scorn by their Cullies for to be embraced;
When Cooks do want Victuals, as sure as a Gun
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Poets build Almshouses up for the Poor,
And the rich old Curmudgeons desire no more;
When Cripples at running great Wagers have won,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Vint'ners and Tapsters never value their scores,
But freely give all Men that enter their doors;
When the Cart to the Horses with great haste shall come,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Men without Money shall buy House and Land
And a Soldier forget the word of command,
When a Welsh-man to breakfast shall drink a whole Tun,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Hogs do wear Armor and vapor along,
And Pick-pockets never appear in a throng;
When Tradesmen by trusting shall never be undone,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Men grow as high as the May Pole in the Strand,
And Fishes take pleasure to be on dry Land;
When Oysters at Billingsgate cry eat me come;
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When great Essex Scrpents shall fly in the Air,
And Rabbets cry catch me in Net or in snare;
When Hectors pay debts without ever a Dun,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When Ships over Dunstable Downs you see sail,
And Oyster-women cease to scold and to rail;
When Men shall roast Apples at midnight in the Sun,
Then Covetousness out of England will run.
When all these things happen then you will confess,
The honest plain Countryman rightly did guess;
He vows you shall shoot him to the heart with a Gun,
When Covetousness out of England will run.
SONG CXL.
When I shall leave this clod of Clay,
When I shall see that happy day,
That a cold bed, a winding sheet
Shall end my cares
My grief and tears
And lay me silent at my Conquerour's feet.
When a dear Friend shall say he is gone,
Alas! he has left us all alone;
I saw him gasping, and I saw
Him strive in vain
Amidst his pain
His Eye-strings breaking, and his falling Jaw.
Then shall no tears bedew my Hearse,
No sad uncomfortable Verse;
My unlamented Death shall have,
He who alive
Did never grieve
How can he be less merry in the Grave.
Then Friends for a while be merry without me
And fast as you die come flocking about me,
In Gardens and Groves our day Revels we will keep,
And at night my Theorbo shall rock you asleep:
So happy we will prove, that Mortals above,
Shall envy our Music, shall envy our Love.
SONG CXLI. Long Vacation.
HOw quiet the Town is
Now the tumult is gone,
Now the Bullies and Punks
To retirement are flown:
The Nights are all peace
And the Mornings serene,
Our Windows are safe
And our bodies are clean.
Chorus. The Nights are all peace, etc.
The Woman of Honor
The Bulker and Ranger,
Disturb not our selves
Nor inveigle the Stranger;
Our joys are our own
Spite of empty Gallants,
Who Cuckold the Town
To supply their own wants.
Chorus. Our joys are our own, etc.
Since the Town's then our own
And the sweets it affords,
Though indeed we are Rogues
We Will be as drunk as the Lords
Opportunity short is
For Term-time will come,
When our Wives will be rambling
And we must keep home.
SONG CXLII.
LAurinda who did Love disdain,
For whom had languish'd many a Swain;
Leading her bleating Flocks to drink
She spied upon the Rivers brink,
A youth whose eyes did well declare
How much he loved, but loved not her.
At first she laughed and gazed a while
But soon it lessened to a smile,
Then to surprise, and wonder came,
Her breast to heave her heart to flame;
Then cried she out, ah now I prove!
Thou art a god almighty Love.
She would have spoke but shame denied,
And bid her first consult her Pride;
But soon she found that aid was gone,
For Jove alas had left her none:
Ah how she burns but it is too late,
For in his eyes she reads her Fate.
SONG CXLIII.
LOve's soft deluding charms
Must now give place to Arms,
Hark, hark, I hear the Trumpet's fresh Alarms;
Mars chides me for my stay
And frowning seems to say,
Thy honor youth will suffer by delay:
Adieu ye Sex Divine
Whose all commanding shrine,
So often has bowed these stubborn knees of mine;
Kind Females now no more
Must I those charms adore,
Nor court the pleasures of the British Shore.
My Friend and I in Wars
'Midst Armies, Wounds and Scars,
Will bid defiance to unlucky Stars;
No charming Female Darts
With all their amorous Arts,
Shall e're disjoyn our undivided hearts:
Friendship that noble Name
That kindles generous flame,
Prompts us to court no Mistress now but Fame;
Her we may jointly love
And happy Rivals prove
In Emulation like to those above.
Thus hand in hand we will go
And equal danger know,
Love begs in vain when Honor answers no;
The Battle done at last,
We Will lie so close embraced
And think with pleasure on the danger past:
Should one of us be slain,
Fate's envy's spent in vain;
In spite of Death our friendship we will maintain;
For he that is left behind
Shall teach the World to find
Though two in person, we are but one in mind.
SONG CXLIV.
HOw mighty are the charms of Woman kind,
And yet how soon decayed;
Scarce has a beauty in full glory shined
E're it is in utter ruin laid:
While the blessed minutes last before it is fall,
It Is made a Deity and adored by all;
But when the glorious lustre's gone,
The unhappy slighted Nymph is left alone
The sad privation to bemoan.
See, see, poor Phillis yonder once the fair,
Bright as the Morning Sun;
Blasted and faded all her beauties are,
Alas her killing days be done:
How unregarded now she treads the plain
Pursued by no admiring Swain;
Not one charm left, not one alluring grace,
Horror and wrinkles have assumed their place,
Age, Age (...) wrote upon her Face.
Who then would be in love and fondly prize
At so-unjust a rate,
A pair of flattering false deluding eyes
That are to morrow out of date:
If their first vigor lasted to the Grave
'Twere richly worth the while to be a slave:
But since the fairest in their course must end
I will no more on the gay toy depend
But make my pleasure in my friend.
SONG CXLV.
DO not ask me charming Phillis
Why I lead you here alone,
By this bank of Pinks and Lillies,
And of Roses newly blown:
It Is not to behold the beauty
Of those flowers that crown the Spring,
It Is to -- but I know my duty
And dare never name the thing.
It Is at worst but her denying
Why should I thus fearful be,
Every Minute gently flying
Smiles and says make use of me:
What the Sun does to those Roses
While the Beams play sweetly in,
I would -- but my fear opposes
And I dare not name the thing.
Yet I die if I conceal it
Ask my Eyes, or ask your own,
And if neither can reveal it
Think what Lovers think alone:
On this bank of Pinks and Lillies
Might I speak what I would do,
I would with my lovely Phillis
I would, I would, I would, ah would you.
SONG CXLVI.
PEace Cupid take thy Bow in hand
In The gloomy shade in ambush stand,
To watch a cruel Nymph frequents this Bower,
Cold as the streams but sweeter then each flower;
There, there she is, direct thy Dart
Into that stony Marble heart,
Draw quickly, draw and show thy Art.
Woe's me, you are blind indeed, thou have shot me,
Whilst she scapes in the Grove and laughs at thee.
SONG CXLVII.
He Is a Phlegmatic Lover
In whom we discover
A temper that never does change;
A Breast that is like mine with jealousy burns,
Now Love and now Anger possess it by turns;
With fears I grow mild and with hopes I grow tame,
That passion is weak that is always the same.
But the Sanguine brisk Lover
Can never discover
How the Soul of a Woman's inclined,
He knows that her charms have conquered yet more;
That many there are who do figh and adore:
He trusts not to merit, to give him success
For Women love only by fancy and guess;
Or if to desert by great chance they prove kind,
The fair still are fickle and often change their mind.
Oh the starts of a Lover
Do plainly discover
The passion he feels is extreme;
For he that loves well and does not possess,
Must either be jealous or else love you less;
Then say not my fears or my doubts do you wrong,
He cannot be quiet whose passion is strong:
Small Fires do but glow, and are always the same,
But the greater will rage and scatter the flame.
SONG CXLVIII.
MY Muse denies
To Apologize
For my Song's acceptance,
I know 'twill fit
Your Appetite
Because it is of the fashion.
New Fashions began
With the World and Man
In Adam's time and Eves,
They did begin
To cover sin
With a fashion of their leaves.
After was tried
The rough Bucks hide
A wear of commendation,
Had not with the Skin
The Horns crept in
And turned it into fashion.
Each Tailor is read
In this Fashion, his head
Is capable on it it is feared;
When he is not at leisure
His Wife will take measure,
Though It be by his Neighbors yard.
The Clown's array
Is an innocent gray
Nor stained by the Dyer's Art,
Which does invest
As pure a breast
And no less spotless heart.
The Farmer's Hose
His wearing Shoes
For both are wondrous plain,
His Honesty
Not Knavery, he
Most purely dies in grain.
The Schoolmaster in
His Trouzes has been
And bumbast, Doublet long space,
He Is a Monoptote
For he varies not
At any time his case.
His Wife is pure
In her task demure,
Her Gown is of Reformation,
And she verily
Turns up her eye
In a very zealous fashion.
The Shopkeepers walk
And often do talk
In Gowns of Purple or Blew,
Since Venner and Far
Wore such at the Bar
Some wisely have changed their hue.
The Lawyer (be it known
To all Men) is prone
To the fashion of long Hose,
And fain he would
Still have and hold
Long Suits for he lives by those.
Now with the best
Your Pimp's in request
This your Gallant is supplied:
By his Bones as well
As his clothes you may smell
He Is rarely Frenchify'd.
His Mistress plumed
Painted, perfumed
Is stillify'd all over,
Her loose array
Does every day
A looser body cover.
The Scholar well trust
In his black Suit brusht
Is like to jet in his degree,
Nor is it enough
Men point at stuff
He Will be pointed at the knee.
Thus are we become
As Apes of Rome,
Of France, Spain, and all Nations:
And not Horses alone
But Men are grown
Diseased of the Fashions.
SONG CXLIX.
HOw happy and free is the resolute Swain
That denies to submit to the yoke of the fair,
Free from excesses of pleasure and pain
Neither dazzled with hope nor deprest with despair,
He Is free from disturbance and calmly enjoys
All the pleasures of Love without clamor or noise.
Poor Shepherds in vain their affections reveal
To the Nymph that is pievish, proud, sullen and coy,
Vainly do Virgins their passions conceal
For they boil in their grief till themselves they destroy.
And thus the poor darling lies under the curse
To be checked in the Womb or o'relaid by the nurse.
SONG CL.
AH how unkind is the Nymph I adore
For my obedience she slights me the more,
Still as she shuns me I closer pursue,
So by her flight she has learnt to subdue;
How endless are the pains I must endure,
Since she by flying wounds and slams the cure.
Yet how unhappy soever I am
Still I must follow and cherish my flame,
For should I struggle and break off my chain
My freedom would be worse then her disdain;
Therefore the nobler Fate I will prefer
It must be happy if it come from her.
Then cruel Fair if my death you have decreed
Spite of compassion I beg you proceed,
And look not down on my wretched Estate
As neither worthy of your Love not hate:
For with your frowns I would rather dispense
Then languish in lukewarm indifference.
SONG CLI.
MY Gaffer and Gammer were fast in their Nest,
And all the young fry of their cribs were possessed;
Spot whitefoot and Puss in the Ashes were spread,
And a blinking rush Candle stuck over their head.
Sweet Ursly was washing the Trenchers and Platter,
Preparing to make her good friend, the Hog fatter:
Greaz'd up to the Elbows and smutcht to the Eyes;
And her rich broider'd clothes were as fat as her Thighs.
Like Bagpipes her cheeks, and her Udders chin high
Her Nose hawking out bending both ways awry;
Her Lips were as thick as her squint eyes were blinking
And her orient locks were most rankishly stinking.
While Roger the Plowman lay close by a snoring
God Cupid was vexed at his Clownish adoring;
And therefore conveys to his great Loggerhead,
In a whisper the News, that all were a Bed.
Up Roger starts then and rubbing his Eyes
To his dearest sweet Ursly with passion he flies;
And jolling his Elbows on Urslys broad back,
Complains that his heart was e'n ready to crack.
But Ursly displeased with the weight of her Love
(Oh Cupid why do thou thus treacherous prove:)
As fast as she could she turned her about
And with dish-clout slopt over the wretch'd face of our Lout.
Now Cupid you are fit to be kicked out of doors
Since a Pimp thou do prove to such fulsom amors;
But Cupid is only a hope to obtain
What is out of our reach seldom causes our pain.
For Roger at Matket had frequently seen
Such beauties good lawi, each looked like a Queen:
Yet his heart all the while did continue his own
But Ursly, ah Ursly but seen and it is gone.
SONG CLII.
POor Celia once was very fair
A quick bewitching eye she had,
Most neatly looked her braided hair,
Her dainty cheeks would make you mad:
Upon her Lips do all the Graces play
And on her breast ten thousand Cupid's lay.
Then many a doting Lover came
From seventeen to twenty one,
Each told her of his mighty flame
But she forsooth affected none.
One was not handsome the other was not fine,
This of Tobacco smelt and that of Wine.
But the other day it was my fate
To pass along that way alone,
I saw no Coach before her door
But at her door I heard her moan:
And dropped a tear and sighing seemed to say
Young Ladies marry, marry whilst you may.
SONG CLIII.
AS sad Philothea lay melting in grief,
And kindly complained of the amorous Thief;
She aloud to the Woods did her passion impart
But faintly lamented the loss of her heart:
Ah cruel unkind Dorilaus she cried
Bring back the fond stray that has wandered aside.
The Youth as from courting Astraea he came
Had the pleasure of hearing her sigh out his name;
And softly he stole till so nigh her he drew,
That his Arms on a sudden about her he threw:
Then take back thy heart Philothea he cried
It Is pity the stragler should ever be tied.
Surpised at the welcome approach of her Swain
Yet unwilling to take the fond Truant again,
No Shepherd says she give me thine in exchange
And I Will keep it so safe that it never shall range:
No trust me not I, Dorilaus replied
Since your own you have suffered to wander aside.
SONG CLIV.
PEace and silence be the guide
To the Man and to the Bride,
If there be a joy yet new
In Marriage, let it fall on you,
That all the World may wonder;
If we should stay we should do worse
And turn our blessings to a curse
By keeping you asunder.
SONG CXXV.
I Courted a Lass, my folly
Was the cause of my disdaining,
I courted her thus; what shall I
Sweet Dolly do for thy dear Loves obtaining.
But another had dally'd with Dolly
That Doll for all her seigning,
Had got such a Mountain above her Valley
That Dolly went home complaining.
SONG CLVI.
CLoris forbear a while
Do not o'rejoy me,
Urge not another smile
Lest it destroy me.
That beauty pleases most
As is best taking;
Which is soon won soon lost,
Kind yet forsaking:
I love a coming Lady faith I do
But now and then I Would have her scornful too.
O'recloud these Eyes of thine
Bo-peep thy features,
Warm with an April shine
Scorch not thy Creatures:
Still to display thy Ware
Still to be fooling;
Argues how rude you are
In Cupid's Schooling:
Disdain begets a smile, scorn draws us nigh,
It Is cause I would and cannot makes me try.
Chloris I Would have thee wise
When Gallants view thee,
Courting do thou despise
Fly those pursue thee:
Fast moves an Appetite
Makes hunger greater.
Who Is stinted of delight
Falls to it the better:
Be coy and kind betimes be smooth and rough,
And buckle now and then and that is enough.
SONG CLVII.
PHilander and Sylvia a gentle young pair,
Whose business was loving, and kissing his care;
In a sweet smelling Grove went smiling along
Till the youth gave a vent to his heart with his Tongue:
Ah Sylvia said he and sighed when he spoke,
Your cruel resolve will you never revoke;
No never she said, how never he cried,
It Is the damned that shall only that sentence abide.
She turned her about to look all around,
Then blushed and her pretty eyes cast on the ground;
She kissed his warm cheeks and then played with his neck
And urged that his reason his passion should check:
Ah Philander she said it is a dangerous bliss!
Ah never ask more and I Will give thee a kiss!
How never he cried and then shivered all over,
No never she said and then trip'd to a Bower.
She stopped at the Wicket, he cried let me in,
She answered I would if it were not a sin;
Heaven sees, and the gods will chastise the poor head
Of Philander for this: straight trembling he said
Heaven sees I confess, but uo Tell-tales are there,
She kissed him and cried, you're an Atheist my dear,
And should you prove false I should never endure,
How never he cried, and straight backwards he threw her.
Her delicate body he clasped in his Arms.
He kissed her, he pressed her, heaped charms upon charms;
He cried shall I now, no never she said
Your will you shall never enjoy till I am dead:
Then as if she were dead, she slept and lay still
Yet even at death she bequeathed him a smile;
Which emboldned the youth his charms to supply
Which he bore still about him to cure those that die.
SONG CLVIII.
TAke oh take those lips away,
That so sweetly were forsworn;
And those Eyes the break of day,
Lights that do mislead the Morn:
But my kisses bring again,
Seals of Love, but sealed in vain.
SONG CLIX.
WIth an old Song made by an old ancient pate
Of an old worshipful Gentleman who had a great estate,
Who kept an old house at a bountiful rate,
And an old Porter to relieve the Poor at his gate:
Like an old Courtier of the Queens,
And the Queens old Courtier.
With an old Lady whose anger good words asswages,
Who every quarter pays her old Servants their wages;
Who never knew what belonged to Coach-men, Footmen and Pages,
But kept twenty old Fellows with blew Coats and badges:
Like an old Courtier of the Queens,
And the Queens old Courtier.
With an old study filled full of Learned Books,
With an old reverend Parson you may know him by his looks;
With an old Buttery Hatch worn quite off the hooks
And an old Kitchen which maintains half a dozen Cooks:
Like an old Courtier of the Queens,
And the Queens old Courtier.
With an old Hall hung round about with Guns, Pikes and Bows;
With old Swords and Bucklers, which have born many shrewd blows;
And an old Frisado Coat to cover his Worship's Trunk Hose,
And a cup of old Sherry to comfort his copper Nose:
Like an old Soldier of the Queens,
And the Queens old Courtier.
With a good old fashion when Christmas is come,
To call in his Neighbors with Bagpipe and Drum;
And good cheer enough to furnish every old room,
And old Liquor able to make a Gat speak, and a wise Man dumb:
Like an old Courtier of the Queens,
And the Queens old Courtier.
With an old Huntsman, a Faulconer, and a kennel of Hounds,
Which never hunted nor hawkt but in his own grounds;
Who like an old wise Man kept himself still within his own bounds,
And when he died gave every child a thousand old pounds:
Like an old Courtier of the Queens,
And the Queens old Courtier.
But to his eldest Son his House and Lands he assigned,
Charging him in his Will to keep the old bountiful mind,
To love his good old Servants and to Neighbors be kind;
But in the ensuing you shall hear how he was inclined:
Like a young Courtier of the Kings
And the King's new Courtier.
Like a young Gallant newly come to his Land
And keeps a brace of whores at his own command;
And takes up a thousand pounds upon's own Land,
And lies drunk in a new Tavern till he can neither go nor stand:
Like a young Courtier of the Kings,
And the King's young Courtier.
With a neat Lady that is brisk and fair,
Who never knew what belonged to good housekeeping or care;
But buys seven Fans to play with the wanton Air
And seventeen or eighteen dressings of other Men's Hair:
Like a young Courtier of the Kings,
And the King's young Courtier.
With a new Hall built where the old one stood,
Wherein is burnt neither Coal nor Wood;
And a Shuffle-board Table smooth and red as blood,
Hung round with pictures which do the Poor little good:
Like a young Courtier of the Kings,
And the King's young Courtier.
With a new study stuffed full of Pamphlets and Plays,
With a new Chaplain that swears faster then he prays;
With a new Buttery Hatch that opens once in four or five days,
With a new French Cook to make Kickshaws and Toys:
Like a young Courtier of the Kings,
And the King's young Courtier.
With a new fashion when Chrisimas is come,
With a new Journey up to London we must be gone,
And leave no body at home but our new Porter John,
Who relieves the Poor with a thump on the back with a stone:
Like a young Courtier of the Kings,
And the King's young Courtier.
With a Gentleman Usher whose carriage is complete,
With a Footman, Coachman, Page to carry Meat;
With a waiting Gentlewoman whose dressing is very neat;
Who when the Master has dined let us the Servants not eat:
Like a young Courtier of the Kings,
And the King's young Courtier.
With a new honor bought with his Fathers old gold,
That many of his Father's old Manors had sold;
And this is the occasion that most Men do hold,
That good Housekeeping is now grown so cold:
Like a young Courtier of the Kings,
And the King's young Courtier.
SONG CLX.
PHillis I pray
Why did you say
That I did not adore you,
I durst not sue
As others do
Nor talk of love before you.
Should I make known
My flame, you would frown
No tears could e're appease you;
It Is better I
Should silent die
Then talking to displease you.
SONG CLXI.
A Way with the causes of riches and cares
That eat up our Spirits and shorten our years;
No pleasure can be
In state nor degree
But it is mingled with sorrows and fears:
Then perishall Fops by sobriety dulled
While he that is merry reigns Prince of the world.
The quirks of the zealous of beauty and wit
Though supported by power at last must submit;
For he that is sad
Grows wretched or mad
Whilst mirth like a Monarch does sit:
It cherishes life in the old and the young
And makes every day to be happy and long.
SONG CLXII.
NO, no thou all of red and white
Thou have not yet undone me quite,
For I have lost but half my heart
Yet I confess the wound does smart;
Then pretty Thief oh steal no more
But let me keep one part in store;
Sure half's too much for thee of mine
Unless I had some share in thine.
Though thou art fair and thou art young
And though thou have a pretty Tongue,
And every word that thou do say
Might lead a Prince's heart astray:
Yet all those Traps will never catch me
I must have kinder snares from thee:
Alas thou shall see I can retreat
And not lie conquered at thy feet.
It Is true if I did keep the Field
At length I must be forced to yield,
Not like a Coward will I fly
Nor like a fool will stay and die:
With half my heart I Will march away
Then the other part not long will stay;
A heart divided knows no power
Nor will submit above an hour.
Reproach me not though heretofore
I only freedom did adore,
And brag that none though kind as fair
The loss of it could half repair:
Since I now willingly do yield
To Chleris beauty all the field.
With greater joys I do resign
My freedom, though thou e're keep'st thine;
And am resolved constant to prove
Should her neglect transcend my Love:
Strange charms they are which make me burn
Without the hopes of a return.
To see and not to be in Love
A wonder like her self would prove,
Whose charms by Nature and by Art
Do each of them deserve a heart:
For which my sorrows are not small
I have but one to pay them all.
I must confess a while I strove
With reason to resist my Love,
All Saints sometimes against death do pray
Though it be to Heaven their only way;
It Is only Chloris has the skill
To make me blessed against my will.
Nor will I so much as endure
To think unconstancy secure,
For were I to that sin so bent
It sure would prove my punishment;
Her to adore I must confess
N better then elsewhere success.
A TABLE Of all the SONGS, Alphabetically composed.
A.
A Dieu to the Pleasures and Follies of Love Page 4 A Wife I do hate Page 11 As
I was sitting on the Grass Page 20 A Curse upon thee for a Slave Page 27
Augusta is inclined to fears Page 38 Ah fading Joy Page 57 A Curseo' the
Zealous and Ignorant crew Page 58 Adieu my Cordelia, my dearest adieu Page 59
As I was walking on a May Morning Page 64 A Curse on Impertinent Age Page 112
As Amoret with Phillis sat Page 113 As Chloris full of harmless thought Page
115 A young Man lately in our Town Page 116 A Maid I dare not tell her Name
Page 118 A Maiden fair I dare not wed Page 120 Arm, Arm, Arm, the Scouts are
all come in Page 123 Ah how unkind is the Nymph I adore Page 138 As sad
Philothea lay melting in grief Page 141 Away with the causes of riches and
cares Page 161
B.
BE thou joyful I am jolly Page 11 Be jolly my friend Page 56 Beauty and Love
once fell at odds Page 83 Bess black as Charcoal Page 114
C.
COme away, the other Glass Page 13 Come drink off your Liquor Page 25 Cupid no
God a wanton child Page 33 Come you Ladies of the night Page 39 Cupid once was
weary grown Page 46 Charon, O gentle Charon let me woo thee Page 47 Courtier if
thou needs wilt Wive Page 51 Chloris when you disperse your influence Page 53
Cease Chloris, cease to wonder why Page 57 Come my Daphne come away. Page 79
Come all you Gallants that ^ive near the Court Page 96 Come come bonny boys
Page 104 Chloris forbear a while Page 142
D.
DIogenes was merry in his Tub Page 26 Did you not hear the hideous groans Page
73 Disputes daily arise and errors grow bolder Page 92 Do not ask me charming
Phillis Page 133
F.
FAir Clarinda I do owe Page 19 Farewell the dearest of my crimes Page 38 Fond
Fables tell of old. Page 41
G.
GOd Cupid's for certain as foolish as blind Page 65 God Cupid for ever I defy
thy poor Quiver Page 99 Great Love to thy Deity praises I Will sing Page 105
H.
HAng up Mars Page 23 Here lies not in, but on Earth's Womb Page 26 He that
marries a merry Lass Page 28 How happy's the Prisoner who conquers his Fate
Page 34 Hold back thy hours, dark night Page 51 How bonny and brisk, how
pleasant and sweet Page 61 Had Daphne Honor, Wealth or Fame Page 93 Happy is
the Man that takes delight Page 110 How severe is Fate to break a heart Page
111 How cruel is Fortune grown Page 111 How happy art thou and I Page 121 How
quiet the Town is Page 129 How mighty are the charms of Woman kind Page 132
He Is a Phlegmatic Lover Page 134 How happy and free is the resolute Swain Page
138
I.
IF Wealth would keep a Man alive Page 13 I always resolved to be free from her
charms Page 18 I wo' not go to it, I mun not go to it Page 28 I Will sing you a
Song that was never in Print Page 48 I know more then Apollo Page 49 I Would have
you quoth he Page 66 I never shall henceforth approve Page 69 In Caves full of
Skulls and rotten old Bones Page 71 I charge thee Neptone as thou art just
resign Page 84 I have heard your amorous Tone Page 101 I know more then Apollo
Page 105 In Faith it is true I am in Love Page 120 I found my Celia one night
undrest Page 124 I courted a Lass, my folly Page 142
L.
LOng since Clarinda my passion did move Page 5 Let the Bowl pass free Page 17
Let Fortune and Phillis frown if they please Page 41 Lo behind a Scene of Seas
Page 68 A Latin Song Page 103 A Latin Song Page 164 Laurinda who did love
disdain Page 130 Loves soss deluding charms Page 130
M.
MAke a noise pull it out Page 8 Make a Bed in the deep Page 15 My jolly good
Friends who to mirth are inclined Page 125 My Muse denies to Apologize Page 135
My Gaffer, and Gammer were fast in their Nest Page 139
N.
NOw that the cold Winter's expelled by the Sun Page 2 Nymph and Shepherd come
away Page 36 Nay let me alone Page 62 No I will sooner trust the Wind Page 82
No, no, it is in vain Page 92 No Joys like to those of a new married Bride Page
93 Now drink i^ all off Page 103 Never more will I protest Page 113 No, no,
thou all of red and white Page 150
O.
OH Celia come tell me how long it will be Page 12 Oh Delia for I know it is
thee Page 23 Oh that Joy so soon should wast Page 33 Oh name not the day lest
my (...) reprove Page 59 Oh sorrow, sorrow, say (...) do thou dwell Page 71 Oh
Celia come tell me (...) Page 100
P
POor Citizen if thou will be Page 52 Poor Corydon thy flames remove Page 112
Peace Cupid take thy bow in hand Page 134 Poor Celia once-was very fair Page
140 Peace and silence be the guid^ Page 142 Philander and Sylvia a gentle young
pair Page 143 Phillis I pray Page 149
S.
STay shut not the Gate Page 32 Since we poor slavish Women know Page 40 Sure
it is so, then let it go Page 74 Still to be neat, still to be dressed Page 79
Since Celia 's my Foe Page 90 Strephon what enviom Cloud bath made Page 117
T.
THe delights of the Bottle, and charms of good Wine Page 5 Tell me no more you
live Page 3 It Is not enough great Gods, it is not enough Page 5 The Pot and the
Pipe Page 28 It Is late and cold stir up the fire Page 42 Thou joy of all
hearts, and delight of all Eyes Page 52 To play upon a Viol if Page 60 They
call, they call, what noise is that Page 62 Tyrant thou seek'st in vain Page 63
Thou art so fair and cruel to^ Page 67 Turn off the Glass it is a crime to see it
full Page 73 'Twas in the pleasant Month of May Page 75 The Glories of our
Birth and State Page 77 Thou fair Usurper of my Fate Page 88 The World is grown
mad and turned upside down Page 109 Take, oh take those Lips away Page 145
V.
Venus chanced to love a Boy Page 42
W.
Why should so much beauty fear Page 1 What sighs and groans now fill my
breast Page 6 Why should Friends and Kindred gravely make thee Page 7 Were
Celia but as chaste as fair Page 14 What a madness it is to give over our
drink^^ing Page 15 When a Woman that is bux^m to a D^tard does Wed Page 16 When
first I saw fair Celia 's face Page 21 What mean the dull Poets themselves to
abuse Page 22 When I see the young Men play Page 24 Where the Be sucks, there
suck I Page 27 Woman who is by Nature wild Page 30 What an Ass is he Page 48
When first my free heart Page 53 What does the fair Clariza mean Page 55 When
(...) my dear Delia my heart did surprise Page 61 What shall we do Page 66 Why
lovely Celia should I fear Page 70 Whilst Alexis lay pressed Page 72 What makes
you all so dull Page 76 When Aurelia first I courted Page 78 Why should we not
laugh and be jolly Page 80 Why Phillis to me so untrue and unkind Page 89 When
youth do agree to be merry and free Page 108 Where ever I am, and what ever I
do Page 122 When I shall leave this clod of clay Page 128 With an old Song made
by an ancient old pate Page 145
Y.
YOu Lovers Love on Page 29 You merry Poets old Boys Page 39 Ye she-friends and
he-frriends Page 85
AN INDEX, DIRECTING How to find out any of the aforegoing Letters in their
proper Pages.
A Father to his Son at School in the Country Page 49 The Sons Answer Page 50
A Citizen returning his Friend kind thanks for his entertainment when he was in
the Country. Page 51 The country Gentleman's Answer to the Citizen Page 52 A
merry Letter to invite a Friend to the Tavern Page 52 His Friend's Answer Page
53 A Letter from a Gentleman to a young Lady whom he courted to marry Page 54
The young Ladies answer Page 55 A Country Farmers Son to one of his Neighbors
Daughters Page 56 Her kind Answer Page 57 A Letter to court a young Widow who
had lately buried her Husband Page 57 The Widows Answer Page 59 A Merchant to
his Factor in the East Indies Page 60 The Factor's Answer Page 61 A Letter to
dissuade a Friend from marrying Page 61 The Young Man's merry Answer Page 64 A
Letter of Anger sent to his Friend for an affrent given at their last meeting
Page 66 His Friend's short Answer Page 67 A Letter to chastise a near Kinsman
who was given to Extravagancy Page 67 His Kinsman's Answer Page 69 A Letter
from a Country Shopkeeper to a Grocer in London for commodities Page 70 The
London Grocer's Auswer to his Country Chapman Page 71 A Letter from a Citizen
to his Friend in the Country to send him up a Prentice Page 72 The Country
Gentleman's kind Answer Page 73 A Letter of advice for health Page 73 The
Gentleman's Answer Page 74 A Letter to his Friend in praise of his Mitress Page
75 His Friend's merry Answer in praising his foul Mistress by the Contraries
Page 77 A Letter sent to his Friend a Sommerset shire Man full of Complements
Page 80 The Sommerset-shire Man's clowish Answer in their own Country Language
Page 81 A loving Letter sent to a Gentlewoman Page 82 The Gentle-woman's kind
Answer Page 83 A Letter from a Gentlewoman to her Husband, who had buried her
Child in the Country Page 85 The Husband's Answer Page 86 A Letter to
congratulate a Friend's happy return from his long Journey Page 86 The
Captain's thank full Answer to his Friend's Letter expressed with many
Complements Page 88 A hasty Letter to his Cousin Page 89 His Consin's hasty
Answer Page 90 A Letter sent to his Friend condoling his long sickness Page 90
The sick Man's thank full Answer Page 91 A Letter to persuade a Friend to betake
himself to business Page 92 His Friend's short Answer Page 94 A Letter from an
Elder Brother to the Younger, reproving him of extravagancy Page 95 The Younger
Brother's Answer Page 96 A Letter sent from a London Quaker to one of his
Country Brethren Page 98 The Country Quaker's Answer Page 99 A Letter of Excuse
Page 99 The Gentleman's Answer Page 100 A Letter sent to a Gentleman in way of
petition Page 101 The Gentleman's Answer Page 102 A Letter from a Gentleman to
a Country Schoolmaster, concerning putting his Son to School with him Page
103 The Schoolmaster's Answer Page 104 A kind Letter to a Gentlewoman with a
Ring sent as a token Page 105 The Gentle woman's Answer Page 106 A Letter sent
to a Gentleman as a challenge Page 106 The Answer Page 107 A Letter desiring
his Friend to acquaint him with what news is stirring Page 108 His Friends
Answer Page 109 A dunning Letter sent from a Creditor to his Debtor for Money
Page 110 The Debtor's Answer Page 111 A Letter to persuade a Friend to marry
Page 112 His Friend's Answer Page 114 A Letter complaining of such long
silence, in his Friend, in writing no oftener to him Page 115 His Friend's
Answer Page 116 A cunning Letter sent to a crafty Friend to borrow Money Page
116 The Answer Page 117 A Letter to his angry Sweetheart Page 118 Her short
but loving Answer Page 118 A Letter upon the delay of a courtesy desired Page
119 The Answer Page 119 A Letter of Counsel and good advice from a Father to
his Son Page 120 The Son's dutiful Answer Page 121 A merry Letter after the old
fashion sent to a Maid Page 121 Her Answer Page 123 A Letter from a Father to a
Son at the Vniverfity Page 123 The Son's Answer Page 125 A Danghters Letter to
her Mother Page 126 The Mothers kind Answer Page 127 A Letter of comfort sent
to a Friend in adverfity Page 127 His Friend's thank full Answer Page 128 A
Letter sent to a Friend persuading him that he was a Cuckold Page 129 His
Friend's Answer Page 130 A Fantastical Comical Letter sout to a Friend to try
both his wit and patience Page 131 The Answer Page 132 A Conceited Letter from
a Country Schoolmaster who thought himself to be a great Scholar Page 132 The
Gentleman's Answer Page 133 A contional Letter from a Husband to his Young Wife
in the Country Page 134 His Wifes Answer Page 135 A Letter to invite a Friend
to a Wedding Page 136 His Friend's Answer Page 137 A Letter of farewell sent to
a Friend from one that was going a long Journey Page 138 The Answer Page 139
How to begin Letters with Complements Page 140 Supplements with choice Phrases
and Sentences to be used in the middle of Letters upon all occasions Page 151
Conclusions and Endings of Letters of all sorts and upon all occasions Page 157
Superscriptions for Letters suitable for, all Degrees and Qualities of Men and
Women Page 16^ Posies for Rings, or Motto's fit for presents. Page 166
FINIS.

