Truth Exalted; IN A short, but sure, Testimony against all those Religions,
Faiths, and Worships that have been formed and followed in the darkness of
Apostasy. -- And for that Glorious Light which is now risen, and shines forth
in the Life and Doctrine of the despised Quakers, as the alone good old way of
Life and Salvation.

Presented to Princes, Priests, and People, that they may repent, believe, and
obey.

BY WILLIAM PENN the Younger, whom Divine Love constrains in a holy contempt to
trample on Egypts glory, not fearing the Kings wrath, having beheld the Magisty
of him who is Invisible.

London, Printed in the Year, 1668.

TO Princes, Priests, and People.
JEHOVAH, the everlasting Power, that spans out the Heavens with his span, and
measures the Waters in the hollow of his hand, before whom all Nations, Tongues
and People, are less than the drop to the Ocean, or the Sand to the Sea shore;
who said, Let all things be, and they were, and by the same Word of his Might,
preserves them to this very day, is Holy, Merciful, and Just; and, as the most
excellent part of the whole Creation, made he Man, the Image of himself, by
investing him with that Righteous Principle, and innocent Life, which gave him
Dominion and Authority over all his works, allowing him to eat of every Tree,
saving that of Good and Evil, of which if he did eat, he should certainly die.
Happy had it been for Adam and his Posterity, had he obeyed Gods Commands; but
transgression by disobedience getting entrance, he soon died to his Innocent
State, in which God created him, and became alive in the Dominion sin had over
him, being now as one without Law, in whose fallen State all Nations have been,
and are, (let their Professions seem never so great, and their Sacrifices never
so many) that live in the disobedient Nature, and so strangers to that
Immortality and life Eternal, the first Adam became dead and darkened to by his
transgression, and which the second Adam raises to the knowledge and possession
of, by the power of his quickening Spirit; yet where the Devil (that subtle
Serpent) has not totally extinguished the notion of a God, and the necessity
of his being worshipped, it has been rather his interest than dis-service, to
put the selfish part of the Creature upon sacrificing, wickedly insinuating
that none can be freed from sin, and that the performing of Rites, Duties, and
Ceremonies, is all God requires, and what is necessary to procure acceptance
with him. Thus 'twas that murdering Cain became a Sacrificer, whose Sacrifice
God rejected, because offered in the fallen unrighteous and accursed Nature.
Such also were those Generations who drew near to God with their Lips, and to
whom he said of old, What signifies the multitudes of your Sacrifices? I am
full of burnt Offerings, bring no more vain Oblations; Incense is an
abomination unto me; the new Moons, and Sabbath; Isa. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16
the calling of the Assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity; even the
solemn Meetings I am weary to bear them; and when you spread forth your hands,
I will bide mine eyes; yea, when you make many prayers, I will not he^^ them;
your hands are full of blood: wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings, etc.

Therefore, O ye Princes, Priests, and People, the sollid, necessary, and
weighty Question I have to ask you all in the dread and fear of the
everlasting, Holy, Lord God Almighty, (by whose eternal Spirit the sense of
your present State and Condition I perfectly have received) is this. What
Nature, what Heart, what Spirit, and what ground is it in which your Religions,
Faiths, Works, Words and Worships stand and grow? Is it the Divine, not the
fallen Nature? It is the broken, not the stony Heart? Is it the Contrite not
the formal Spirit? Is it the Gospel increasing good, not old Adams corrupt
thorney Ground? For this know, that no performances but by clean hands and a
pure heart, from whence evil doings are put away, can give acceptance with the
pure God.

Come, answer me first, you Papists, whose Popes for many hundred years have
sat exalted in the hearts of Nations, (God's Temple) above all that is called
God: What Scripture ever made a Pope, or gave authority to any one to lord it
over the Consciences of others, since Christ enjoins that Christians should be
Brethren? And by what warrantable Tradition can be make, dispose, and depose
Civil Empires? Whence came your Creeds but from factious and corrupted
Councils, dyed in the blood of those who refused conformity? What Scriptures of
the Holy Prophets, and Apostles, or any Tradition for the first three hundred
years, mention a Mass Book, speak of Peter's Chair, and a successive
Infallibility, or that say a Wafer is corporially the flesh, blood and bones,
which suffered without Jerusalem? And where did they adore Images, consume many
thousands and millions in building, carving and painting outward Temples, after
Jerusalems (the Type) was destroyed, whilst thousands of poor Families
languished through extreme poverty? When did they enjoin Baby-Baptism,
Churching of Women, Marrying by Priests, Holy Water to frighten the Devil,
hollowing of Bells to scare evil spirits, making and worshipping of Crosses,
erecting of Altars? And where did they command Bowings, institute Musicks,
appoint Holy Days, Canonize Saints, chaffer and merchandise about Indulgences,
pray for the Dead, preach or write for a Purgatory? And what Book or Chapter in
the Old or New Testament, mentions the degrees of Popes, Cardinals,
Archbishops, Deans, Prebeuds, Jesuits, Franciscans, Dominicans, Urselines,
Capuchines, Benedictines, with other such like lazy Nuns and Friars, for the
edification of Christ's Church? But above all, when and where did they authorize
or indulge your Cruel, Persecuting, Whipping, Racking, Inquisition, Murdering
Spirit? Whose Popes, Faith, Church Government, and whole Religion, were
founded, and are maintained by inhumane bloodshed, as your own Histories
plainly manifest* -- Who gave life to these things but the Devil, who was a
murderer from the beginning?

Thus have you Papists, through many Generations, received for Doctrine the
Precepts of Men, Mat. 15. 9
who for much speaking, and sacrificing of your own Inventions, expect to be
heard, whilst in the lustful, wanton, ignorant, and killing Nature, which has
been always shedding the precious blood of those whom God in every Age raised
to testify against your Superstitions and will-Worships; Therefore WOES from
God Almighty to that Romish Whore, who has corrupted the Nations, Rev. 17. 3,
4, 5. Chap. 18. 6, 8.
and sits upon a Scarlet colored Beast full of names of Blasphemy, drunk with
the blood of Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus; the hour of her desolation is nigh,
and in the Cup which she has filled, shall it be filled unto her double; for
strong is the Lord God of Hosts who judges her.

Come now, you that are called Protestants, however denominated or
distinguished, who profess the Scriptures for the Rule of Life and Doctrine,
stand your Trial by them; and first those who are called Episcopalians, who
date your Religion from the Martyrs: that those who first protested against the
darkness and gross Idolatry of the Popish Antichrist, were directed thereto,
and supported therein, by the mighty Power of God, is not denied; and that the
Seals of blood they set to recommend their Testimonies to posterity, are with
us in high esteem, I openly affirm and declare; But that you of the Church of
England have any more to do with them (who now persecute us) than had the Jews
and Pharisees with Abraham, Moses, Acts 7. 52, 59.
and the Prophets, who crucified the Lord of Life, is as positively disowned:
for as they were out of the Life and Spirit of those Holy Men, (though building
and garnishing their Sepulchers, and making great profession with their words)
insomuch as that they slew those whom God sent in the same Spirit to preach a
farther Glory, and to discover a more excellent way; so are you out of the
Power and Spirit your Forefathers lived and died in, professing their words,
but persecuting the same Spirit in others, and crucifying it in your selves: No
wonder therefore you have made so little progress since the first dawning of
Reformation, being not yet got out of the Borders of Babylons form, and
altogether in her lustful, proud, persecuting and wicked Nature: For have not
you Protestant Princes condemned that in others, which you have and do allow in
your selves, contrary to your Forefathers Protestations? Did you not return
severe Persecutions, not only upon the heads of the Roman Catholics in Queen
Elizabeth's time, who esteemed it Antichristian in them; but even your fellow
Protestants, who through zeal for God declared against your backslidings?
witness her severity, and what followed in the Reigns of James, and the
deceased Charles, but more particularly the many thousands now of late that
have been club'd, bruised, imprisoned, exiled, poisened to death by stinking
Dungeons, and ruined in their outward Estates, contrary to Laws, Christian or
Humane: Therefore well may I take up the lamentation and reproof that was of
old, Ye make men offenders for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves
in the Gate; Ye turn aside the Just for a thing of naught, Isa. 29. 21
and lay burdens upon the backs of the Righteous, whilst evil doers pass
unpunished; Amos 3. 10.
You store up violence in your Palaces, Jer. 23. 17.
and many are the oppressed that are amongst you? Yet do not your Priests
prophecy smooth things, Ezekiel. 13. 19, 20.
that sew Pillows under your Arms, and cry Peace? who provoke you to slay
those, Isa. 56. 10, 11.
by executing cruel acts that should not die and preach safety to them that
should not live, like greedy Dogs, Shepherds that cannot understand, they all
look for gain from their Quarters; Mic. 3. 5, 6, 11.
they teach for hire, they divine for money, and You all judge for rewards; for
all which abominations God is departed; Vision is ceased, the Sun is gone down
over you, and your day is turned into thick darkness; Therefore it is you deny
the necessity as well as the present enjoyment of Revelation to any, though
without it, Joh. 17. 3.
as Christ says, No man can know God, whom to know is Life Eternal; and place
the ground of Divine Knowledge in humane Arts and Sciences, that thereby you
may ingross a Function to your selves, and keep up your Trade of yearly gain
upon the poor people; preaching sin for term of life, thereby rendering invalid
the glorious Power of the second Adam, and indulging people in transgression; 1
John 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. Heb. 12. 14. Jer. 23. 32.
though be that sins is of the Devil, and without Holiness none shall see God;
Ministers he never sent, but were commissionated by men, void of the Holy
Ghost, and therefore ye profit not the peoples a badge inseparable to lying
prophets, who run in their own name.

Come and tell me now, ye of the Church of England, that say the Scriptures are
your Rule, where do they own such Persecutors, false Prophets, Tythmongers,
denyers of Revelation, Opposers of Perfection, Men-pleasers, Time-servers,
unprofitable Teachers, (witness the abominations of the Land) Extollers of
humane Learning, as the only way to know God; Admirers of Universities, (signal
places for idleness, looseness, profaneness, prodigality, and gross
ignorance;) and where do we find the Prophets, Apostles, and Servants of the
Lord, to live in worldly pomp, possess hundreds and thousands a year, be called
Lords of their Brethren, and exercise Civil and Spiritual Jurisdiction over the
Bodies and Souls of Christians in their days? Whence came your Forms of
Prayers, and Church Government, from the Scriptures of Truth, and the practice
of the Primitive Christians, or the Mass Book, and Popish Canons? Where is it
that Mass-Houses are called Churches? and what president do you find for
Litanies, Responses, Singing, Queristers, Organs, Altars, Bowings, Surplices,
square Caps, Hoods, Rockets, Fonts, Baby-Baptism, Holy Days, (as you call
them) with much more such like dirty trash, and foul Superstition? Are these
your Scripture Doctrines, and this the Spiritual Worship of Holy Jesus, his
Apostles, and the Ancient Christians? Stand up and answer me ye Members of the
Church of England; but are they not the offspring of that Idolatrous Popish
Generation, amounting at best to Will Worship, which is abominable to the God
of Heaven, who is now breaking forth in vengeance, to thunder down and consume
all the fair Buildings, and pleasant Pictures of Babylonish Inventions?
Therefore from you may I expect an Answer to the Question I asked the
Romanists, In what Nature and Spirit is i^, O Princes, Priests, and People, you
hold and profess Religion, and Worship toward God? Is it the Divine and
Heavenly One which is pure and perfect? Are you Baptized by the Holy Ghost, and
with Fire; Crucified through the daily Cross to the World; Act. 19 2, 3, 4, 5.
Col. 3. 2.
born again, and your affections set on things above? But alas poor Souls! are
you not at, Have mercy upon us miserable sinners, there is no health in us,
from seven to seventy? And as in truth it is, to the shame of Religion, and
destruction of humane Society; How do you abound in evil? Equalizing, if not
outstripping Papists and Heathens (against whom you protest in words) in all
kinds of impiety: Therefore woe unto you Protestants, Isa. 15. 11, 22. Amos 6.
3, 4, 5, 6.
that are mighty to drink strong drink, that give your Neighbors drink, and
put the bottle to them that they may be drunk; that put far away the evil day,
and cause the seat of Violence to come near; that lie upon Beds of Ivory, and
stretch your selves upon your Couches; that eat the fat of the Flock, and drink
the sweet of the Vine; that anoint your selves with the chief Ointments; that
chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to your selves Instruments of
Music, but consider not the afflictions of Joseph. How sport you away your
precious time, as if ye were born not to die, at least never to be judged? O
what Swearing, what Uncleanness, what Drunkenness, what Profanation, what
Vanity, what Pride, what Expense, what Patching, what Painting, what lascivious
Intrigues, what wanton Appointments, what public unclean Houses, what merry
Masks, what lustful insinuating Treats at your Plays, Parks, Mulberry and
Spring-Gardens, with whatsoever else may please the lustful eye, and gratify
the wanton mind? Is not this your case and practice, ye Gallants, young and
old, Men and Women? And by these courses, have not Debts surprised your
Estates, Poverty Plenty, Diseases Health, Debauchery Chastity? Whole Families
ruined both in Soul and Body; yea, such a deluge of Intemperance has so
overwhelmed the Nations, that hard it is to light upon sobriety and virtue.
Well my Friends, when I ruminate on these things, my heart affects mine eye,
and grief overcomes my Soul for yor sakes; Repent therefore, O ye Protestants,
or else know that for all these things God Almighty will bring you to Judgment;
and in the day that his Indignation shall be kindled, your Religion of words
shall fly away, Mat. 7. 21.
and your Lord Lord cryings shall be rejected, because you were strangers to
the Spiritual Nature (though bablers of the Name) of true Christianity, and
therefore shall ye perish by the Sword.

Now as for you Separatists of diverse Names, although I shall not disallow the
Zeal that once you had, yet must I on God's behalf bear my Testimony concerning
you; Therefore be it known unto you all, that you are teaching and receiving
for Doctrines the Traditions of men, running and striving in your own Spirits,
compassing your selves with the sparks of your own fire, Isa. 50. 11.
being not yet come to stand still and know that Will done on Earth which is
done in Heaven; You tell people, Christ Jesus has suffered and satisfied for
sins past, present, and to come, and though never so corrupt, vile, and
polluted in themselves, yet reconciled to, and justified in the sight of God,
by his Personal Righteousness imputed unto them, and not from a Work of Grace
or Regeneration in the Creature; therefore no wonder at your vehement cries
against a state of perfect separation from sin, as being a dangerous Doctrine,
who preach acceptance with the Holy God, whilst in an unholy state; You
generally scoff at Revelation as being ceast; most of you also abetting God to
have ordained a Remnant absolutely to Salvation, and consequently making sin as
well as torment unavoidably necessary to the major part; whereby the Glorious
God of Mercy is represented more infamously unjust than the worst of men;
Doctrines of Devils indeed, and grounds of all looseness and Ranterism; and tho
pleaders, and fighters for Liberty of Conscience when oppressed; the greatest
Oppressors, when in power, not minding the end of Gods loving kindness: but
because of your wanton neglect, is your day darkened, and your Sun set, and
grovelling you are in beggarly Elements, imitations and shadows of the Heavenly
good things, relating to the dispensation of the second Covenant, hoping by
your many duties to be heard, and find acceptance, whilst very strangers to the
covering of Gods Spirit, and ignorant of him (whom to know is life Eternal)
from the Revelation of his Eternal Spirit, and Operation of his Mighty Power,
but from the conceivings and apprehensions of other men, and Books well
reputed, whereby Gods Grace and Light have lost their Office of leading and
teaching: and thus true Counsel becomes darkened, the Fountain shut, the Book
sealed, and you in this state strangers unto God, so that you perish for want
of sound knowledge; for I declare and testify on the behalf of Gods
everlasting Way to Life, and against you all, that you are yet in the man's
spirit, which works not Gods Will and Righteousness, being found helpers of the
mighty against that pure and unchangeable Principle of Light, Grace and Life,
in which God only did, does, and will reveal and manifest himself unto the Sons
and Daughters of men, for which cause you are yet in your ups and downs, Genesis
12. 3. Gal. 3. 8
tossed to and from, not knowing the Rock of Ages, and Foundation of many
Generations, which is that only Holy Seed, wherein the Duties and Performances
of all Nations only can be blessed, and from whence proceeds that Pure,
Righteous, and Immortal Birth, to whom is the promise of an everlasting
Inheritance, but are sticking in your own imaginations, and patching out a
peace unto your selves from your Duties, Performances, and the imitations of
weak times and seasons in some perishing Observations, that no way relate to
the Nature of the Pure, Romans 14 19. Mat. 11 23, 24.
Spiritual and Internal Kingdom of Peace, Righteousness and Joy in the Holy
Ghost; Therefore well may I say, as once of old, We unto thee Capernaum, which
art exalted unto Heaven; for if the mighty works that have been done in thee,
had been done in Tire, Sidon, or Sodom, they would have repented in Dust and
Ashes, and would have remained unto this day. Wherefore O ye zealous
Professors, who in the Spirit of a man are striving to comprehend the Mystery
of God, Joh. 1. 9.
unless ye repent and believe in that Light wherewith Christ has enlightened
every man, that you may obtain to the true discerning of the Spirit and Nature
in which you live and worship, that so you may come to witness the Work and
Will of God, It shall be more tolerable for them in the day that God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ; Rev. 3. 9.
God will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, who say, they are Christians,
and are not.

Therefore unto you Princes, Priests, and People, whether Papists or
Protestants, or any other separated way, that are in your Idolatry,
Superstition, Carnal Ordinances, and Will Worship; whose Faith in, and fear
toward God, are grounded on other men's apprehensions, persuasions and
precepts, and not from the teaching of God's Holy Spirit or Grace; to you all
am I constrained to sound forth and proclaim, That unto us, the most despised,
afflicted and forsaken by all the Families of the Earth, is a Child born, unto
us a Son is given; We call him Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; Isa. 9. 6, 7. c. 49. 6.
of the increase of whose Government there shall be no end: this is he the
Prophet styles, A Light unto the Gentiles, and for Salvation unto the ends of
the Earth; unto whom John Baptist bore this certain record, John 1. 7, 8, 9. c.
8. 12.
That he was the true Light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the
World; who also gave this testimony of himself, That whosoever followed him
should not abide in darkness, 1 John 1. 7.
but have the Light of Life, and the Blood of Jesus, (says the Beloved
Disciple) shall cleanse you from all sin. 1 Cor. 15. 47. John 6. 51, 52, 53
Isa. 42. 6.
This is the second Adam, the quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, the New
and Spiritual Man, the Heavenly Bread, the True Vine; the Flesh and Blood that
was given for the Life of the World; the Second Covenant; the Law writ in the
Heart and Spirit, Jer. 31. 32, 33, 34. John 14. 6 1 Cor. 1. 20. Ezekiel. 34. 29.
Genesis 3. 15
put in the inward Parts; the way in which the Fool cannot err; the Truth,
before deceit was; the Life that is hid in God, eternal in the Heavens,
glorified before the World began; the Power, the Wisdom, the Righteousness of
God; the Plant of Renown; the Royal Seed that bruiseth the Serpents Head; in
short, That Grace which has appeared unto all men, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
teaching them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live Godlikely,
and soberly in this present World. He stands at the Door of every Heart, and
knocks, if by any means he may be heard and have admittance, whereby God's
Promise may be fulfilled, That God will dwell with Men; and my Testimony is,
That a Remnant have obeyed this Heavenly Voice, and now walk in this pure Light
in which God Almighty is known to tabernacle with them: Rev. 21 3.
Therefore in the fear of God Eternal do I cry aloud unto you all, who are
wandering in the bypath of men's Inventions, Traditions and Precepts, to empty
your hearts and minds of those unprofitable Guests, that better entertainment
than a Manger may be had to receive this Lord of Glory; Deuteronomy. 18 18, 19, 20.
Jer. 17. 10. John 4. 29.
The mighty Prophet all must hear or die, who searches the Heart, tries the
Reins, and is able to tell you all that ever you did: -- This is the Quakers
Christ, and Son of the Living God, whom we are not ashamed to confess before
Men, as that Glorious Light, which since we have believed and walked in,
according to our distinct measures, we have not only received a perfect
discovery of all the will-Worships, Pollutions, and vain Fashions, or Customs
that have been brought forth by, and stands in, the dark, lustful, and
apostatized nature; but as we have continued in a holy watchfulness, to observe
and obey its Righteous Dictates; Gods mighty Power we have, and do experience
to subdue and redeem therefrom; Heb. 9. 14. chapter 10. 22.
yea, that Spiritual Blood is sensibly felt to sprinkle and cleanse the
Conscience from dead works.

And to you all must I declare, That by no other way did I ever receive the
knowledge of the least evil, or ability to conquer it, than in this universal
Light, who is given for a Captain and a Leader out of all the bypath and
petty persuasions of men, through judgment that purifies, and the Red Sea of
Troubles, Trials, and Afflictions, unto the Rest which is pure and undefiled;
This is Gods beloved Son, hear ye him; For I proclaim, another way there is not
to eternal Life and Peace, than this everlasting Gospel which now is preached;
for the time is come that the Angel of his Presence is flying through the midst
of Heaven, having this ancient Gospel to preach to them that dwell upon the
Earth, and are in their Earthly Nature, Wisdom, and Worships, Crying with a
loud Voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is
come: Rev. 14 6, 7.
Therefore away away with all your own ways, works and Worships that are
grounded upon men's Command, and fallible apprehensions, whose breath is in
their nostrils; and no more do homage according to such prescriptions, but fear
and dread the living Lord God of Heaven and Earth; For if the Righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4 18.
But woe, anguish, tribulation and sorrow shall come upon every Soul that
remains in sin.

Therefore be warned ye dark and Idolatrous Papists, ye superstitious and loose
Protestants, yea zealous, yet carnal Professors, to come out of all your own
Ways, Works, Worships, Nature, Spirit and Practice; In silence and fear to
wait in this glorious Light which God Almighty has displayed, and raised us
contemned Quakers to walk in, and testify of, in these last Ages; that by
believing therein, and circumspectly adhering thereto, you may come to
experience the rising of that eternal Power which overcomes and removes
transgression, that has so long separated between you and your God, hereby
shall you receive sound Judgment and Heavenly Wisdom; -- This will not destroy,
but fulfill the Spriptures of Truth, and so shall you know the Baptism that is
from above, and eat the Heavenly Bread, and drink the Spiritual Wine at Christ's
Table, in his Kingdom, which the Saints of old saw the coming of before they
tasted of death; Luk 17 20, 21.
For the Kingdom of God is within; -- Here all old things, Covevenant, Signs,
Ordinances, and whatever perishes with the using, shall be done away; and the
everlasting unchangeable Substance witnessed; and no more shall you profess
Religion, or perform Worship from the imagining and transgressing nature, but
from a certain sense of Gods own Operation; so shall your Faith stand in that
Power the Gates of Hell can never prevail against: For this I once more am
necessitated to declare, by vi^^ue of the sound knowledge given me of God, that
whilst you are fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, and walking after your own
will and imaginations, you are altogether strangers to the yoke, to the daily
Cross, and self-denying life, but are yet the corrupt Ground, and evil Tree,
which bring forth evil Fruits, Job. 4. 8 Gal. 6. 7, 8.
Thorns, Briars, and sour Grapes; Be ye undeceived, God will not be mocked;
such as you sow, such shall you reap: --

Wherefore I entreat, advise, and warn you all, before the day of your
visitation be shut up, in the eternal withdrawings of God's Love, and
revelation of his dreadful endless Vengeance, O ye Idolatrous, Superstitious,
Carnal, Proud, Wanton, Unclean, Mocking and Persecuting Princes, Priests and
People, to repent; Return, return, believe and obey this Light, which manifests
and reproves all your evil deeds, that in it you may know your Redemption from
the captivity of sin effectually wrought. O tremble and quake with the Prophet
Habakkuk, Hab. 3. 16.
you who scoff at Quakers, that you may all rest in the day of trouble.

But if you shall still go on to rebel against the reproofs and instructions of
this Holy Light, and despise and persecute the Children of it; be it known to
you all, that before the brightness of its Glory shall your shadows vanish,
your imitations fly away, your beggarly Elements melt, and you die in your sins.

Nor shall we be sollicitous what your intentions are concerning us, well
knowing him in whom we have believed, to be much greater in us than he that is
in the World, 2 Timothy 1, 12. 1 John 4. 4.
who in love has called us out of it, and we doubt not will by his everlasting
Arm of strength defend and preserve us over all opposition, and by us exalt his
Name, Truth, and Salvation unto the ends of the Earth.

Therefore let the Winds of Imagination blow, the storms of Persecution beat,
and the Sea of raging malice foam; Hab. 3. 17, 18.
Yea, though the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither Fruit be in the Vine;
though the labor of the Olive fail, and the Fields yield not their meat;
though the Flock be cut off from the Fold, and there be no Herd in the Stalls;
though Nations should combine against us, and multitudes assemble themselves to
our overthrow; -- Yet, be it reported to the Nations, and let it be told unto
the people, that we shall still confide and rejoice in that everlasting Holy
God Almighty, Lord of Hosts, and King of Saints, who has gathered us; and
therefore is by us over all Things in Heaven, and things on Earth, blessed and
renowned for ever.

THE END.

