SOME USEFUL SAYINGS, IN VERSE and PROSE, COLLECTED By a Lover of Virtue and
Goodness in Whomsoever.

The Heart of him that is upright,
In Heavenly knowledge takes delight.
I will delight my self in THY Statutes. If thou would true Wisdom win,
Then thou must retire within.
That which may be known of GOD is manifest in them, Romans 3.19. The Second
Edition with Alterations and Additions.

He that is instrvcted unto the Kingdom of Heaven, brings out of his Treasure
things New and Old.

London, Printed for the Author, 1688.

THE PREFACE.
THe former Impression (excepting the Postscript) was chiefly intended for
Young People, and This being not only for such, but more especially for Those
of riper years; most of the Verses are left out, and many Sentences in Prose
(and some of them of a more Spiritual concern) put in: which probably, to some
Hungry Souls who are waiting for the Crumbs that fall from their LORDS Table,
may be of some Service and Refreshment. For its the Poor and Hungry that are to
be fed with Good things, when the Rich and the Full goes empty away.

O THOU INFINITE AND WONDERFUL BEING! How do THOU hide the Mysteries of THY
Kingdom from the Wise and Prudent, and reveals them to Babes; even to those
sincere Souls that are entirely given up to serve THEE: This, this, is THY
doings THOU KING of Righteousness and KING of Peace. Go on, go on, I beseech
THEE, that THINE OWN WORKS MAY YET PRAISE THEE: and that it may be known that
the GOD of Daniel is the ONLY TRUE AND LIVING GOD, and that HE alone is the
Revealer of Hiden Mysteries, to those who are found Innocent before HIM, and
who are freely and willingly given up to part with all that is near and dear
unto them for HIS Sake.

O THOU GREAT AND MIGHTY ONE! make bare THINE Arm, that the Nations may know
there is a GOD that judges in the Earth; and that will reward every Man
according to his Deeds.

I that am but as a poor Worm, Prostrate my self before THEE: Humbly begging
that THOU would Rule and Reign in and over Me, and all Mine, henceforth even
for ever, and ever. Amen.

Dec. 1687.
SOME USEFUL SAYINGS, etc.
1. TO work aright, OLORD, instruct thou me, That in THY Sight I may approved
be: Then shall my Soul have Rest and Peace for ever In THEE, which neither
Death nor Hell can sever.

2. IT matters not, how I appear to Man, A Witness in my Soul there is, that
can This record to the FATHER bear, that I Seek not Man's praise, but
Immortality: That so a Crown of Rest I may receive, Which Mortals have not in
their Power to give.

If I yet pleased Men, I should not be the Servant of Christ.

3. Though all the World my Actions discommend, I am at Peace, when Conscience is
my Friend.

And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of Offense
toward GOD, and toward Man.

4. HE that Commands himself is more a Prince, Than He who Nations keeps in
Awe, And they that yield to what their Souls convince, Shall never need another
Law.

The WORD is nigh thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, to obey it and do it.

5. He Is still himself, when company is gone, Too well employed ever to be
alone; He takes no thought to be observed or seen, Whilst all his Acts are
echoed from within.

Love to be unknown and nothing accounted of.

6. HE dares not wish, nor his own fate propound; But if GOD send, reads love
in every wound And would not lose, for all the joys of sense, The inward
comfort of Obedience.

Remember Abraham, the Father of all the Faithful.

7. WHen all the stormy World does roar, How unconcerned am I: I cannot fear
the falling lower, Who never would be High.

The lowliest mind is safest.

8. HAppy that Soul that is content alone, And needs no entertainment, but its
own.

Never less alone, than when alone.

9. HE that lives at Home, and learns to know, GOD and himself, needs no
further go.

The Kingdom of GOD is within you. Luke 17.21.

10. AT length this Secret I have learned, Who will be happy must be
unconcerned; Must all their Comfort in their bosom wear, And seek their
Treasure, and their Power there.

We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels. 2 Cor.

USEFUL SAYINGS, etc.
1. THe Fear of the LORD is the first step to be accepted of HIM, and true
Wisdom obtains HIS Love.

2. Blessed is that Soul that hears the LORD speaking in Her, and receives
from HIS Mouth the Word of Comfort. Christian Pat.

3. Blessed are those Ears that hearken only to the DIVINE VOICE, and listen
not to the Whisperings and Allurements of the World.

4. If I choose the LORD for my Portion, then Mercy and Goodness shall follow
me whilst I live, and Glory and everlasting happiness shall be my Portion when
I die.

5. He that has little Understanding, and seareth GOD, is better than he that
is exceeding Wise, and transgresses the Law of the most HIGH.

6. He that intends to attain to the more inward and Spiritual things of
Religion, must with JESUS depart from the multitude and press of People.

7. It Was Sir Henry Woton's Motto, after all his Travels and Embassies, I have
at length learned, That the greatest Wisdom is got by a quiet retirement.

8. Let it be our Care to live here as we ought, contented with the condition
which Providence alots us; whatever we may meet with in the Way we shall be
happy in the End, which the Wise in Heart considers.

9. Learn to overcome thy self in all things, for the Love of thy CREATOR, and
then thou shall be able to attain to Divine Knowledge.

10. If thou spend the Day profitably, thou will have cause to rejoice in the
Evening.

11. Simple Obedience is to be preferred before all Worldly Wisdom.

12. The Glory of a good Man is the Testimony of a good Conscience; have That
and thou will have inward Peace in the midst of many Troubles.

13. To do always well, and to have low thoughts of thy self, is a sign of an
Humble Soul.

14. They that follow Sensuality, stain their own Consciences and lose the
favor of GOD.

15. Withdraw thy self violently from That, to which nature is viciously
inclined.

16. They that avoid not small faults, by little and little, fall into greater.

17. They that live at Liberty and Ease, shall ever live in Disquiet.

18. True quietness of Heart is got by resisting our Passions, not by obeying
them.

19. Remember always thy End, and how that lost time never returns.

20. If we engage into a large Acquaintance, and various Familiarities, we set
open our Gates to the Invaders of most of our time. Char^on.

21. Visits made or received, are usually an intolerable consumption of Time,
unless prudently ordered: and they are for the most part spent in vain and
impertinent Discourses, J. Hales.

22. Many Visitings, or many Visitors does not only hinder true Tranquillity,
but much deprive us of that time which ought to be better employed.

23. Time fruitlesly passed away, will in the end cause an aching Heart.

24. Defile not thy Mouth with Swearing; neither use thy self to the Naming of
the Holy ONE.

25. Let the Name of GOD be sparing in your Mouth, but abundantly in your Heart.

26. The Jews of Old accounted the Name JEHOVAH so Sacred, that they durst not
utter it; the High Priest alone, and that in the Temple only, but once in the
Year at their Solemn Feast, while he blessed the People, might have leave to
mention it, for others it was Death. Buxt. Lex. Youths Monitor p. 100.

27. It is a mark of folly and ill nature to hate reproof, and far from his
mind that said; If the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil.

28. Sin and Sorrow are inseparable Companions; thou can not let in the one,
and shut out the other; he that swims in Sin, must sink in Sorrow. Divine
Breathings. p. 66.

29. Corrupt Examples may sway with weak Minds, but the wise in Heart will
regard and consider their own Duty. Sam. Crosland.

30. Noah had perished in the Waters, if Times had carried him. LOT had Burnt
in Sodom, if the Multitude had swayed him; The sins of Times GODS People may
always be pious mourners for them; but never practisers of them: Be ye (what
ever others are) Righteous in your Generation before the LORD. Idem.

31. Oppose no Man willful^l^, neither follow any in evil Courses, Idem.

32. Obstinacy is an Advantage to our Enemies, a Trouble to our Friends, and
the assured overthrow of our Selves.

33. SO gracious is Providence, that every Man has a Light set up within
himself for a Guide. Seneca.

34. An Immutable Law, which with the knowledge of Good and Evil, is Engraven
upon the Heart, and Grafted into the Soul of Man. Origin.

35. Let none blame the Light, they are not Saved, but their own Rebellion who
refuse to be Saved by it. -- No Man is without a Teacher, to Instruct, or
Assist him, in the Way to Eternal Life. Chrysostom.

36. The most excellent thing the Soul is awakened to, is her Guide; that is, a
Divine Spirit within: But if man be Rebellious to it, it will prove his
Torment. Pythagoras.

37. Socrates frequently said, he had the Guide of his Life within him, and
called it his good Angel, or Spirit, that suggested to his Mind what was Good
and Virtuous, and inclined and disposed to a Pious Life; and that it furnished
him with Divine Knowledge.

38. The Virtue and Happiness of a Man depends upon the close correspondence of
his mind with the Divine Will. Cleanthus.

39. Seneca says, I have a clear and certain Light by which I may judge the
Truth from Falsehood; that which appertains to the felicity of the Soul, the
Internal will direct to. -- GOD is in us, the Holy Spirit sits or resides in
Man, and is the observer of our Good or Evil Actions; as HE is dealt with by
us, HE deals with us.

40. GOD has Built to HIMSELF a Temple in the Consciences of Men, as the Place
wherein HE would be Worshipped; and that there Men ought to look for HIS
Appearance. Justinus.

41. A Life Subject to the holy Guidings of the Universal Light in the
Conscience, is a kind of a natural Christianity, or to be naturally a
Christian. Tertullian.

42. Worship GOD; reverence thy Parents; know thy Self; in Childhood be
Modest; in Youth Temperate; in Manhood Just; and in Old Age Prudent, that thou
may die untroubled. Chilon.

43. Virtue is the Beauty, and Vice the deformity of the Soul, Socrates.

44. Virtue is an Armor that none can pierce or take from good men. Pleasure
is one of the greatest Mischiefs in the World. Antisthenes.

45. Where men's Souls are deeply and frequently employed in Spiritual
Retirement, and waiting for Divine Strength, and are often exercised in
Meditation; Holy Revelations, or Illuminations will occur, which enlightens the
Soul and enables it the better to live and act Virtuously. Diogenes.

46. GOD grant that I may always be so happy, as to observe the venerable
sanctity in my Words and Deeds, which are commanded by those Noble Laws,
written in men's Hearts. Sophocles.

47. Cordially espouse all Virtue, constantly hate and decline all Vice.

48. To be humble to Superiors, is Duty; to Equals Civility; to Inferiors
Courtesy; to all Safety.

49. It is to be Observed, that the Poor Man Sings at his Plow, while the Rich
Man frets in his Palace: This shows, that it is the Mind not the Fortune that
makes us happy.

50. The Glory of the Aged is their Experience and their Wisdom, the Glory of a
young Man is his Modesty and Submission.

51. He that is a Companion of Riotus Men, shameth his Father and dishonors
his Mother.

52. It Is not for young Men to drink Wine, nor for lovers of Virtue to be
Drinkers of strong Drink.

53. Be not a Companion with Wine-bibbers, nor with Riotous eaters of Flesh.
Pro. 23.20.

54. Deal by thy Estate which GOD in HIS Providence shall please to give Thee,
as Cicero once Ingeniously and Prudently advised; Let them not be locked up so
close, but that Wisdom and Liberality may have the Key, and at any time come
freely to them: Neither let them lie so loose and open, that Prodigality should
abuse and wast them. S. Crosland.

55. He that will be Lavish in his Superfluities, will afterward find himself
unavoidably straightened in his necessities. Idem.

56. Conscience once embased, the Heart once polluted by Vicious Courses, is
not easily recovered to the true Fear of the LORD. Idem

57. Honor thy Father, and forget not the Sorrows of thy Mother; and take heed
of Grieving, Contradicting, or Contending with them: But with all Tenderness,
Modesty, and Submission behave thy self toward them.

58. Youth should be a Pattern for Virtue, not a Privilege for Vice: Therefore
let thy Virtues be Grave, whilst thy Years are Green.

59. Plato, seeing a young Man play at Dice, reproved him sharply; the other
answered, what for so small a matter? custom (said Plato) is no small thing;
let idle hours be spent more usefully.

60. Let youth take delight in good things, for Pleasures are the Baits of
evil: Observe the momentary sweetness of a delicious life is followed with
eternal Sorrow, the short pain of the contrary with eternal Pleasures.

61. Be meek and courteous to all, yet choose only the Virtuous and Harmless
for your Companions. The Dove flocks not with Ravens.

62. Let thy Speech be sober and seldom: To know how to be silent, is a great
advantage to speak well; and he that knows not how to do the one, knows not the
other.

63. Who hears much and speaks little, may best discern Falsehood from Truth.

64. We ought always to keep a Bridle at our Mouths, even in Religious and
Holy Occasions; because it is hard to fall into Arguing, without offense to GOD
and our Neighbor.

65. Let thy Speech be short, comprehending much in few Words. For long
Discourses, Amplifications, and Repetitions, are a sign of Ostentation in the
Speaker, tedious and irksom, and of no real good to the Hearer. Even in a good
Cause, or on a good Subject, a man may say too much.

66. Rare are the men who set a higher price upon hearing then speaking.

67. It is the Property of a good Man, to do much and say little.

68. The beginning of Strife, is as when one lets out Water: therefore leave
off Contention before it be meddled with.

69. A froward Man sows Strife: and a Whisperer separateth very Friends.

70. Silence is a Guard of the Conscience, a Bridle from Insolence, and a sign
of Innocence, and preserves from many Evils.

71. They that turn another words to a worse end than was intended, shows an
evil Mind; and are far from doing therein as they would be done unto.

72. There is more desirableness in Meekness, and Innocence, than in all the
Mountains of Prey or Self-exaltation.

73. A Virtuous Man is more Patient in Adversity, than a Vicious in Prosperity.

74. I will learn contentment by considering others wants and my own
enjoyments, and not learn discontent from others enjoyments and my own wants.
J. Hales.

75. A Rich Worldling is rather to be pitied for what he wants, than envied for
what he has.

76. Unsatiable desires in Temporals, makes a man poor in Spirituals.

77. How little soever the thing be, if it be inordinately loved, it defiles
the Soul, and hinders the enjoyment of the CHIEFEST GOOD.

78. There is nothing in the World conduces more to the Composure and
Tranouility of the Mind, than the serenity and clearness of the Conscience;
keep but That safe and untainted, the Mind will enjoy a Calm and Tranquillity in
the midst of all the Stoyns of the World. And although the Waves beat, and the
Sea works, and the Winds blow; the Mind that has a quiet and clear Conscience
within, will be as stable and as safe from Perturbation as a Rock in the midst
of a tempestuous Sea, and will be a Gosken too, and within it self, when the
rest of the World without, is like an Egypt for Contusion and Darkness.

79. Whatever thou do hazard or lose, keep the Integrity of thy Conscience,
both before Troubles come and under them; it is a Jewel will make thee Rich in
the midst of Poverty, a Sun that will give thee Light in the midst of Datkness,
a Fortress that will keep thee safe in the greatest Danger, and that is never
to be taken from thee, unless thou thy self betray it and deliver it up. J.
Hales Contempl. p. 374.

80. Many words do not satisfy the Soul, but a good Life comfort the Mind,
and a pure Conscience gives great assurance in the sight of GOD.

81. He that keeps the Law of GOD and abstains from the impurity of the World,
that is, the good Man, the just Liver; he is the Apostles true Jew and
Circumcition. W. P.

82. The Curse of the LORD is in the House of the Wicked, but HE blesses the
Habitation of the Just.

83. Whosoever fears HIM, it shall go well with them at the last; and they shall
find favor in the day of their Death.

84. Let reason go before every Enterprise: And Counsel before every Action. B

85. Though a good Life may have but few days, yet a good Name endures for ever.

86. What are the delights of the World to the Peace of my Consoience? Rather
let me be Poor with a good Heart, than Rich with an evil Mind.

87. How can Pleasures content me, whilst the Sting of them Poison me?

88. Never think those true hearted Friends to thee, that are false to their
own Consciences.

89. They who suffer their own Wills and Lus^s to Rule, not only oppress others
thereby, but Ri^le and crucify the Just and Faithful Witness in themselves.

90. There are no such Enemies without, as unruly Lusts and Passions within,
therefore labor to overcome them all.

91. The great folly of Mankind, is the unruliness and want of Government, of
the Sensual Appetite or Lusts: Hence grows Internperance and excess in Eating,
and Drinking, which breaks out into very Foolish, Vain, and Imprudent Actions;
exhaust the Estate, wast and consume the Health, embase and impoverisheth the
Mind, destroys the Reputation, and fills the World with much of that Folly and
Disorder, that is every where observable. Judge Hales.

92. A^ thou desirous of a Kingdom, says the Philosopher, I will presently
show thee One. Rule Wisely over thy self.

93. Erasmus says, What Men set forth by Men's device, may be Perceived by Man's
Wit; but the Thing that is set forth by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
requires an interpreter inspired with the like Spirit, for without the
Inspiration of It, the secrets of GOD cannot be known.

94. Our Eternal help is from GOD who Illuminates our Minds, without WHOM we
are unable to understand any thing in Divine Matters; and HE inspires men with
that understanding, which neither Age, nor Industry, nor Doctrine of Man can
possibly give. Drusius.

95. Chilon, One of the Wise Men of Greece, left these three Pathetical sayings
behind Him: 1. Whosoever thou art, learn to know thy self. 2. Be not earnest in
thy desires after any Visible thing. 3. Misery will be the end of Meddling with
many Matters.

96. Humility and Abstinence keeps the Body and Mind, in much Evenness and
Tranquillity; but Pride and Fullness are Pernicious to both.

97. Afflictions are sent for the good, even of good Men; and it is their fault
if they have not that effect.

98. Let thy Afflictions make thee humble, and thy deliverance therefrom the
more increass thy humility.

99. Follow Peace and Holiness with all Men, not only with your Friends, but
with your very Enemies; that you may be the Children of the HIGHEST, and of a
good example to all Mankind.

100. The clean Soul of a Christian is the House of GOD, and also the House of
Prayer, whose Body is HIS Temple.

101. There are some that Pray often, yet are not heard to speak much. There
are many that make long Prayers, yet Pray not at all -- acceptably.

102. Prayer is a more Spiritual and Secret thing in the Sanctified, than is
understood by most.

103. A just Man (says Chrysostom) leaves not off to Pray; unless he leaves to
be just: He always Prays, who always does well; the good desire is Prayer,
and if the desire be continued, so is also the Prayer.

104. To me the Strife of Men is wearisom, their Threatenings, their Flatteries,
their Applause, their Revilings, are all of them Wisely, and Silently, to be
passed over by him that truly means Peace on Earth or Glory in Heaven. He
were yet to seek (says a worthy Man) how to live that knows not how to digest
and put up such trials as these.

105. The first step to true Religion, is, to depart from Iniquity: all other
steps in Religious performances till that be, avails little: for if iniquity
be regarded in the Heart, GOD regards not that man's Prayers.

106. Religion (however pulled several ways) is of it self a quiet and
strifeless thing; Holy indeed, but Harmless, and Divine: yet still shining
forth in much Plainness and Simplicity. Be you of that Religion which gives
Glory to GOD on High, on Earth Peace, and Good will toward Men.

107. True Religion is not to fill Heads with Notions and Opinions, but to Sow
in the Mind the Seed of Virtue, to direct how to Govern Passions, and to
destroy self-will.

108. Of all the diverse Religions that are or may be in the World, they seem to
be most Noble, and to have greatest appearance of Truth, which without much
external and bodily service, draw the Soul into it self, and raise it by pure
Contemplation to admire and adore the Greatness and Infinite MAJESTY of the
cause of all things, and the BEING of Beings, without any great Declaration or
Prescription of HIS service. Charon.

109. Virtue and Goodness ought to be owned in all Parties and Opinions, and if
these were practiced it would reconcile all men to each other.

110. Happy is he that shall be exercised in these things, and he that lays
them up in his Heart shall become Wise.

He that can Read, let him understand what follows.
111. THat the Soul may be the Habitation of the Celestial KING, it is
necessary that it should be pure and without any blemish; wherefore the LORD
purifies it as Gold in the Furnace of Tribulations and Temptations.

112. Thou art to know, that the humble Soul is a Habitation for GOD, that
therefore to the end the Sovereign KING may rest in the Throne of Thy Soul;
thou oughtst to take care it be Clean, Quiet, and Peaceable.

113. Think not that GOD esteems him most, that does, or talks most; but he
is most beloved, who is most Humble, most Faithful, and Resigned, and most
conform to the DIVINE WILL and Pleasure.

114. Where the DIVINE SPIRIT dwells, there is always Simplicity and
Innocence; which are the proper fruits and effects of it.

115. The Spirit of DIVINE WISDOM, fills men with Sweetness, governs 'em with
Courage, and enlightens those with excellence who are subject to Its direction.

116. It is a constant Maxim, that DIVINE Wisdom begets Humility: But that
which is acquired by the Learned (or others) begets Pride.

117. The LORD takes delight only in those Souls, where Peace and Quietness
Reins, and Self-love and Self-will are banished.

118. Self-love and Self-will are two of the greatest Enemies to Mankind; and
are hard to be discovered, or overcome.

119. Encourage thy self to be Humble, embracing Tribulations as Instruments of
thy good; and desite that GOD may be thy only Refuge, Comfort, and Consolation.

120. Happy's that Soul who when Afflicted and disconsolate keeps steady
within, and goes not forth for outward Comfort, but relies only upon the DIVINE
Goodness.

121. The Soul that would be United to Christ must be conformable to HIM, and
follow HIM through Good and Evil report.

122. Resign and deny thy self wholly; for though true self-denial seem harsh at
the beginning, it is easy in the middle, and becomes most exceeding Sweet and
Pleasant in the End.

123. The disesteem of the delights of the World, and accounting of 'em
troublesome, is a sign of a Mortified Man.

124. Inward Mortification and perfect Resignation, are necessary for obtaining
inward peace.

125. Happy is he, who by DIVINE assistance suffers both Internal, and External
Cro^^^ with Content and Resignation.

126. Never disquiet thy self for any Accident; because, unquietness is the
Door by which the Enemy gets entrance into the Soul to Rob it of its Peace.

127. Enjoyment and Internal Peace are the fruits of the DIVINE SPIRIT, which
no man gets into his Possession, if in the Closet of his Soul he is not a
resigned man.

128. Take heed of thy Self, for thou of thy Self, art the greatest Enemy to
thy Self.

129. The Spiritual man that lives inwardly with his MAKER, is contented in the
midst of all Adversities.

130. The Way of inward Peace is in all things to be conformable to the
pleasure of the DIVINE WILL. This Conformity is the Sweet Yoke that introduces
us into the Region of Internal Peace and Serenity. Hence we may know that the
Rebellion of our Will is the chief occasion of all our disquiet.

131. O how much is there to be purified in a Soul that must arrive at the Holy
Mountain of Perfection! O how Innocent, Sincere, and Humble, ought that Soul to
be, which would not hinder the entrance of the DIVINE BEING into it, nor HIS
communication with it?

132. This preparing the Soul for DIVINE entrance, must of necessity be made by
the DIVINE WISDOM.

133. He that will follow CHRIST, and come unto Perfection, let him part with
his own Will wholly; let him entirely submit to the Yeak of Obedience and
Subjection, by means of Solf dental, which is the truest Cross.

134. Perfection does not consist in Teaching it, but in living it* Because, he
is neither the greatest Saint, nor the wisest Man that knows the Truth most,
but he that practices it.

135. The LORD has HIS repose in Peaceable and quiet Souls, and in those in
whom the fire of Tribulation and Temptation has burnt up the Dregs of
Passions, and the bitter water of Afflictions has washed off the Filthy Spo^s
of Inordinate lusts and Affections; HE reposes only where Quietness Reins and
Selflove is Banished.

136. Tho the Soul be wanting in Sensible Devotion, yet, it covets Solitude and
avoids Conversation, that it may be in readiness to receive the influences of
the DIVINE Bounty.

137. How is it possible for any to have Communication with the Sweet, Inward,
and Powerful Voice of GOD, who are not sequestered from the Noise and Cumults
of the World?

138. And though exterior Solitude does much assist for the obtaining inward
Peace, yet, it is the inward Solitude that chiefly brings a Man into the
enjoyment of the CHIEFEST GOOD.

139. He is busied enough, who is always waiting to do the will of GOD; to
Whom one pure Act of Internal Resignation, is more acceptable then a thousand
Exercises in ones own Will.

140. Behold, to Obey is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken better then the
fat of Rams.

141. He that is upon excuses and replies to his Superiors, has not a Simple
and Humble heart; because, replies grow from a secret Pride that reigns in the
Soul, and from thence the Total ruin of it.

142. The Soul when it is in the deepest Contemplation, and in the feeling of
the Ravishing delights of its BELOVED, is seldom seen in much Show or Ceremony.

143. And when the Soul is in those enjoyments, which Eye has not seen, Ear
heard, nor entered into the Heart of Man to conceive; then the Enemy seeks by
various Temptations and Aluteinents, to draw the Mind from a Steady, Quiet, and
entire Resignation: But the true Spouse who is kept Chaste to her BELOVED,
cannot be drawn from HIM by any Temptations. Divinarions, Enchantments, or
Alurements whatsoever; well knowing that one Hour in HIS presence, is better
then a thousand elsewhere.

144. The Harlot by good Words and fair Speeches, seeks to bewitch and beguile
the Hearts of the Simple; Happy is he that sees Her, and the foot that turns
from Her.

145 He that has put his band to the Plow and Work of GOD, ought not to look
back what ever Reproach, Trial, or Difficulty he meets with all; neither should
he that is engaged in a spiritual War-fare, entangle himself with the Affairs
of this life.

146. Unless a Man be Circumcised in Heart, and Ears, he cannot be truly Happy.

147. Antichrist's Kingdom was upheld and promoted in days past by the
Scribes, and Pharisees, in talking of the FATHERS Will: But Christ's Kingdom
was upheld and carried on in Doing the FATHER'S Will: and as it was then, so it
has been in this our Age. He that has Ears to hear, let him hear.

148. Many have been called, but few have followed the LORD fully, who requires
a Purifying, yea, a through Cleansing of all, that this Day make mention of HIS
Name.

149. It is written of the OX, that in days past he knew his Owner, and the
Ass his Masters Crib; but the People who professed the Name of the Most HIGH
they had forgot HIM days without Number, and as it was then, so it is now: He
that can receive it, let him.

150. The Way is narrow that leads unto Life, and though many be the talkers of
it, yet, ^ew there are that have found it, or are walking in it.

151. Many have a form of Godliness, but most deny the Power thereof, and from
such the Righteous and Sincere are to turn away.

152 To speak inwardly with GOD is the State and Happiness of an Heavenly and
Spiritual Man.

153. The Blessing is not to the High, nor to the Exalted; but to the Poor in
Spirit.

154. A Meck and Quiet Spirit is of great Price, happy are the Enjoyers and
Possessors of it.

Hugo Grotius, a Man of Universal Learning and profound Policy (before he came
to dye) said, I would give all my Learning and Honor, for the plain integrity
and harmless Innocence of Jean Vrick.

155. Spiritual Worship is called for, and Spiritual Worshippers are to be
sought out; happy's the Man, and happy's the Woman that is fitted and prepared
for it.

156. The PEARL which many have lost, is not to be found abroad; he that would
find it, must dig deep for it.

157. It is good for all to have salt in themselves, that so the good
Shepherd's Voice may be known from the Voice of a Stranger.

158. He that knows, and talks of his MASTERS Will, and does it not; must
expect to be beaten with many Stripes.

159. In the Inward work let all be Diligent, and Zealous, lest whilst they see
the Evils of others, they may be Blind to any that is within themselves; and
then are they miserable: Therefore mind the fear of the LORD only, and that
will keep your own Hearts clean, and will preserve you from being hurt, or
defiled by others.

160. Happy's the Man, and happy's the Woman, that fears always; that
stands in Awe and sins not.

161. Truth leads its Followers into Humility, and Lowliness of Mind, and
leads out of all Pride, Conceitedness, and Self-Exaltation.

162. Truth Glories not in Multitudes, nor the Followers of the LAMB in an Arm
of Flesh.

163. No Man nor Woman can know the true SHEPHERD'S Voice, until they come to
witness a silencing of all Flesh in themselves.

164. Death and Destrution have long talked of the same of Wisdom, but Wisdom
is only justified of her own Children; happy are they that have an Ear to hear.

It Is not the Doves but the Birds of Frey that feed upon the Carcass. happy are
they that have an Ear to hear, so as to feed only upon the true Bread.

165. A Virtuous Good and Holy Life, is more to be desired, and is more
accepted of, then all the hearing, or all the talking of Truth in words, is, or
can be.

166. This is certain, no Soul goes to GOD in Death; but only That which drew
nigh to HIM in Life.

167. He that has the Law of the most HIGH witten in his Heart, and is guided
thereby, cannot feed upon Wind; nor be satisfied with a Multitude of Words: For
it is only the Word of LIFE that can satisfy the Hungry and Immortal Soul;
happy are they that have an Ear to hear.

168. He that follows the Truth for the Loaves, or for any Senister or By-end,
can never be an Inheritor or Possessor of the true Bread.

169. He that seeks the good of others, ought not to be weary of well doing;
there being a Season in which he shall assuredly Reap, if he faints not.

170. He that cannot freely forgive his Enemies and reward Good for Evil,
cannot be a Disciple of JESUS that JUST and HOLY ONE.

171. He that is not faithful to the Measure or Gift of GOD in himself,
whatever others say or do unto him, is not, nor cannot be CHRIST'S Disciple
this Day.

172. He that Builds upon the Faith of others, Builds upon a Sandy Foundation;
and he that gives up his Understanding and Judgment unto others, whatever they
be, is one of those Builders. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear.

173. But he that Builds upon the Grace and Gift of GOD in his own particular,
Builds upon a sure and safe Foundation; yea, he Builds upon that Foundation
which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against, and which Men nor Devils can-
overthrow; Happy are they that have Ears to hear, so as to be Builders on that
Foundation.

These are faithful and true SAYINGS: He that can receive them, let him.

174. MY Soul says, in the bitterness thereof, O what wilt THOU do for THY
GREAT NAME! Shall It be Dishonored, and shall none lay it to Heart? Shall the
leadings of THY SPIRIT be departed from? and shall none take It to be their
GUIDE?

175. Where are the People that are so Chaste, so Resigned, and so entirely
given up to serve the LORD, that they are willing to part with all for HIS sake?

176. Where are they that are Valiant for the Truth, and are steadfastly set to
follow the LORD fully?

177. Where is the Mind that is so Humbled as to follow HIM through all
Reproaches? and where are they that live by Faith and not at all by Sight?

178. Where are the Hungerers after the true BREAD? and where is the slain-Mind
to all visible things?

179. Where are the Sufferers with the SEED? and where are Its True and
faithful Companions? who suffers with It in Its forsaken state? and who joins
to It in all Exercises?

180. The Eye that is abroad cannot see HIM; the Mind that is at ease cannot
behold HIM; they that are full see no want of HIM; they that slumber near HIM
not; but the silent Water has joy in HIS presence. Even so, O LORD, let THY
Childrens whole delight be in THEE, henceforth and for ever. Amen.

To Day if you will hear HIS Voice, harden not your hearts.

For in such an Hour (and in such a Way) as you think not of, the SON of Man
comes.

It is my chiefest Care, and greatest Concern to endeavor the Finishing every
Worlt I have to do; that when my days are ended, and the Work finished for
which I came into the World, I may have nothing else to do, but to depart this
Life in a Reaceable Quiet, and Happy State.

THOU shall well consider in thin^ Heart, and remember all the Way that I have
hitherto led Thee, to try Thee, and to prove Thee, [Thou that art the Author of
these Collections] that thou may in the following part of thy Life, know and
acknowledge the GOD of all thy Mercies.

Oct. 3. 1687.

O LORD! Cleanse THOU me, and I Shall be clean; Purge and Purify THOU me, that
I may be as white as Snow, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: This,
This is that my Soul has long longed for; and now beg of THEE that it may be
fully accomplished to THY Honor and Glory, henceforth even for ever and ever.
Oh! hear, defer not I beseech THEE, to forgive whatever has been amiss in me;
even for THY Great Names sake; for THY Suffering Seeds sake; and THY Endness,
Infinite, and Incomprehensible Mercies Sake, which has ever been extended
toward all who have put their whole trust and confidence in THEE, as I do at
this Day. Glory, Glory, for ever be to THEE, OTHOV most HIGH! who were, who
art, and who art to come! GOD Blessed for ever, and for evermore! Amen, and
Amen.

October. 19. 1687.

Several Coppies of this following were sent to my Friends and Acquaintance in
and about, London, and is here Printed for the sake and service of all
concerned therein.

Dear People,
YOu, who are forth your Habitations, I am at this Moment, in suffering for
you; and am made in that Love that is not of this World, to entreat and beseech
you who have in any measure tasted of the Good Word of GOD; to return every
Individual of you to your own Homes, Tents, and Tabernacles: and there to wait
in the stilness and silence of all flesh, for the Resurrection of that Life,
and Power, which at present seems to lie Dead; and as it were even Buried in
most. Oh! reject not, withstand not, but be freely given up to the Counsel and
Advice herein given you, then will you reap the Benefit, and I the Reward of
this my Love and Faithfulness toward you all.

Oct. 19. 1687.

Choose you whom ye will serve: But as for me and mine, we are bound and
engaged to serve the LORD, the great GOD only. THE END.

