PENSEZ-Y BIEN OR THINK WELL ON IT Containing THE SHORT, FACILE AND ASSVRED
MEANS TO SALVATION.

DEDICATED, Anto those who desire to enjoy the happy Eternity.

And translated into English by FRANCIS CHAMBERLEYNE Esquire;

AT GANTE, Printed by BAVLDWINE MANILIVE at the white Pigeon, 1665.

THO HIS MOST HONORED AND VIRTVEVS KINS WOMAN THE REVEREND LADY MARIE KNATCHBUL
Abbess of the Noble Englise Religious of the holy Order of S. BENEDICT in GANT.
MADAM
THis Little one containing so profitable and wise instructions for mankind to
arrive at the Co^ble of perfection, and so facile means to atttaine eternal
felicity, that J deem not lost time the two months spent in translating it, to
the end that all English might participate of the Authors and my intention,
which is most charitably, and with ardent affection, to procure for all, the
happynes of ever lasting Bliss, which infallibly may begained by the easy
practice of that which is comprehended in these feu leaves. But I dare not
presume to publish this without your ladyships benign affording me the favor
of permiting this to be sheltred under the charitable Protection of your
ladyships Patronizing it; which J humbly be seech you to grant me; for then J
shall be confident that my labor, though ill performed, in translating itt
will be so acceptable unto many, that they will read it, and by doing so, I
hope they will reap the benefitt my heart desires them all, specially those
Angelical and religious spowses of Jesus Christ, who are so happy as to have
your ladyship their Superior, and the whole world their Admirors, for their
exemplar and pious lives they lead under your ladyships sage and sweet
Conduct. Pardon Madam my holdenes, and accept of my endeavors to serve you, and
your ladyship will exceedingly agrandize the obligation J have, to glory in
being

MADAM Your ladyships humblest Servant and affectionat kinsman FRANCIS
CHAMBERLEYNE.

A SHORT, FACILE AND ASSURED MEANS TO BE SAVED. Jntitled THINK WELL ON IT A
necessary Advertisment.
DEAR Souls ransonned with the blood of the Son of God JESUS CHRIST, and who
are so advantagiously endued with reason, so divinly illuminated with the light
of Faith, and so povverfully solicited with the inspirations of the Holy Ghost.

Have ye never well considered?

FRom whence proceeds that Man being created of nothing; and made according
unto the Image and likeness of the Soon of God, and for a certain time placed
in this world: not to heap up riches, to take his pleasures, and to runn after
honors, but only to love, serve, and praise his Creator in this transitory
life, to the end to enjoy in the other an happy eternity. From whence comes it,
say I, that after this signal favor, Man so ill thinks on that which he is
to perform here below, that it may be justly written on his forehead, the
Epitaph which was engraven on the Tomb of a servant of the Duke of Burgundy.

Here lies William Party, of this good Duke Secretary, he is departed this
world, without knowing what he came to do.

O stupiditie altogethere ineffable, and unworthy of all endued with never so
little judgment.

Have ye never well considered?

HOw it can be possible, God having given so many means unto Man to arrive
unto his end, and has produced creatures, who all cry out sufficiently loud,
Learn, Render, Proceed. Learn, by how many benefits God obliges thee. Render
him infinite thanks, for what thou receave. Proceed, to love him to serve and
to honor him. In this is his great design, and nevertheless almost all men
employ themselves on Creatures O Brutality.

Have ye never well considered?

How the only begotten Son of Almighty God perceaving that all the
innumerable benefits of his eternal Father, which are so many beams
proceeding from his amorous and bountefull essence are not able to enlighten
men's Hearts with the flames of his divine love, is become Man, to assemble all
these benefits and threasures, within his sacred humanity, and by it making
them to distill into the Hearts of men, he may inflame them with a most ardent
love of the Divinity; as we see, sunn beams are not of them selves able to
fire flax, but if they pass through a crystal, they presently reduce it
into ashes but Alas these miserable Hearts are of a far other disposition then
Flax, they are colder then marble, more hard then steel; they are not heated
with all these amorous inventions, they are not molifyed with all these divine
fires. O infernal coldenes.

Have ye never well considered?

HOw the adorable Son of God has hidden the brightness of his infinite Majesty
under the gross veil of our infirmity, for to accomodate him self unto the
feeblenes of our se^ces: How he is become Man, for to make us love in the union
of our propre flesh, that which we knew not to affect in the only Divinity; How
he makes him self our companion in this pilgrimage, for to reduce us unto the
true and good way, which we have lost, trasing by all his actions the steps
which we ought to tread, for to save our selves: How he has shed all his blood
on the Cross for to wash our filth, and to afford us a vermillion which all
Paradise admires. Yett not with standing we misprise this precious bath, loving
rather to remain in our ordeurs: we fly and shun the Company of JESUS, for to
follow that of the devil. In a word, we will not love God, do what he can. O
ingratitude worse then brutall; O malice most diabolical.

Have ye never well considered?

I say, considered once as ye ought; From whence that a Christian soul, which
the Holy Ghost preserves with so much care with in the bosoome of his dear
Espouse the holy Catholic Church, nourish it so royally with the divine
Sacraments, and so amourously conducts it with holy inspirations, instructs it
so charitably by his Preachers, and so many good and pious books, encourages
it so powerfully with so many eminent examples of Saints who have passed the
same way: and yett (a most strange thing) this poor soul finds her felf in a
lamentable condition, wholly weary, languishing, undone and often even dead.

O most deplorable misfortune not with a few watery tears, but with great
torrents of blood, to see man, the lively image of God the favorite of Heaven,
the chief workanshipe of grace well furnissed with reason, enlightened with
faith, regaled with the Sacraments, fortefyed with grace, cherished with
inspirations, to be more feeble and tepide, to raise him self, and march
toward his end, to acknowledge his sovereign Lord to procure his true
felicity, then are the dullest beasts and the most insensible creatures. This
is the great misfortune which God reprehends the soul with all, by the
Prophite. The ox with all his stupidity, (faith he) knows his master, the
Ass more gross, runs unto the stable of him who nurisheth him: Isarell only
makes no account of me, my people only apprehends not, unto what end, I have
placed them in the world, my only Children knows not the singular care I have
of them; And in another place, he complains with great indignation. Who is more
blind then he who serves me, who is more deaf then he unto whom I speak by my
Embassadeurs, who is less reasonable then he, unto whom soly I have given
reason.

But, what would ye think of a Child, which a potent Monarch should find
lying in the dirt, and having adoptated him for his son, should send him for a
certain time in to a remote country, to the end that with a little labor and
with great assistance, he might heap up treasures there to be discovered, with
which he might gain a flourishing kingdom, and make him self in a manner
equal and coheire with the legitimat son of this Prince; if this unfortunate
Child, in lieu of searching after this treasure should consume the mornings in
sleep, and spend the rest of his time in play and debauchery, or to run after
Butterflyes, if he should employ all his means in buying fescues, pinns and
glow worms, would he not be justly thought to have lost his senses and to be
vnwortly of the least favor done him? would he not at his return deserve, in
steed of a fair palace, an obscure prison, and for a crown of a King,
fetters and manacles of a slave; in lieu of a Princely entrataynment, the
chastizement of a griveous criminal? Of far greater punishments are those
worthy, on whom the Prophet Jeremy sheds so many tears, the 4. Chapter of
his lamentations. Blind and insensible are they; they might have been nurished
with exquisite and Royal food, but they loved better to be filled with filthey
ordures: it was in their choice to become beautiful like Angels by their
virtues, but by their vices are made more black then the Devils; and it was
most easy for them with a little patience to be kings for all eternity in the
happy Paradise, but by their wicked demeanor they have purchased the eternal
pains of a most miserable Hell.

Have ye never well considered?

FRem whence proceeds this great misfortune, tell me ingeniously? Comes it
from man for not having sufficient light to guide him? No, this can not be for
he has reason which would sufficiently direct his steps, if he were not
blinded with too dark passions: Faith would conduct him directly unto God, if
he were not hendred by vice: Divine inspirations would raise him unto high
perfection, if ke were not depressed by the charming allurments of the world
and the flesh.

Proceeds it from the wicked nature of persons, who resemble certain trees
incapable to bear any good fruit, nor to serve for any thing then the fire?
No, it is not this; but, that which makes so many Confessariours to sighth, is
to see amongst so many rich natures which they encounter, and which seems to
be made soly for virtue, to see there are (I say) so few make use of these great
prerogatives of nature, which never the less are some of the most assured
marks of predestination, if they would but never solittle cooperate.

Proceeds it from the want of sufficient instruction, and that the soul being
left free unto its depraved inclinations does not clearly distinguish good
from evil, virtue from vice? Truly this reason is nothing, especially in these
times, in which the least girl, or Boy knovves the deformity of vice, seeing
every one takes up the mask of virtue, and can not be deceaved unless they
grosely flatter them selves.

From whence then proceeds this evil? Answer me I beseech ye. But be fore
ye answer, I conjure ye by all the favors which ye have received from
Heaven, by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ shed for ye, by the share ye
pretend to have in Paradise.

Think well on it.

ANd after good and profound consideration, ye will freely confess that this
mischief and ill fortune arrives from not having had due consideration; for if
one had but once well thought on it, and seriously pondered, wherefore are we in
the world, and what is that we would desire to have done, when we shall be
departing this world, it would be almost impossible to offend our good Creator,
and we should find great facility to serve him. Is not this true? Thinker well
on it.

IF ye never solittle doubt it, I will wholly convince ye, by two or three
examples. What was it, I pray ye, which fred S. Antony from all the ill habits
and coustomes of this world, for to raise him unto that sublime degree of
perfection, unto which he arrived? Three words well considered have made
this great vvonder. He entered on a certain day into the Church, to hear
mass, as he ought, and being attentive unto the Ghosple; he heard how Jesus
Christ said: If thom wilt be perfect go, sell all thou have, and follow me:
These words knocking at his Heart, he opened the gate, he kearkneth unto them,
he weighs them, and seriously considers them, goes forth the Church, he
hastneth to give a beginning unto the great perfection, he afterward showed.
How many others have heard the same Ghosple, but all have not so well
considered it as he.

What extraordinary power drew S. Augustine out of the vice, in which he was so
far engaged, for to addict him self unto virtue. Three words well considered
caused this miraculous change: you have read, how his good Mother S. Monica
exhorted him to live well, but he seemed deaff she powered forth fluds of
tears, but did not mollify him, she passed dangerous seas to follow him, and
always solicit him, but she prevailed nothing. Ye have heard how S. Ambroise
undertook him, how they conferred to gether, how he was always at the
sermons of this holy and eloquent Prelate, notwithstanding all this, he
remained always firm and obstinat in his imperfection. One day he entered into
a Garden, and lying under a tree, the Epistles of S. Paul by him, he heard a
voice, which said unto him, take, read, take, read: he rises, openes his
book, and finds these words. It is not in feasts, nor in debaucherey, it is
not in the bead, nor ordeurs of the flesh, much less in quarrels and contests
that God is found, but put on Jesus Christ. He reads these words over and over,
he meditats on them, he considers them, he engraves them in his heart. He runs
unto his dear Alipius, he hastneth unto his Mother, he wholly bequeathe him
self unto God.

What power broke the strong chains which fast bound a young Gentleman in the
vanities and follies of the world? One sole thought well digested in his soul,
He was in a city ready to represent some galentry unto the eyes of a great and
brave assembly; wherefore he retird unto his lodging betimes, to be the ealier
up in the morning: But the ardent desire he had to appear, permitted him not
to sleep or to take any rest, he turned him self an hundred times in his bed,
and as often demanded, what hour it was: at last amonghst these inquietudes,
a thought came into his mind, without doubt from his good Angel it proceeded:
Thou art here in a good and easy bed, environed with filken curtaynes, and
finds the night so long and tedions, and unable to take any repose; Oh, what
can the souls so many yevres in purgatory do, not mentioning those which
burns in hell for all eternity: This thought well pondered, made him to
resolve, to quitt these Fopperyes, to apply him the more seriously unto the
obtaining celestial and eternal happynes.

What ravishing speech or moving discourse persuaided a young and vain lady to
fortefy her courage, and to resolve to do penance for her sins, which she did
detest as she ought. A strong imagination ceased on her Heart. She goes with
her Neighbors to confess as much for company sake, as for devotion, by good
fortune she met with a discreet Confessarious, who having heard her
confession, and sweetly having advertised her of the injury she did her self in
living so vainly and wickedly, he gave her for penance to wear a hair cloth
for certain hours. O Father, said she what say you, to wear a hair cloth?
Alas! I can not do it, I have great difficulty to wear a smock, if it be not
very fine: well, answered the confessarius, in lieu of Heircloth, you shall
fast three days: how fast, replied she, J who can not rise forth of my bed
before I have eaten a good caudell: O Father, this is impossible for me to
perform. Well then, said the Confessarius, you shall hear three Masses on
your knees without turning your head: it will be very hard for me, not to turn
my head, replied she a gain, but impossible for me to kneel so long without
fainting. I know not what then to do with you replied the Father, seeing you
refuse so easy penances having commit'ed so many great sins. Perhaps you can
as often as you wash your hands, think that those white hands shall become
filth and worms meat: she accepts of this pen^ance, receaves absolution, goes
home, washing her hands before she sitts to eat, she thinks on what was
enjoined her, for the first and second time she made but small reflection; but on
the third time this thought made so deep impression in her Heart, that she
resolves to give a fare well unto all delicacie and vanity for to do penance
proportionable unto her sins, and to give herself wholly unto God, and to
become a Saint.

Let these particulare examples suffice, for it is a most assured truth, that
there have been million of Persons who have heard most eminent Preacheurs, and
yett have not ben moved: who have had religious Confesseurs able to make
Saints, and have not gained any thing: who have read most spiritual books,
and have nothing profited. And yett two or three words well considered, a
speech spoken without disigne, but well pondered and digested has made them to
know themselves and has reduced them into an happy condition. I was
Confessarius unto a Lady of quality, who assured me, rhat she for 7. years had
wepp for the death of her Husband: in the beginning very often in the day, and
afterward twice every day she never failed to weep: I know not how many
Religious of diverse ordres, and other able and discreet people were employed,
to make her know the injury she did unto the holiness reputation and virtue of
her deceased Husband, but all to no effect: one day as she was weepeing in her
chamber, passing throught a gallery, she meets with one of her Maids sweeping,
who mildly said unto her, I know not Madam unto what purpose your La so long
time opposes the will of God. This speech proceeding from a chamber maid,
glided so deeply in to her soul, and she considered it so well, that she
resolved to make an end of these tears, the which so many premeditated dis
courses could not effect, because they were not well considered on; one word by
chance spoken, and well considered gained and eonquered her.

There fore being it is most true, that one sole word well meditated on, is
capable to convert a person, and to profitt more then long exhortations, even
as as one only grain well buried in the earth, will yield more increase, then
a hundred others cast on the high way or on stones. I am resolved, having a
most ardent desire to aid ye. Toward your salvation, not to propose unto ye
above two or three words, at a time: but I conjure you by what is most dear
unto you, after that I have spoken, Think well on it.

ANd because the great secreat consist in giving you the means of well
thinking on it. J find not a better then a strong representation; a lively
imagination of the hour of death. This is the secreat, which those that would
live holy, made use of. For this reason, the Emperor Maximilian had his Coffin
carried always with him; S. John Elimosinarius twice or thrice every day
visited his sepulcher. The Anchoritts have always in their Cells a Deaths
head, on which they always looked. There are so many good Religious who hardly
meditate on any thing then on death. Believe me that amongst the infidels,
those that have desired to live the better, have made use of this means; I
will not give you any other example then that of Philip King of Macedony,
Father of Alexander the great, who had one of his Pages vvitth him, for to
come and tell him every Morning: Sir remember that you are a Man, and therefore
must dye. Go too my dear friend, tell me seriously, and from the heart: if God
should send you an angel to assure you that you were to dye whithin two or
three days, in earnest, what would you think then? what would you say? hasten
not to answer, but before? Think well on it.

I read on your countenance what lies hidd in your Heart: you think that you
are in health, young and strong, and therefore you can not imagine death to be
so necre: O for the love of God, my dear friend J befeech you, confide not on
your youth, on your health, and strenght nor any quality you can have: No, no,
you must be deceaved by those who have no other design then to ruin you,
believe me rather who am your faithful friend, having no other interest then
your good. I tell you then, and assure you, desireing you to believe me. More
young, beter in health and stronger then you, more rich and abler then you
shall dye this week, who not witshstanding believes to live as long as you.
And although I am not a Prophet, for to foretell that you shall be of the
number, yet I can with as great assurance advertise you, as if I were one, that
death to day is nearer unto you then it was yesterday and that to morrow it
will be nearer then it is to day, and it will never rest vnt ill it has over
taken, tript up your heils and sent you into the other world. Consider therefore
seriously on your affairs. Think well on it.

THat if finding my prayers too importune, you say unto me, that I begin first
to think and po^der on what I demand of you. I am content and will truly
declare unto you what I think. If I were advertised by a messenger from heaven
that my life were to have an end with in this week, I protest unto you, that I
would put in exsecution, that which often I learned being young of a very
learned and Religious Person, who did me the honor to love me and to have a
care of my soul, amongst the pious and good discourses with which he
entertained me when I visited him, he often said unto me. My Son what soever
thou would have done at the hour of death do it now whilst thou art able,
and what thou would not have done then, be careful to not commit it now.

Let you and I willingly have this profitable counsel before our eyes always
and so engraven in our hearts as it is necessary for us, for which end, Think
well on it.

ANd if by good fortune your mind delates it self and desires to know every
particular which you would have done and not have done, if you were at the end
of your life, I am exceedingly satisfied, and I praise God with all my heart,
because he has so sweetly touched you, for it is a great testimony, that you
take to heart that which most concerns you, in which if I can assist you, I
will employ all my endeavors, writting what soever sweet Jesus shall please to
dictat unto my soul, which may aid you to gain heaven, deeming my self most
happy, if I should sweat blood and water, yea give my life for to render this
good service unto you.

To the end that the profitt be more assured and the greater, I ask you four
things, before I begin.

The first is, that every demand I shall make, you will imagine that it is not
I that speak, but it is your good Angel, or the blessed Virgin, or God
himself, indoing so you will be the more attentive.

The Second is, that as soon any point be proposed you beseech the Holy Ghost
for to illuminat your understanding to know the verity of what is proposed unto
you saying with fervor, Come, o Holy Ghost, infuse into my soul a beam of thy
divine light, that I may be able to comprehend what is said unto me now.

The third is, that for to conceave that which shall be proposed unto you, and
to answer there unto the better you for a while deliberatly considere, pondering
each point the space of three or four Paters at least.

The fourth is, that you make a firm resolution with the grace of Almighty God
to live better, saying an Ave Maria to the end that the Immaculat Virgin
assist you.

If you please to grant me these four things, I do assure my self that you in a
short time will find great benefitt and be in a very good disposition to
appear before Almighty God, when it shall please his divine Majesty to call
you unto his presence. Let us begin.

THE FIRST PART Of that which one would not have done if he were at the hour
of death.
Dear Reader profoundly reasonable, and truly Christian I conjure thee to
tell me, but rather tell me fron the heart, then the mouth: If God should
assure thee at this present, that thou art to die this week, would thou not
be very sorry to have so miserably spent so many hours, fair days, and large
years, which were afforded thee for to gain Paradise. For what? to eat,
drink and sleep, as beasts do. For what? to trim thy self, laugh, and
play, as fools do; For what? to do, say, and think that which is unworthy of
a reasonable soul, much more of a Christien. I beseech thee, what would thou
say of a Merchant who had employed himself all the time of a fair in walking
plaing and making good cheer, whilst his Companions are become rich by
laboring day and night, with what confidence dares he return home having
foolishly spent all he had carried with him, without buying any Marchendize, how
will he be blamed by his Parents and friends, how confounded will he be,
appearing befor-his neighbors who know his ill husbandry? Say with devotion,
Come o holy Ghost, enlighten me with a beam of thy light for to understand
this proposition: And then, Think well on it.

Having done this, consider how thou have behaved thy self hereto fore. Be a
shamed, if thou have ben faulty, resolve to act better here after. Address thy
self unto the blessed Virgin beseeching her to second thy good resolutions. Ave
Maria.

THou who have so often desired to be advertized of the hour of thy death, if
I now assure thee, that within five or six days thou shall die: wilst thou not
have great cause to complain on thy memory, in having taken so much pain a
bout things un profitable, indecent and hurtful, which have hendred the
remembrance of God. What esteem wilst thou have of him, who being able easily
to fill his cofers with silver, gold, and pearl, had rather put therein dirt,
shells and filth.

Think well on it.

Thou wilst boldly conclud, that he is indiscreet and un fortunate, who having
an happy memory for creatures does forgett the Creator, and remembering the
affairs of the world has lost the memory of his own concerns, if thou finds
thy self guilty of this misfortune, be ashamed, and asking pardon for what is
past, resolve to do better hereafter. Ave Maria.

I am certain that thou have a tender devotion unto thy good Angel, and that
thou remits thy whole life unto his conduct. If he should now come and tell
thee that he has but four or five days to govern thee, would thou not
condemn thy understanding of stupidity more then brutall, in having ben
employed so un profitably in so many foperies and childish toys, so un
worthily occupied in so many vanities, so unfortunately busued in transitory
things, which are worth nothing incomparaison of those which God has prepared
for thee in the kingdom of heaven, promised on his faith and by solemn oath
unto thee. What opinion would thou have of him who being able to apply him
self easily unto good affairs, from whence he might gain much honor and
profit, had rather amuse himself with lacquies and children about trifels.
Think well on it.

Thou vvilst freely avoue, that it is the most extravigant folly that a man can
commit. Considere if thou be exempt, and resolve be vvayling what is past to
do better from this day forvvard.

I know thou believe, that there are many Saints in the Church, who do
miracles, and fore tell what is to come: if any one of these should whisper
thee in the ear, that thou have but two or three days to live, would thou
not be excedingly confounded for having employed thy will in fondly loving
that which vvisely ought to be hated, and maliciously hating that which ought
perfectly to be beloved, art thou not very much ashamed to so effectionaly
adheare unto creatures, as to contemn the Creator? what vvoulst tho think of
him who being ablc to chang his heart into pearl. into a luminous starr, yea
even into God himself should rather love to convert it into dirt, into a hogg
or into a devil? Think well on it.

And knovving that love Metamorphizeth thy heart into what it loves, thou
vvilt confess that it is an extreme malice which deserves more then hell, to
settle the affection on any thing then God soly, take heed of what thou have
done heretofore, and resolve for the time to come.

Have thou never beheld the heavenes enveloped and darkened with obscure clouds,
the air all in fire with lightning, thounders grumling on all parts, an horred
medlay of winds and rain drouning the fields and ^over turning howses, if this
should happen to day, and a voice should bed thee to look unto thy self, for
this tempest very shortly would fall on thy head, would thou not tremble with
fear and grief, for having so wickedly employed so many good talents which
God has given thee for to serve him. would thou then be endued with the
eloquence of speech to ruin others, with subtility of wit to deceave them,
with the sweetness of conversation to draw them unto evil, with force to distroy
them, with beauty to hurt them, and with all other talents to damn thy self
and them together. Unto what punishment would thou condemn him, who having
received a great sum of money, of a great king, for to serve him, and to
engage others in his service, should buy halters for to distroy himself and
others.

Think well on it.

Thou will with out doubt conclud, that it is far better not to have received
so many talents from heaven, then to employ them ill, and that servant to be
very unhappy who spent his masters monyes in things contrary unto his
intention. See if thou be not such an one, and purpose to amend.

FEaring that I have weared thee with my interogations, I am resolved to
acquiesce, for a while, to hearken unto a music which in deed is none of the
sweetest, for it comes from hell, notwithstanding it will profitt very much,
and confirm all that is already said; In the book of wisdom chap 5. the wise
Man makes the damned to say. Repenting and sighing for anguish of spirits:
These are they whom we had some time in dirision, and in a parable of reproach:
we senseless esteemed their life madness and their end without honor. Behold how
they are counted among the children of God, and their lot is among the Saints,
we therefore have erred from the way of truth, and the light of justice has not
shined to us, and the sun of understanding rose not to us, we are weried in
the way of iniquity and perdition, and have walked hard ways, but the way of
the lord we have not known: hat has pride profited us? what commodity has
the vaunting of riches brought to us. Al those things are passed away as a
shadovv, and as a messenger running before and as a ship that passes through
the surging waters: where of, when it is past, the trace can not be found, nor
the path of that ships keele in the waves: or as a bird that flies through
in the Air, of which there is no token can be found of her passage, but only a
found of the wings beating the light wind: and by vehemence of going cutting
the air, moving the wings she is flowen through, and afterward there is no
sign found of her way; or as when an arrow is shot forth to a set mark, the
divided air is forth with closed in it self again, so that the passage thereof
is not known: so we also being borne, forthwith ceased to be: and of virtue
certes have been able to show no sign: but in our. Naughtines we are consumed,
such things said they in hell, which sinned, because the hope of the impious
is as dust, which is taken away with the wind: and as a thin froth, which is
dispersed by the storm: and as smoke that is scatered abroad by the wind: and
as the memory of a Ghest of one day that passes. Have thou well heard this
harmonius music of hell, tell me seriously, would go thither one day to be
partaker of it,

Think well on it.

In the mean while I will continue my demanding of thee, if for certain thou
must die with in four or five days at the farthest would thou not with many
tears complain of they eyes in having given them so much liberty to read so
many vain and unchaste books, would thou not be sorry to have cast so many
amoreus and lewd glances on so many dangerous objects which Satan made use of
to precipitate thee into wicked actions, as if he had not been sufficiently
powerful to ruin thee without the aid of thy sight, had it not ben better
for thee to have been borne blind, or that thine eyes had been putt out as soon
as thou were borne, then to have made so ill use of them, Think well on it.

Thou will conclud with the evangelist, that it is more expedient to have thy
eyes plucked out, that is, to retain with violence thy sight, for to enter into
Paradise, then to behold what soever presents it self, and to descend into
hell, invite thy eyes to wash with their tears they passed faults, and make a
covenant with them for the time to come, as Holy Job did.

TEll me freely, if thou should hear the bell which advertise all, that they
are carring the viaticum unto thee, would thou not exceedingly blame thy
ears, for having too curiously listened unto the wicked discourse held against
the reputation of an other, for having taken to much pleasure in impertinent
praises, and indiscreet jestings and scoffings, for having ben too attentive
unto wanton songs, lascivious words which insinuate their poison so secreetly
into the heart, that hardly one perceaves it before he he dead, as the fish
takes not heed that be has swallowed the hook until he is drawn forth of
the water. O how much better had it ben for thee to have been always deaf
then to have by this organ afforded entrance unto this poison which has
infected thy soul, and perhaps will cause its eternal death.

Think well on it.

Thou vvilt resolve to follovv the counsel of the wise man: to inviron they
ears with a hedge of thorns, that is to say, with a strong consideration of
hell fire, for not to hearken to any thing which can ruin thee.

IMagine that with in two hovvres thy soul is to give an account of all she
has ever said, if this were so, would thou not torture thy tongue with
they teeth, for having uttered so-many jeasts, mockeryes and untruths, so many
braggings, oftentations, and vauntings so many foul words, detractions and
blasphemes, so many cursings and oaths, of all which thou shall see a most
exact catologue, vvilst not pass for a poor merchant, if thou art found for
one word to have lost what soever good thou had, and sold thy soul unto the
devil. Think well on it.

Seek redress for the wounds thy tongue has made in thy soul, and resent
them with grief, firmly purpose to keep it better, being most assured, that
of a hundred that this time goes to hell, ninety are precipitated there by the
tongue.

IF thou already did feel the stinking exhalations of thy dying body,
would thou not sigh from the bottom of thy heart sor having sought with so
much sensuality svveet odours, to perfume they garments, to imbaume thy carkas,
and to satisfy thy nostrels, and those who accompany thee, whilst thy soul by
its imeperfections yields an intolerable loathsome sent unto all the celstiall
court? what extravigance is it to perfume the sleave, and permit the arm to
be putrified? what folly is it to smell of musk amongst lackyes acd to stinck
in the presences of a Prince.

Think well on it

Be confounded, if the ancient proverb be verifyed in thee; very often the
heart stinketh, when the body is perfumed, resolve not to verify here after
this truth.

WHat would thou do, if thou did know for certain that with in three
days thy body should be worms meat? vvoudst thou not curse a thousand times
thy taste which finds nothing fufficiently seasoned, which seeks with so
much care svveet and delicious viands and pleasant vvines; which knovves not
how to fast, nor to abstain from what is forbiden. Had not better eaten
some ill dressed meat, then to be enforced to drink the poison of serpents
and eat toades.

Think well on it.

Thou vvilst confess, that it is better with a little pain to abstain and
to be mortefyed a fevv days in the noble company of JESUS and his Saints for
to gain Paradise, then to suffer hunger eternally with the damned in hell.

IF thou did lively apprehend what will happen at the last period of they
life, where thou shall loose all feeling, would thou not have an extreme
regret and sorrovv to have been so delicate and sensual in thy touching, that
thou have never been able to endure, hair cloth, discipline, nor the least
incommodity, but have alvvayes sought after the finest linen and have made his
sense wholy brutale. Alas! how vvilst thou be able to wear garments of
fire, to lie eternally on the burning coals of hell. Think well on it.

Thou vvilt confess that it had been better a hundred times to have been
alvvayes leprous then to have procured these eternal evils. I do ask thee, if
this were the last hour of thy life, whether thou vouldst not rather be with
out a hand, then to have employed thy hands so often in taking that which did
not belong unto thee, implaying, eateing to much, in satisfying vanity, in
stirking without reason, in unjustly increasing thy wealth, in taking things
unlawful? is it not true that there would not be so many gallows, if there
were not so many malifactors? Think well on it.

Thou will allow, that there had not ben so many damned, if their hands had
taken so much pain for to open unto them the Heavens, as they have done for to
purchase hell.

THis is the last question I will propose unto thee at this time. If thou were
fallen to day sick as it is possible, and that thou were assured that thou
shoudst not recovere; would not thou rather have been lame and with out feet,
then to have so often run after dauncings and tavernes, frequent play howses
and infamous places in which thou perhaps have lost that which is never to be
recovered, and with that the life of thy soul. Take heed of those hogs which
the Evangelist mentions, behold how after the devil was entered into them, they
never left running until they were precipitated into the sea. Think well on
it.

Have compassion on those who being once under the slavery, never rest from
falling from one sin into an other until they be indulfed into eternal
perdition.

I am not so passionatly amourous of the salvation of thy soul that I forget
the health of thy body, and therefore least thy mind being to much employed in
thinking on those things, I propose might cause a distemper in thy head, J am
willing that thous spend some time in beholding a spectacle which represents
itself here, very fit to confirm what has been said. There was a young lady
who appeared unto her Ghostly Father in a most terrible manner, a thousand
snakes were her hairs of her head, she had two cruel Aspes hanging at her
eyes, which did cruelly torture her, two venomous vipers at her nostrels, two
poisonning lizards at her ears; she mutilated her tongue with ineffable rage:
on her bosom there appeared two ugly Toads which nibbled her breasts: an
horrible dragon which constrained her to swallow his Foame, an other four or
five times environed her body, thrusting his head into her privities drew forth
her entraills: two ghastly devils most cruelly did tear the parts of her body
which had been instruments of the greate^st offenses, and incessantly powered
melted led and boiling oil: I am not able to express what strange faces and
wry mouths she made, her eyes sparkling with fire rolled in her head withfury,
she cast forth of her ears and nostrels fiery sulphur, she mouthed worse then
a fury; a garment of fire covered all her body, but truly nothing was so
insupportable as her roarings and cries: Cursed be the creature, said she, who
for so small pleasures has deserved so great torments; cursed be the head
which for being the seat of all vanities is at present the bayt of all the
infernal worms, cursed eyes which for inconsidered looks are punished with
most horrid sights. Cursed ears which for lascivious airs and songs are
constrained to hear hellish music. Cursed nostrells which for effeminat
odors, smells the stinking carcasses of the damned. Cursed, and a hundred times
cursed body which for having taken to much pleasure in superfluous promotions
and forbeden sensualitys shall be always clothed with fire and tortured with
diverse torments. Cursed creatures which have contribuited unto my misery and
have been complyces of my crimes. Cursed be Father and Mother who have given me
the temporal life which has conducted unto cternall death, Cursed be above
all, cursed eternity which will not afford an end nor truce of my evils. O
eternity, and insaying, cursed eternity, she vanished: behold a a strange
vision, I assure thee, that we should see one far more frightfull, if God
would afford us a sight pearceing even unto hell, and therefore: Think well it.

I Return to ask of thee, I say of thee, who art the dearly beloved of my
heart; if thou should know that thou were to depart this world with in two
days, would thou with so much ambition appear among men would thou spend
so much money in magnificent clothes, in splendent jewels, fine perrles, and
rich equipage; would thou walk with so much pride, would thou speak with
so much arrogance; in a word, would thou harbor so much hautines in thy
heart and in all thy deportments, know thou not that God could not permits
pride to be in heaven in the most eminent creatures which ever he made, how
will he endure it in thee.

Think well on it.

Boldly resolve to root out of thy body even the least hair, and put of thy
soul the smalest thought which may nurish this vice, least it should procure
the wrauth of God on thee, eternal damnation IF thou knew most certainly
that within four and twenty hours thy Parents and Friends, in recompense of
what they enherite of thee, must send thee into the other world sewed in one of
the commune sheets of thy cofer, would thou be so covetuous of gain would
thou so greedily run after Gold? would thou heap up treasures so
painefully for Heirs who will remember thee no longer then they are making
good cheer of thyn? what will avail thee the stately and sumptuous Howses
which thou have built when thou must lodge in a black Tomb, what will profit
thee to have left so much gold and silver in Bank when thy Soul shall burn in
purgatory Think well on it,

Conclud, that it is no small folly in being so solicitous to heap up wealth,
which soon or late must be lost, and so careless of thofc treasures which we
may carry with us and enjoy for all eternity.

IF thou did know that death were but two or three days from thee, and did
see one of his forerunners with thee, as it is very probable that thou art not
without some corporal incommodity, tell me, in this apprehension would thou
abandon thy self in the ordure and filth of sensuality, would thou wallow
like a hog in the mire; would thou say with those shallou brains in the
second chapter of wisdom. Come threfore, and let us enjoy the creature as in
youth. Let us fill our selves with precious wine and oyntmentts, and let not
the flower of the time pass us; let us crown our selves with Rofes before
they wither, let there be no meadow, which our riott shall not pass through,
let none of us be exempted from our rioteousnes, every where let us leave sign
of joy, because this is our portion and this our lot, would thou with these
people have led a life of an Athest and a beast, or lived like those of Sodom
to be swalloved up by the earth. Think well on it.

Thou will avoyde all occasions of defyling thy body and Soul, imitating the
fair Hermine, who for fear of defyling her whit skin with the dirt permits her
self to killed.

IF a malign fever did torment thee in thy bed, having dispatched many with in
twice four and twenty hours. Would thou not be vexed for having harbored so
long hatred and envy in thy soul against thy Neighbor, for having endeavored
to distroy him and to blemish his honor, without gaining any thing but a bitter
remorse of conscience, and the maledictions of Cain? Think well on it.

Thou will compassionat the envious; seeing them macerated with the prosperity
of others, and thou will avoyde envy which tortures the heart and consumes the
body.

IF thou did imagine that within three days that thy body should be reduced
into dust, would thou have so much deked and cockered it and taken so much
care to nurish it, affording it all that it desired without consulting with
reason. Would thou be like unto the rich Gluton, who from a plentiful table
was draged into the eternal flaming fires, where he could not obtain a little
drop of water to releave his thirst which infinitely tormented him. Think well
on it.

Conclud that they most miserably unfortunate who for being too indulgent unto
their bodies, exposes their bodies and souls unto the danger of eternal
damnation.

IF thou were sick in bed, and an expert and shilful Phisician should desire
thee to put all things in good order for that thou art in great danger of
death, would thou not exceedingly grieve, to have been so often impatient, to
have cursed and injured thy servants domestics and neighbors, and to never
have suffered any the least thing for God and for thy salvation? which is
better either to endure same little thing for God and to gain Paradise
according unto the example of Saints, or to suffer in the next life without
any benefitt. Think well on it.

Firmly resolve to subdue thy Choler and to suffer all things patiently seeing
that the grievous malice of men in the world is not to be compared with the
rage and fury of the devils which torment in the other world.

IF now the holy Oil were brought, would thou not tremble and shiver
considering the negligence thou have used all thy life to save thy soul: will thou not be ashamed for having used so much slacknes in kneeling every morning,
in making thy intentions, in frequenting the holy Sacraments, in visiting, the
sick, in hearing Mass? would not thy heart faint seeing so few good works
accompaning thee before God? what shame is it unto a child of a noble family
to see himself ill attended when he presents him self unto his Father before a
noble assembly? Think well on it.

Thou will boldly say that it is a devilish inchaunting, to see men so
dilligent in gaining the good which death will wholly deprive them of, if they
do not before loose them, and so laisy in seeking after those treasures which
will accompany them after death and comfort them for all eternity.

IF thou had thy soul even on thy lips, and there wanted but one breath for
the departure of it, would thou not be in a shameful confusion to have sold
and lost the merit of thy good actions for little vanity, for an humane
respect, for a foolish compliance? Is it not childish, to leave a piece of
gold, for a putrifyed nutt? is it not most brutall, to sweat and kill himself
with labor, to be solaced with a little wind? Is it not worse then folly, to
do well merely for to be esteemed and praised by men. Think well on it.

Be a fraide to receave the answer which God gave unto those who after having
prayed much, and ben well mortefyed, thinking to be rewarded therefore, heard: I
tell ye in truth, that ye have already received your salary and wages.
Resolve to have a good intention in all your actions to please God, rendering
him all the glory, that he will conserve thee entierly, for to enjoy him
eternally.

LEt us conclud all in a word; If thou were in the passage which all must
make from this life unto the other; would thou have done, said, or thought
any the least thing a against the Majesty of him, before whom thou art going to
receave the sentence of death or life eternal Think seriously on it, nether
more or less then if on this thought depended thy eternity of felicity or
misery.

Think lively on it, nether more or less, then if thou had a strong
assurance that after this half hour thou shalst not have any more time to
think on it.

Think on it often and profoundly; Alas! thou think day and night, two or
three months together, on Philosophical question; is not thy salvation more
dear unto thee?

Think and considere well on it, beseeching the blessed Virgin, thy good
Angel and the Saints, that they engraven deeply this thought in thy heart,
that it may produce the fruit of eternal life in thee.

THE SECOND PART Concerning that which one would not have done if he had been to
dye presently.
I remember to have read in the history of Barlaam and Josaphat, that there was
in a certain Region of the world a flourishing Kingdom, the habitants of which
were accoustomed to choose a King evety year during which time they gave him
all soveraignity, and a retinue suitable unto his quality, but the year was no
sooner expired, but then they banished him into a desolate and unhabited
Island, where he had more to suffer in exile, then he had recreation and
pleasure in his Royalty. Among these annual Kings, there was one more
provident then the others, for foreseing that at the years end they would not
fail to use him after the same manner they had afforded unto his predecessors;
he resolved to live as frugatly as possibly, and to save all he could and to
send it privately into the place of his banishment, where he failed not to
arrive at the ordinary time, and by reason of his providence did not meet with
those inconveniences and miseries which the others found there, but enjoyed
pleasure and content. This Parable, for I do not belive it to be a true story,
plainly declaires the blindness and stupidity of those which the world has
raised unto greatness and riches with which they are wholly delighted and absorpt
they never thinking that at the end of their life (which how long so ever it
be, is not a day in the calendar of God) the world will deprive them of all it
seemed to bestow on them, sending them into the other world where they shall
find nothing but poverty and misery, for want of providence. Dear Reader I
love thee too tenderly for to wish thee so much misery, but on the contrary I
do pray from the bottom of my heart for thy greatest happynes in the next life
where thou must remain for all cternity. And for this end.

I ask of thee, if God should send a messenger from heaven for to advertise
thee that within eight days thou shall die would thou not be exceedingly
pleased for having well employed thy time in honoring and serving thy good
Creator, in imitating in all thy actions the virtues of thy sweet Savior, in
correcting thy faults and doing penance, in cultivating thy soul and adorning
it with all virtues, in doing good to all that needed thy assistance, and
ingaining the favor of those who are powerful in the celestial Court. What
contentment unto a Captain who having bravely overcome his enemies returns
laden with precious booty and trophies before his Sovereign, for to receave
of him praises and recompenses due unto him. Think well on it.

Thou will say that this is but a gross and rude reprefentation of the
ineffable joy which the Soul has at the hour of Death, seeing her self
environed with many good works, which conducts her unto the Throne of God. O
how sweet is Death unto such a Soul: O how willingly does she behold it.
Wherefore do thou not live accordingly, that thou may die so?

AMiable Jesus says in the gospel, that we ought to be always ready, for we
know not when Death will come: If thou should be warned that it will be to
morrow, would not thou thank thy memory for having always kept thee in the
presence of God, and often put thee in mind of the favors which every moment
thou receavest from the liberal hand of thy Creator for having perpetually
presented unto thee the beauty of heaven and the horror of hell? what hopes
conceaves the courtier, who ever had his eyes on his Prince for to perform his
will, when he perceaves the day arriues of the Princes liberality and great
bounty. Think well on it.

Thou will bless the memory which affords so much felicity unto the soul, and
wilt exhort thine to afford thee the like happynes.

IF thy understanding which endeavors to know all, could understand that within
two days it must depart this world would it not leap for joy to have fought
the Creator in all creatures, and all crcatures in the Creator. not having
esteemed any othet knowlegd, then the making, him self most agreeable unto God
and to be conducted in all things by the faith which made him seek after
heaven in misprising the earth; what pleasure and comfort received the woman of
the Ghosple at the finding of her groat which she had long seeked after? did
she not invite her neighbors for to congretulate and rejoice with her? Think
well on it.

Thou will tesolue to employ thy intellect inseriously considering the
grandeurs of thy God, and thou will make use of all other sciences to arrive
unto this knowledge.

IT is very probable that once in thy life thou have desired thy death; If now
thou should see him with his mortiferous Sithe would thou not feel asweet
and delicious ravishment of heart for having never loved any other thing then
the infinitely amiable goodness and him who has infinitely loved thee? How great
is the consolation of the spowse of a Prince where she is certain to have soly
loved her husband and that her bridegroom knows her fidelity. Think well on
it.

Boldly of affirm him unhappy and miserable who being able to love God, loves
any thing else, take heed least thou be such an one.

IT is a long time since God has preached unto thee, that thou shall render an
account of all the talents, which be has bestowed on thee; jmagine this to be
the day in which he will demand them of thee: and if it were, what sweet and
ravishing content will thou feel in being able with truth to say with the
servant of the ghosple lord thou have given me five talents, behold other five
I have gained over and above. Thou have given me eloquence, which I have
always employed to praise thee, and to procure all others to do the same. Thou
have given me a great spirit which I have used in overcoming thy enemies and
comforting thy servants: Thou have given me learning which helped me to
discover thy greatness and mighty works, and to declare them unto others: Thou
have given me the grace to be beloved of all, I have not taken any other
pleasure, then that it might make me able to enforce all to love thee: Thou
have given me industry to trafick and gain some thing, with which I have
virtuously and decently maintained my family and relived the poor. Who can
explayne the joy and pleasure which thou will receave when the great Lord and
Master imbrasing thee with affection shall say, welfare thee good and faithful
servant, be cause thou have been faithful over a few things I will place thee
over many things: enter into the joy of thy lord.

Think well on it.

Whilst thou considers there on, I will listen, if thou please, unto a troop
of Saints, who ascending into heamen singe with a most melodious voice. O God
almighty, thou have delivered us from this fiery tomb, in which thou have for
a time buried our souls; thou have led us into thy glory, in which we shall
be environed on all sides with eternal felicity. Let all creatures bless and
praise thee for the favors so mercifully, thou bestowest on us. Blessed be the
time that we have employed in thy holy service. Blessed be the memory which
made us remember thee for to never forgett thee hereafter. Blessed be the
understanding which wholly endeavored to know thee, and by that means to enjoy
thee eternally. Blessed be the will which never would love any thing then thee
for to be happily lost in thy infinite love. And blessed be the talents and
favors which thou have given us, seeing by their means we have gained eternal
happynes. O mortels employ all your forces, powers and cndeavors in the service
of a God who is most infinitely deserving, and does most liberally and
superabundantly reward those who have rendered him never so little service.

I return unto thee, who art next unto God (as I have often told thee) the
sole object of all my thoughts, and I continue in demanding of thee; Jf to day
thy eyes were to be closed for never to be opened in this life, would thou
not love them most tenderly for not having served thee but to read good and
holy books, to behold pictures of devotion, to weep for thy sins, to
consider with joy the prosperity of thy neighbor, and his misery with
compassion, and to have been never fixed on any creature but with honorable
resentments of the Creator, will not these eyes shine like little stars in the
imperial heaven? Think well on it.

Resolve to deprive thy eyes here on earth of all damageable objects, which are
but foul in comparason of those which are seen in heaven.

WHen thou do hear the Bell for some burial, if death should come and tell
thee, to day it is for me, to morrow itt will be for thee: will thou not feel
a sweet consolation, for having lent thy ears unto the divine office, unto
spiritual discourses, unto good counsel, unto the praises of others, to have
suffered with patience contempt and injuries? will thou not bless thy ears
which never listened unto any evil thing. Think well on it.

Belive that if one were prepared and desierous to hear the celestial
music, that he were not in danger of dieing with the force of the sweet
ravishment, witness the seraphicall S. Francis.

IF now thou had lost thy speech, thy judgment being sound and whole and that
within two hours thou were to lose thy life, would thou not cordially love
thy tongue for being employed only in praising and thanking now God, in
inviting others to do the same, in singing the victories of generous souls,
which by their holy lives gained the eternal kingdom, for speaking the
virtues of their neighbors for maintaining the reputation of every one, for
comforting the afflicted, encouraging the timorous, confounding the wicked, and
converting sinners, what glory has a soldier, whcn he presents his sword
unto his king, which nevet unsheathed but for is Majestyes service and for the
ruin of his enemies. Think well on it

Resolve to govern and curb thy tongue so wisely and discreetly which is in
thee as a bridle unto a horse, and a stern unto a ship, that by its means
thou may conduct thy soul directly into heaven.

IT is a great charity to help a sick body who can not swallow any thing and is
dying: Alas! put thy self in his place, and imagine that thou were even now
departing; among these corporal trances and perplexities, would not thy soul
be in a pleasant calm and ecstasy, knowing that it has generously avercome
all the disordered appetits of drinking and eatings and although thy body were
insensible, yet thy soul would rejoice in being assured that thy body never
admitted of the least touch contrary unto virtue. Think well on it.

Resolve to deprive thy self with discretion of those meats commune unto
gluttons, for the better to satiatt thy self with those particulare unto the
Angels, and to touch nothing which may displease him, who often touches thee in
the holy Sacrament and whom thou hopest to embrase happily for all eternity in
heaven.

Can thou give me a reason, why the sick a little before death grope after I
know not what with their trembling hands? for my part I am confident, that if
thou were in this extremity, thou would kiss with honor thy hands, for
having liberally distributed thy goods unto the poor: for having alvvayes
labored with right intention to please God, shunning all idleness, for having
discreetly chasticed thy body to make it subordinat and obedient unto the law
of the spirit: these hands will thy not be admired by all the celestial
Court, when imbellished and adorned with precious stones thy shall bear the
palms of an absolute victory, and the laurels of an eternal glory. Think
well on it.

Detearmine to sow largely for to reap plentefully.

THey say, that the fitst part that dies of the body are the seet; in fine they
are the first that looses heat and become insensible. If this evening thou
should feel thy self in this condition, and thou belivest that thou should
die before midnight, would thou not take great pleasure in remembering the
steps thou have made to go to the Church, to hear Mass, Sermons, and the
Divine office; to visit the Hospitals, prisons, and the poor, to accomplish
holy Pilgrimages; these feet which have walked in and through all places for
to amplify thc glory of God do not they deserve to march on the azure vaults?
Think well on it.

Make resolutions never to spare thy steps when Gods service is concerned, for
one day to march in triumph.

FOr conclusion, when thy soul shall be separated from thy body for to render
an account unto God of all thy faults, vvilt thou not with great affection
thank that part which has been best employed in the scrvice of his divine
Majesty and has suffered with most love and patience. Think well on it.

Thou vvilt make most efficacious resolutions, especially if with attention
thou cast thy eyes on the multitude of those Saints S. John savv in his
memorable ravishment, they appeared exceedingly content in glory; which
although it was not equal in all; their bodies shined like little suns, yett
some brighter then others proportionably unto their merits, there was seen in
those bodies some parts more glittering, for having ben greater instruments of
the honor of God their Creator; the head of S. John Baptist was most
majestically radiant, for having ben cut off sustayning the truth: the hair
had the greatest beauty in S. Mary Magdaline, for having wiped the feet of
amiable Jesus; the eyes of S. Peter shined most, for having so long and often
wept his sin, the tongue of S. Chrysostom for having converted so many; the
teeth of S. Appollonia for being pulld out confesseing the truth; the breast of
S. Agatha were most bright, for being exposed unto the burning spinsers,
rather then to deny her faith; the hands of St. John Almner, for having
distributed so many alms, the feet of S. Xauerius sor having travailed so many
unknown and barbarous Countries, for to lead the^ into the fold of the holy
Catholic Church, and so of others: who altogether do sing infinite praises
unto the divine goodness which has so well provided for them, and for a little
misery, rendered them so much happiness. Good Reader I earnestly desire, that
thou could penetrate unto the bottom of my heart, for to see the good place
thou have there, doubtless thou would have great confidence in all that I
propose unto thee, and thou would receave it with the same intention as I
deliver it, which is no other then to make thee a Saint. Tell me then, if thou
knew that after this hour, there remained for thee no more honor,
employment, estate, greatness, dignity, nor place in this world, would thou
not desire to have been the most humble of men in imitation of Jesus Christ,
and according unto the example of so many Saints who now triumph in heaven,
would thou not be pleased to have yielded a little of thy right, precedeance,
and greatness, for to be placed among the friends of God. I demand of thee, if
it be not desirable to be the meanest of men for some few months, for to be
all thy life of the chiefest of the Kings privy Council. Think well on it.

Thou will conclude, if thou have not lost thy common sense that it were most
reasonable to be in the last rank in this world, that after death the great
Master Almighty God say unto thee: my Friend, ascend as high in heaven, as for
my love thou have been humbled on earth, which is most easy;

When one ascends an high place, he is well pleased to have his cloak carried
for him, to receave it on the top of the mountain: if thou must within two or
three days ascend unto the tribunal of God. will thou not be exceedingly
comforted, to have caused many of thy goods to be carried thither by the poor?
certainly thou will have need of them to cover thee before the Justice of
Almighty God, who having been very liberal toward thee, requires that thou be
so to the poor, is not this reasonable? Think well on it.

Resolve during life to put liberally thy goods in the Bank of God, that thou
may receave an hundred fold.

IF thou were at the last gasp of thy life, and thou should see at the feet
of thy bed the Mother of Mercy, who most willingly receaves a pure soul coming
forth a chaste body, would thou not melt with joy for having preserved the
purity of thy Body and Soul against the violent assaults of the world, Devil,
and Flesh; would thou not bless God for having given thee the industry to fly
from and avoid these infamous and ravenous Vultures, these enraged wolfs, these
wicked companions, which destroy all. O what pleasure, content and honor is it
unto a brave Captain: after having magnanimously defended the treasure of his
King, in an unfortified place, against the furious assaults of a puissant
enemy, and against the domestic treasons, he comes from thence tryumphant to
tender the treasure unto the King, and to be rewarded by him. Think well on it.

Thou will firmly purpose to shun all the ocasions which may deprive thee of
this treasure, and, to abandon rather a thousand lives then to lose it, bearing
for thy device and cognizance. Rather to die a thousand deaths then to defile
my Body.

IF within an hour thy soul should be prayed for, as it may happen, seeing we
are not sure of one hour and should call to mind the speech of our Savior,
saying, as thou measurest unto others so it shall be measured unto thee, will thou not be well satisfied, to have been meek, sweet, benign and charitable
toward all? Joyful for their good, and sorry for their evil, to have
interpreted all they did to a good sense and to have always spoken well of
every one; would thou not wish that God should treat thee so? Think well on
it.

Determine to gain this virtue more precious then the Philosophers stone, for
it will procure thee those treasures without pain, which cost others so much
labor and trouble.

When thy soul shall take the last farewell of thy Body which it must though
never so late, who knows whether it shall be to morrow, will she not thank it
most affectionatly, for that by its temperance it has open unto her the gate
for to enter unto the marriage of the Lamb, will not she bless all the Tastes,
abstinences and mortifications which have gained her a good place in the
eternal feast? which is better either for a little morsel to be cast forth of
Paradise with Adam and Eve, or for a small abstinence to enter into Heaven with
a multitude of Saint. Think well on it.

Resolve to observe temperance, which cannot be but discreet, for it is a
virtue, which will prolong thy days in health on earth, and render thee
eternally happy in the Kingdom of Heaven,

THou have often heard say, that of three friends a man gains in this world,
to wit, Riches, Kindred, and good works, there is but one only which
faithfully keeps him company in the other world; the Riches leaves him in the
bed as soon as his soul is expired, for the sumptuous funerals which are often
made, are more proper to augment the ambition of the living, then to afford any
relief unto the dead, the Kindred seem little more constant in Friendship,
they accompany the body unto the grave with grief and tears; but I could not bc
deemed a Liar, if I should averr that very often they have more mind to laugh
then to weep, for if any one weep in good earnest, the earth has no sooner
deprived him of sight of the dead, but he has lost the memory of him, If he be
a Son who has buried his Father, he thinks rather on what his Father has
left him, then to pray unto God for him; If he be a Husband who has buried his
wife, he dreams rather of the means to gain another more rich, then to relive
her dead; the good works accompany us unto the divine Tribunal; they plead our
cause, and having obtained for us a crown of glory, remain with us, and are our
ornaments for ever in Heaven, which of these Friends will thou have. Think
well on it.

Despise and neglect the first which will abandon thee in the way, and adhear
not too much unto the second, who will leave thee at the grave; but affect and
addict thy self unto the third which will accompany thee for all eternity.

IF thou were to be laid on a bed this evening, for to morrow morning to be
carried unto the grave, which I know to have happen unto more then four,
would thou not be exceedingly content to have suffered with patience the loss
of thy goods, thy renown, thy health, and all other things? and would thou
not rejoice really for having moderated although with difficulty thy natural
passions? would thou not be infinitely consolated if God should tell thee: by
thy Patience thou have saved thy Soul, and thou shall dwell with me for all
eternity in my glory?, Think well on it.

Thou will conclude, that he is most wife, who moderating his violent passions,
had rather recourse in his affairs unto the puissant aid of God, and so gain
a great Crown in Heaven.

HEre I make an and of all my queries, and only ask thee, if being at this hour
to die, thou do remember among the pains and anguishes of death, that thou
have used a great diligence in the service of God and for thy salvation, that
for it thou have not spared riches, life, nor honor, that for it thou have
employed thy self day and night with all possible intention, that the glory of
God, and the good of thy soul have been the two feet on which thou have marched
in all thy affairs; the two hands which has made thee to labor always; the
two eyes which has conducted thee through all! would thou not be exceedingly
cheerful and in fullness of delight, if then presenting thy soul unto God, he
shall demand of thee; whofe Image is this? thou can answer, Lord, it is the
Image of the most holy Trinity which I have conserved inviolate the best I
could possible, washing it in the blood of Jesus Christ, which I received in
the Sacrament of Penance, when that I confessed any Sin; I have thereunto
added, according unto thy intention, the imbellishment of all the virtues I
knew to practice assisted with thy divine Grace. O what pleasure will thou
feel, when after this answer, thou shall see the Father Omnipotent give the
kiss of peace unto thy Soul, acknowledging her for his child! what consolation,
when the most amiable Jesus shall imbraise it most affectionatly as his dear
Spouse; what ravishment, when the Holy Ghost shall place it on high among the
Saints of Heaven as his dear beloved? dear Friend I do beseech thee both for
the good I vvish thee, and for the ardent affection I bear thee, Think well on
it.

If thy patience being tired, thou telst me, that I sing but one song which is
very importunate and troublesome and that I break your brains with my. Think
well on it.

And thou should be exceedingly pleased if I would think on it well my self,
and leave you in quiet, well, God be blessed, I did expect cleen another thing
from a Person whom I so dearly love and desire to serve in the important
affairs of the salvation of his soul; but patience, I will not any longer
trouble thee, and I will depart presently, after I have said these two words,
Think well on it or not Think on it.

These things will not sail to happen, Think on death or Think not on it,
notwithstanding it will not leave approaching thee daily, so that all the
worldly power cannot make it stop one moment, nor make it avance before its
time, most happy are those who often think on it, O how sweet and fair will
they find it; miserable are those that never think on it, O how hideous and
bitter will they find it.

Think to give an account, Think not on it, yet it must be made, maugre thee
whosoever thou art, Happy are they who think to keep them selves always
ready. O how cheerful will they depart; unfortunate are those who are never
mindful of it, O how cruelly shall they be treated;

Think that there is a Hcaven and a Hell, Think not on it, nevertheless most
assuredly thou most go for all eternity unto the one or the other. Most happy
are those who practice virtue which conducts them unto the first, O how few are
there. Miserable are those who are given unto vice which leads them into the
second, O what multitudes are there. But what do I? I am al most angry with
one. whom I love as my self; excuse my dearest Friend I beseech thee, this
little and sudden passion, and remember not what I said last; Think or not
Think on it. Alas! all the contrary, I do conjure thee more thcn ever to
Think on it with attention, to the end thou may act better; permit me to
show thee the means.

O death, how bitter is the memory of thee unto a man enjoying peace and
content in his riches?

O death how sweet is the memory of thee unto a man having peace with his God!
Choose, thou have freedom.

THE THIRD PART Certain means ayding to do well, what he would have been done,
and to hender the doing of that which he would not have been done in this life.
WHat better and more prevalent reason can J give him, who is very deeply
engraven in my heart, for to assist him in procuring his salvation? then that
which the Holy Ghost says in the 7. of Eccle: My Son, in all thy works
remember thy later end and thou will not sin for ever: and what must arrive
then but Death, Judgment, Hell or Heaven? these therefore are the things which
he counsels us to remember, if we desire to serve God faithfully, and never to
offend him.

Death.
I have already helped thee with the first, knowing it to be both the easiest
applied, because daily we see some one or other dye, or hear the bell for some
burial, and the most proper remedy to cure our spiritual diseases, for thou
never so affectionatly fastened unto any thing, the sole thought of Death will
easiely untye it; the horse leech is not so obstinately fastened unto the Body,
but a few ashes will force him to quitt his hold.

Be thou proud and the most ambitious that ever was, only consider that after
death all will trample on thee, and thy bones shall not be distinguished from
those of the poorest beggar, who perhaps will be happy in Heaven, when thou
shall burn in Hell, assuredly this consideration will render thee humble and
make thee to esteem all.

J suppose thee to be the most avaricious in the world, and to think on no
other thing then to gain riches: if thou would consider with Job, that the
rich Man being awaiked from the sleep of death shall find nothing of what he
had gathered together and opening his eyes in the other life he shall find
nothing but torments which he has merited by his rapine: thou will of
necessity moderate thy disordinate affection which thou have toward perishable
and momentary riches.

When thou have the most violent passion to be esteemed and to be loved, if
thou should consider, that in a moment, after thy death all these Gallants will
be fled and not one will remain with thy Body; thou would not seek so much
to please them, thou would not yield unto so many remiss, effeminate and
unworthy condescendments which blemish the reputation and are cause of the
damnation of many.

If thou were the greatest fool and the most passionate of lovers, for any
humane beauty do but imagine thy beloved to be dead and putrified, as she must
be one day, it will be impossible that the flame which burns thee be not
immediately extinguished; O how easy it is to subdue the flesh whilst it is
alive and sound, if one consider what it will be when it is dead.

Jf thou were as hardened with malice as Pharao, and for all the miracles of
the world thou would not bend unto the will of God, no more then he did, if
death should enter into thy thought, thou would presently yield unto reason,
as he did as soon as it appeared in his Kingdom and in his own house.

I know not whether it be true which some report of Panders that they make use
of dead me^ skulls as a remedy for all their diseases: but I am most certain
that the memory of death is a most powrfull and afficacious means to cure all
spiritual evils and to restore the soul unto perfect health. King David
verefyes my assertion: my lord, says he I had great difficulty to pardon
injuries and wrongs which my enemies did me, chastity seemed unto me very hard
to keep, contempt was intolerable; and in-deed, J found all thy commandments
al most impossible: but when seriously I considered that all here are
tra^sitory, and that I must die, this narow way became of its self wide and
large, chastity appeared easy, pardoning of enemies reasonable, and all thy
precepts light.

If the remembrance of Death destroys sin, the oblivion of it does
intertaine and nourish it: for Esaias ca. 47. counting the sins of Babylon,
and the punishments with which God would afflict them, says, that the cause of
those evils was that they did not remember Death. Jeremy seekeing the origin
of the vices which reigned in the City of Jerusalem affirms it to be no
other, then the little mindefulnes they had of their end.

SAtan having had a long experience of the sovereign virtue of this remedy,
endeavors by all means to hender man from making use of it. I can not better
make thee comprehend his malicious inventions their by the catching or killing
of woodculvers which are wild Pigeons: the bird catcher or Fowler having found
the tree on which they settle and roost at night in troops (for they are birds
that consort together inmultitudes) chooses an abscure and dark night, and
takes others with guns and drums, being arrived at the place, they begin to
beat the drum but softly, for fear that the Birds should fliy a way, and
increasing the noise by little and little, they enure them so unto the sound,
that they at last beat the drums with all their force, with out ever
fritghting the Pigeons; in the mean while one creepes, unto the foot of the
tree, where he holds up a candle which he had in a dark lantern, the
woodculvers which are delighted with light descend unto the lower branches of
the tree to enjoy the light, then they shoot, and at every shot they kill
many, the others which were higher thinking their companions fled. not hearing
the gunne by reason of the noise the drums make, takes their place and are
also killed; Behold the explication of this; the tree represents the world, the
wood Culvers are the men, the Fowler is the Devil, who intices and allures
them unto himself, with pleasures, honors and riches, which are like little
fires or lights, a bout which men fly vvhiles death strikes them, their
companions never take notice of the blovv, by reason of the great noise which
the world makes, figured well by the drums; So that one has no sooner
quitted these small splendors, but an other courts and seeks them; one has no
sooner left any benefice or office, but an other flies thither, and so all
pass, all die, and the gratest part are lost for not having sufficiently ben
warned by the death of others; that if any one has reflected on it, if any
one has been moved. these resentments as quickly pass, as a flash of
lightning; and even as we see hogs hie together in troops, grunt, and are
affrighted when any one of them is killed, but he is no sooner dead, then
every one returns unto his former employment; this unto his wallowing in mire,
that unto his rooting with his nose the earth, an other to fill him self in the
trough; even so when a man is dead, the neighbowrs are astonished, the
domestikes weep, the kindred are aggrieved; but as soon as he is buried,
every one return unto his affairs, unto his former passions and vices. But if
all had a lively and courageous spirit, and a profound judgment, one word in a
hundred years, or to see one dead would be sufficient to convert all those who
should see it, and considere seriously that the same must infallibly happen
unto them selves: from whence then proceeds so small profitt? Think well on it.

Thou will find that it proceeds, either from the malice of the Devil, who
deprives thy soul of this profitable thought, and diverts it otherwise, if
great care be not taken; or from the inconstancy of thy jmagination, which is
so wavering that it knows not how to remain long on the same thing, if it be
not constrained by often reflections, therefore I deem it most necessary, if
thou desire to profitt by this means, that when thou, beginest any busine;,
thou considerest how thou would have done it; if presently thou were to die.
More, that once a month thou retirest into a solitary place, and dismissing all
other thoughts, prostrat at the feet of a Crucifixe either in thy chamber, or
in a Church, thou seriously think on these three or four points.

That the end of thy life will come very soon, perhaps before the month be
ended.

That thou must leave all thou have in this world, honors, richers and
pleasures, carrying nothing with thee but the remorse of thy conscience, and
the sins which thou have committed.

That the Body having given up the Ghost after many pains and conflicts, shall
be sowed in a poor sheet, laid in the grave, and reduced into ashes, being
forgotten of all the world.

That the soul shall be happy if at the hour of Death, it be in good state,
but most miserable if it be in mortal sin, and into what part soever it be
carried, into Heaven or into Hell, it shall remain there for ever: and then
imagining thy self to be at the last gasp, and holding the Crucifix in thy
hand, say with fervor.

O most merciful Jesus, my support and my strength, in whom I believe, in whom
I hope, whom I love and ever will love, afforde me at this hour thy powerful
hand for to depart securely. I confess before the whole world, that my
miserable life has been replenished with many great wickednesses, of which I
heartely repent my self, and I do confide that thy infinite goodness will pardon
me and not permit my soul to be lost, for which thou gave thyn on the
Cross. No, I can not believe that thou will repulse me, o my dearest Jesus,
for I am flesh of thy flesh, bone of thy bone, son of thy Father, thou also
calst me thy Brother. Therefore my Brother, seeing thou have taken my humanity,
to give me thy divinity, deliver me at this hour from the throat of the lion.
I kiss this side from whence proceeded my happynes, open it unto me, and wash
my ordures and impurities with the water and blood which issued from thence, I
adore these hands which were nailed for me, unto them I recommend my soul, they
have created me, they will save me. I honor these wounds, in which I will hide
my self, until the choler of my judge be passed.

O celestial Father, be unto we propitious, and remember that my sins have been chastised with all rigor in the person of thy most beloved Son. O my lord
Jesus Christ permit not the the infinite price of thy blood to be unprofitable
unto my soul. O holy Ghost, fortefy me with thy grace, that I do not fail or
be subdued in this last conflict. O Mother of God, who has been most charitable
and favorable unto me all my life time, be so now in this moment I beseech
thee, on which depends all my felicity. O S. Michael who has the commission to
present Souls unto the divine Tribunal, and to defend them from the enemy, I
recommend mine unto thee. O good Angel guardian, help me; O all ye S. of
Heaven come unto my succor, that leaving this earth, I may ascend into Heaven
for to praise eternally with ye our sovereign Creator.

The Judgment.
THe consideration of Judgment which follows Death is not less profitable,
then that of death, if it be maturely pondered; when I represent unto my self,
says Job, the justice, impartiality, and rigor of the divine judgment and the
exact account I must render, I am so frightened with my sins, that I am
enforced to resolve to shun them more then the greatst evil what so ever. The
Saints conducted by the Holy Ghost do exhort thee to think on it often: place
thy self before the eyes of this Sovereign judge, advises S. Gregory, fear
him now, to the end that abstaining from vice, thou may not fear him when he
shall judge thee, remember the name of that king, who seeing the picture of the
general judgment entered into such a strong apprehe^sion that he was almost
dead. Certes if thou rightly imagine what it will be, thou will stifle all the
imperfections of thy Soul. St. Hierosme had not a better practice for to
triumph over vice, and to addict him unto all virtue, whether I eat, says he,
drink, sleep, or wake, and in all I do, it seems to me that I hear this
dreadful and terrible voice. Arise ye dead and come unto judgment.

IN good earnest, if thou knew assuredly, that within two or three hours
thou were to be summoned to answer before the Tribunal of God, would thou
dare? O! for the love of God mark what I ask thee: would thou dare yet once
more, I beseech thee, think well on what thou will answer: would thou well
dare to resolve, to appear at the Judgment of God?

IN this fearful and terrible Judgment, where thou shall find assembled the
great Council of the King of Kings, who has ordained this hour for to decide
wholly and justly the criminal process of thy Conscience. Process, in which
will be examined exactly all the parts of thy life, a Process where will be
determined the final sentence of thy eternal felicity or misery. VVhoudst thou
dare, I say, to appear in the condition thou art, for to plead thy cause? Thou
who art so bashsul and fearful, when thou art taken in never to little a fault.
Thou would thou dare to behold a Person of quality. Thou who tremblest at the
least apparent danger: Would thou dare, appear in the presence of him,
before whom the most puissant Monarchies of the earth tremble; the highest
Seraphins hide themselves with their wings, not being able to endure and behold
the brightness of so great a Majesty. Ah! for the sacred and bitter Passion of
Jesus Christ; Think well on it.

When I consider how thy soul leaving thy body is in danger to fall into the
hands of the Apparitours of the Sovereign Judge who will lead thee directly
before this dreadful Parliament; I sweat I am in a trance with the imagination,
I have of seeing thee at Bar for to answer being strongly accused.

BUt, by whom? by thy mortal enemies, or rather, immortal; who out of the
hatred which they bear thee, vvil not omit the least thing they can reproach
thee vvithal, in this great and majestical assembly: by whom? by those who
heretofore have been thy good Friends; as the Blessed Virgin, thy good Angel,
so many Saints, who has taken so great pains to save thee, if thou would
have harkened unto them by whom? by the accomplices and confederates of thy
wickedness, who are enraged against thee, and by thy own Conscience which
will say open unto all the world all thy imperfections.

But of what shall thou be accused? of all, in which thou have not kept the
Commandments God gave thee, and the holy inspirations which he most lovingly
suggested unto thee: of all which thou vvast obliged to do, according to the
estate unto which God has called thee. of all which thou have done to
satisfy thy unruly passions. of all which thou have neglected to do for the
glory of God.

But, how accused; with so much assurance; of thy adverse Party, that nobody
will dare to reply, or speak one word in thy behalf and defense; with so
much evidence, of all thy imperfections that not one of them can be hid or
disguised: with so great remorse of thy Conscience, that thou vvilt
acknowledge all: with so much shame, that thou vvilt desire the mountains to
fall on thee. Is not this dreadful? Think well on it.

Having thought on it seriously; if thou do not conceave a great fear, if
thou tremblest not with terror, pardon me I beseech thee, if I doubt and
mistrust the verity of thy faith, for how can I be assured that thou beleevest
rightly, if thou makes no reckoning and esteem of things so important, and
concerns thee so much; what means to be persuaded that thou regardes it, if
when it is presented unto thee, thy Heart remains colder then marble, and
more hard then steel. Wherefore, earnestly endeavor to know thy self, seeing
that thou shall be most rigorously judged.

O Great affair is it to appear for to answer before so great a Court, it is
exceeding misfortune to be accused by every one, to be charged of grievious
crimes, but that which surpasses all imagination; is to be judged at the last
appeal by the Sovereign Judge of Judges: this every one ought to apprehend
with horror that is not wholy deprived of reason, this will make every one
to yield that is not worse then a Turk, this will cause every one to vveep,
that believes he has a soul; to fall into the hands of God, for to be feverly
judged, to be in the power of no more a benign Father, for to condemn us
without favor or mercy; to be chastized no more by the chaste lamb who did so
amorously shed even unto the last drop of his blood, for to give us Heaven. But
by the roaring Lion of Juda who comes to take revenge of all the faults
committed against him. O day most dreadful! O Judge most terrible and without
mercy! O judgment full of terror! But what, is there no means to
procrastinate, delay or prolong it never so little? No no, to demand any such
thing is but time lost. vvhetefore delay it, seeing the crimes are manifest?
the offender has not any thing to reply; it is a very great folly to only
think on it! the knowledge of thy Judge is it not infinite? is not his bounty and
goodness unlimited? unto whom can thou make thy address who is more benign?
his justice is it not the rule of all justice? unto what Court will thou
appealc, that can be more just? his power is it not the omnipotence of a God?
who can resist or contradict him? Think well on it.

Turn thee on all sides, and putt thy self all postures, retire thee in what
place thou will, it is done with thee, thou can not expect any thing, but
this great storm which is ready to fall on thy head, and to make thee know,
that thou art most justly condemned.

ALas! condemned? but to what? to what? to be never more the Child of the
eternal Father who had adopted thee by Creation. To what? to loose the
inheritance which Jesus Christ had purchased for thee in heaven, by his bitter
Fassion. To what? to be for ever separated from the delightful and glorious
Society of the Sacred Virgin, of the Angels, and Saints, who did expect thee,
for to praise God with them. O inestimable! O cruel separation! To what? unto
torments a thousand times more intolerable then all the Tyrants could ever
invent: unto Fire a thousand times more burning then these of this world; Fire
always flaming without light, fire always burning without diminishing: is not
this sufficient for thee, who can not endure the roughnes of a hair cloth? is
not this too much for thce who can not suffer without complaining the prick of
a pinn? Think well on it.

For my part I am at a stand, being unable to resolve to hear this sentence
against thee, which will make to tremble the Heavens, earth and Hell. Go thou
cursed begone far from me for ever, since when there was time thou would not
serve me: depart from hence for to weep in the bottemlesse pit, because thou
have not done it on earth. Get thou away for to burn in the fire, which
causing thee a thousand pains never shall consume thee. Go unto the company
of the Devils, who will make thee pay most dearly for all the follies of thy
life. Who can imagine the rage with which the Devils will seize on thee? the
promptness with which they will torment thee in Hell. Dear Frlend, is it not
true that if this misfortune should happen unto thee, Alas! God of his goodness
preserve thee from it, is it not true, that thou would profoundly sigh, and
say with a lamentable voice, O if! o if!

O if I had but one day of those which I have so unfortunatly lost, if I could
find an hour of time which I have evelly employed, if at least one quarter of
an hour were given me, for to say, A good peccavi.

O with what a good Heart would I say it! O how I would cast my self on my
knees! O how would I knock my breast! how great a grief would I have for my
sins. But what henders thee from doing all this now? wherefore do thou
delay it; courage, I do conjure thee by all that is most dear unto thee: Cast
thy self on thy knees, say this good peccavi; but say it staiedly, and with
feeling sly:

Mercy, o my God, mercy, I repent with all my Heart for having offended thy
divine goodness, because thou art my good God, and my All: I love thee and honor
thee above all things: I will never more offend thee thy grace assisting me,
and I will always avoyed the occasions of sinning: in satisfaction of my past
faults, I offer thee my life and all I have. Receave me I beseech thee, since
thou have moved me to ask it, through the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ, and
never permit me to offend thee again.

Hell.
There are those who deem it unmeet and inconvenient that a generous and brave
spirit should make use of the consideration of Hell, for to shun vice, and to
addict himself unto the service of God, who having made all for love, will that
we serve him for love. Seriously I do not conceave how it shall be unlawful
for any one to practice to do well by this means, seeing St. John Baptist made
use of it, to lead all the word unto God. Preaching alowd and clearly, that
every tree, that is to say, every Man that does not yield good fruit, shall be
cut down and cast into the fire: the Savior of our Souls in the sermon of
his last supper presented unto his Disciples the same remedy, for to oblige
them to be always dutiful and obedient, even as, said he unto them, the vine
branches being separated from the the stock, withers, and is cast in the fire,
even so the sinner shall be cast out of my company, shall loose all the gifts
and all the virtue he had to do good, and shall be thrown into the eternal
fire. St. Athanasius relates; that St. Anthony assaulted with strong and
violent temptations in the beginning of his holy life overcame the^
victoriously by seriously thinking on the torments of Hell. And Metaphrastes
recounts, that St. Martinian being even lost and ready to committ a great sin,
he cast him self on the fire and permitting himself to burn a little while
discoursed with himself, saying see Martinian if thou can endure the eternal
flames, whether this sin thou art goeing to committ will infallibly lead
thee, if thou resents so much this temporal fire which is extinguished with a
little water: if thou find it so unsupportable, what will be the eternal
fire, which can never be extinguished? by this means he vanguished the
temptation. Well, seeing that this remedy is so profitable, I beseech thee.
Think well on it.

TO the end that thou may make it more profitable, inquire of any one that
knows it, what Hell is. Job will tell thee that it is a country full of
obscure darkness and noisome stinkes, where there is no order, but an
intolerable horror; and eternal confusion. Solomon will assure thee, that it
is a most bottomless pit, from whence none can come, that is fallen there in.
Jsayas will explicate it unto thee, that it is a Prison full of a most vehement
fire, which although it be of the same nature with the elementarie fire, is
incomparably more efficacious to torment, because it does not act with the sole
natural virtue, but as the instrument of the infinite divine power of God, which
is elevated to torment the damned, as much as Gods justice requires; from
whence it is, that it needs not any matter for its maintenance: it can never
be extinguished, because it is the breath of God, to wit, his infinite power
that kindles it according unto Jsayas. The Divines hold, that it is replenished
with all sorts of evils, and voyed of all good, it is in vain for to dispute
of it, says the devout Rusbroquius: for when we have said all that can be
said of the pains of Hell, it will be much less in comparison of what it is,
then a drop of water compared unto the whole Ocean; S. Augustine in one of his
epistles says, that a dead man raised to life by the touching of St.
Hierosmes hair shirt testefyed unto St. Cyrille Bishop of Jerusalem that the
torments of the other life were so great, that if any one had experimented the
least, he would choose rather to be even unto the day of judgment in a furnace
where all the fire of the world was enclosed, then to suffer onc day in Hell:
are not these things dreadful? Think well on it

ANd following the counsel of St. Bernard, descend often into Hell whilst thou
live by thy meditations to the end that after thy death thou be not shut
up there for all eternity.

Consider advisedly how the Souls of the damned are hideously tortured, because
they see themselves deprived for all eternity of the vision of God: a torment
far greater then can be imagined in this world.

All their powers are full of bittternes and anguish inexplicable, the memory
with the remembrance of past pleasures and of future evils, the understanding
with the perfect knowledge of all it has done, preferrlng the creatures before
the Creator, the transitory goods and pleasures, before those which shall
never have an end; the will with an enraged hate which they have against God,
which will make them utter a thousand blasphemies: the imagination with the
lively apprehensio^ of the present payens and yett more to follow;

The fire acts with far greater heat against them then does our inflamed
coals against a Bar of Iron which it burns and inflames in the Furnace.

The remorse of Conscience excessively gnawes and vexes, for the means
representing them selves, which it has had of salvation, although it does not
repent of the sin, as an offense against God, yett it burstes with grief and
rage for having committed the evil which has ruined it. Esau roared like a
lion, seeing that for a small dish of porridge he had lost his right of
inheritance: the damned soul does yet worse, knowing that for a short pleasure,
for a base reveng, for a little word she has lost Heaven: in good earnest, is
not this an ineffable heart break? Think well on it.

Mark how the body shall there suffer an insupportable fire; it shall be cast
into an extreme cold, it shall be hammered cruelly on most hard Anviles,
broken on wheels, grounded in a mill, Cut and shred with rasours, pierced with
leances. Infine^, imagine all the punishments that the Tyrants have invented to
torment the Martyrs, the brazen Bulls, boiling Cauldrons, Combs of Iron,
Crosses, Fires, Rasours, all this was but an eesie and short Prentiship to that
which the Devils make the damned to suffer in all the parts of their Bodies but
especially in their five senses.

The sight shall be cruelly tormented with thick obscure darkness, which
depriving them of all comfort of the light, shall afford them I know not what
unfortunat cleernesse, which shall cause them to see hideous and ghastly
spectacles of their torments, and so many dreadful shapes of the infernal
monsters, the sight of which shall be intolerable, without any relaxation.
Alas? if the seeing of one Devil is able to cause the death of the most
courageous, what shall do, I beseech thee, the horrible spectacle of all the
Devils and the damned?

The Hearing shall be incessantly frighted with the despairable cries, with
dreadful howlings, and with most execreable blasphemies which these miserables
shall utter against them selves, and against God. Imagine a thousand People in
the fire even unto the chinn, every one lamentably crying, how insupportable
will their clamors be; and what is this in comparaison of a hundred thousand
millions of the damned which burn in Hell? The Ambitious, shall say I
despair with grief: Cursed vanities which has brought me hither: the
Avaritious, shall complain; I am enraged with the pains, cursed richesses,
which are the cause of my evil; the Lascivious shall yell, I burn, cursed
pleasures which have kindled me this fire etc.

The Taste inportuned with an exceeding hunger and extraordinary thirst, shall
have for viande loathsomes Toads, and the gall of Dragons for drink, this
shall but increase the Hunger and thirst; witnesses the cursed Richman, who
almost two thousand years since demanded a drop of water for to assuage the
thirst which did torture him, and as yet has not obtained it, nor never shall.

The Feeling shall be tormented through all that is sensible by fire, which
shall penetrate even unto the marrow, cold shall succeed, which shall congeale
the blood with in the veins with sharp aches: an hundred times in four aid
tweety hours the flesh shall be torn and the bones broken, and as often
redintegrated and repaired, an hundred times shall be powered on the Body
boiling oil, melted lead, and they shall not consume.

The Smelling shall be infected with stinking and noisome smells, which shall
exhale not only from the infulphured fire, and the tainted sinkes of Hell, but
also from the Bodies of the damned: Odors so insupportable that St. Bonaventure
affirms, that one Body of the damned would be able to infect the whole world
with the plague.

In the lives of the Fathers it is written, that a certain religious man
damned appeared unto his companion who asked him, if the pains of Hell were so
cruel as they preach: know, answered he, that they are such, that the tongues
of men are not able to explicate the rigor of them. Could thou not give me
some proof, said the companion? I will, replied the damned, would thou see,
hear, taste or feel them: Alas! said the Religious, I am not able to see or
hear them, for I am too timorous, nether to feel them, being too delicate,
much less am I able to taste them, having so weak a stomach; but I should be
content to smell them, never the less as favorably as may be: this being
said, the damned opened his cloak, with which he seemed to be covered, from
whence issued so horrible stink, that all the Religious were constrained to
leave the Monastery, without ever being able to inhabit there again: if one
damn soul caused so great infection, what shall, J pray thee, so many millions
of Souls and bodies burning in Hell cause? Think well on it.

Add unto all these evils the comble and chief of all these miseries, which
is, that all these cruel torments shall never have an end; my dear Friend, at
this word Never, thy Heart though never so courageous does it not fail thee?
yes, never the miserable damned shall shall have an end of their pain: after an
hundred years torment, a thousand of years begin, and they being ended, an
hundred thousand are beginning, and after them succeeds as many millions as
there are drops of water in the Sea, and Athomes in the air, and after all
this there will remain an eternity entire, O eternity, thou art exceeding! O
eternity, thou art most horrible! O eternity, thou art badly considered!
Eternity, Eternity. O the weighty word Eternity. If one were for tenn years to
lie on a soft bed, and strewed with roses, what a great torment this would be?
if one were constrained for twenty years to have his eyes fixed on the most
agreeable object of the world, what anguish and wearisomnes would it cause? if
thy ears during fifty years were enforced to hear the most ravishing music
on earth, would it not be insupportable? Alas! O my God, what will be the
eternal pain which with out any mitigation or solace, will continue for ever?
to be couched for ever on most ardent coals, to swallow alwaycs most bitter
gall. and wormwood mingled with the foame of Serpents, to see for ever the
hideous and inexplicable shapes of the devils: to hear always the enraged
music of horrid blasphemies which the damned shall utter against God: to smell
the stinkes and the intolerable infections of Hell for all eternity:

For ever, Alas my God! alas, how long is this for ever! that shall never have
an end, nor rest, it is exceeding long; to suffer for ever, it is a misery
without a second; if it were for a thousand years, one might hope that it
would have an end, but for ever, my soul likes it not. O! For ever, a great for
ever, which never can be comprehended; this eternal ever, frights my Soul;
considering this ever, what Heart does not fail and tremble.

Heaven.
THe consideration of Heaven must-needes be a very efficacious means for to
withdraw us from vice, and to lead us unto virtue: seeing that the Prince of
the Apostles made use of it for to excite Prelates to justly perform their
duty: firmly believe ye, says he unto them, that in recompense of your
fidelity, and labors which ye have taken in the government of souls, ye
shall receceave a Crown of Glory, which shall shine on your heads all
eternity. St. Paul employed no other reason, for to persuade the Collossians to
cast off the old man which carries with him many infirmities, and to revest
themselves with the new man, who has for his portion the greatest virtues, if
ye do this, says he, the celestial inheritance shall be the high prize and
avantageous reward of your pains. Jesus Christ himself, after having declared
unto his Disciples the many ways which leads unto Heaven, found nothing more
efficacious for to encourage them, the^ to say unto them, my Friends, among the
difficulties with which ye shall encounter in these separated ways from the
commun and public way. Confide courageously on the assurances which I give
ye, that they will conduct ye unto infinite rewards. The greatest Saints made
use of this consideration for to practice the highest virtues. Hear David, who
speaks for all. O my Soverign Lord, I confess that I had an exceedingly proud
Heart, and very hard to yield unto thy favorable inspirations, but by the
consideration of thy infinite recompenses, I have humbled it, and made it to
perform all thy pleasures and commands. Dear Friend, tell me, art not thou
able to do the same? Think well on it.

BEcause the true recompance which God gives unto his good servants is found in
Heaven, it is necessary to know what this Heaven is. St. John Apoc: 21.
affirms, that it is a great City, of which the walls are of precious stones
raised on a fundation of pure gold, with twelve gates most magnificent, which
serves but for show, for they are never shutt, for the light which produces
there a continual fair day, banisheth all darkness and night.

St. Matthew says, it is a great Kingdom. St. Luke adds, that it is eternal.
St. Peter calls it divine; divine indeed. since that God is there King, the
Virgin Mother is there Queen, the Angels are the Courtiers, and all the Saints
are there Inhabitatants. A Kingdom where all the discourse is of Joy and
contentment. All grief, vexation, anger, and disquiet being banished thence;
where is not to be seen any Plebeyan or mean Person, all there being most Noble:
where all that is good is found in abundance, without any want: the Divines
teach, that it is an Estate composed of all the good imaginable, and yet more
then can be imagined, and exempt from all evils. Dispute no more of it, says
St. Paul, for I who have been there can not declare the things I have seen there,
so great and admirable they are. No truly, adds St. Augustine, for though all
the tongues of men, yea of all the Angels should be employed in it, they could
not declare them. J will not omit notwithstanding to say a word or two, of this
place, of the company, and of the glory of this beautiful Heaven: whilst I
shall speak, Think thou well on it.

THe place where Heaven is seated, is very high; infinite in its extension, most
pure, and most fertile and full of all goodness: the Philosophers and reason
teach us, that the place ought to answer, the quality of him that there is
lodged, even so we see the Palaces of Princes do surpass and excel in beauty
and richesse, the Cottages of Peasantes and clownes. I will leave thee to think
what must be the mansion and habitation of a God and of all his Favorits,
compared with all the Howses of this world. One must be ignorant that the
Firmament so admirable in beauty, so shining with stars is but the pavement of
this divine House, for not to conclude evidently, that with in there are other
rarietyes far beyond our imagination. O Lord, God of Power, says David, how
charming is the place of thy habitation, my Soul can not think on a more
agreeable and delectable thing, because thinking on it, presently it is
ravished. Great King, thou have greater occasion to do this, then the Queen of
Saba had, considering the wonders of the Palace of thy Son Solomon. It is this
that caused St. Ignatius casting amorous looks toward Heaven, and melting into
tears to say. O how miserable the earth seems unto me when J behold the
Heaven, that is the abode of mortals: this the habitation of the immortals,
that the place of banished men, this the natural country of Angels. that the
prison of Sinners. this the noble Palace of the just and of the Children of
God. Happy, a thoutimes happy those who dwell in this holy Mansion, for in a
most accomplished felicity, they shall praise God for ever and ever, desire
not thou to be in this holy house. Think well on it.

THe noble Company of the Saints will cause an inexplicable ravishment. What
happiness, J beseech thee, to discourse familiarly and friendly with so many
Patriarchs, and Prophites, with so many Apostles and Disciples, with so many
Martyrs and Confessors, with so many most pure Virgins whose relics are in
this world so much esteemed that often times long pilgrimages are undertaken
for only to kiss the^. What joy to see continually the Angels? if it be deemed
a great favor to see any one of them in a human form, what will it be to see
them all in their proper shape: what pleasure to be always with the Mother of
God, who is an hundred times more beautiful then the Monn, and more radiant
then the sunn. O happynes inestimable! O contentement beyond comparison to
enjoy the company so noble, so beautiful, so perfect, so complete, so united
with a ligature of Love, that every one estremes the good and felicity of all
as his own, and all deemes the happynes of each one as their proper. Who is
able to declare the felicity that he enjoyes who is in the company of most
amiable Jesus, to be with him in the most pleasanr and delightsome gardens of
Paradise, to sit at his Table, always to follow him, to behold his divine
Face, which rejoices the Angels, and is a part of the felicity of the Saints.
It is impossible to imagine the contentment which the soul shall have in seeing
its Creator, no more in a myrror or looking glass, but face to face, as he is
in the splendour of his Divinity: it is in this sight, that the soul will be
inflamed with love: it is in this love that it will be lost in God; it is in
this loss that it shall find all honors, wealth and pleasures, is it not true?

Think well on it.

THe glory of Heaven more surpasses all that which has ever ben good
beautiful and agreeable in this world, and which shall be, then the ocean
exceeds a drop of water. St. Bernard says that this glory is so great, that
it can not be measured, so long that it has no end, so numerous that it can
not be reckoned, so precious and excellent that it can not be valued. St.
Augustine enhauncing the price of it assures: that it goes beyond all Belief,
that it surpasses the limits of Hopes, that it can not be comprised by
Charity. I wonder not at it says one; for if we can hardly know the great
benefits which God in this life bestows indifferently on his Friends and
enemies, what shall be the Blessings which he has reserved in Heaven for his
Favorits? If entering into a Palace thou see the stables gilded and azured, if
thou perceivest the chambres of scullions shining with precious stones, will thou not conceave some thing more magnificent, for the lodgings of the gentry
and nobility and for the Cabinet of the King? The Saints with these
considerations became transported and ravished, St. Ignatius at the sight of
Heaven melted into tears. St. Francis at the pronouncing of the celestial
Glory licked his lips as a lickorous Person does at the savor of some
delicate and sweet meat. St. Bernard at the sole name of Heaven rehearsed by
Children, as he walked in the streets, entered in to a profound ecstasy. The
Saints seriously thinking on this Beatitud, have with a commune voice said,
that all the afflictions of this life have not any proportion with the
consolations, which those shall receave who have suffered them with patience
for the love of their God. All Createurs even the Devils themselves
acknowledges this truth, for we read in the spiritual Meadow, that a Devil
being demanded, what he would do for to enjoy the glory and felicity in
Heaven, was constrained to answer, that if it were in his power, and had a
Body, he would willingly be pounded and brayed in a Mortar, or burned in a
Furnace until the end of the world, for to enjoy only one quarter of an Hour
the Glory of Heaven. Alas! It will not cost us so much, if we be but willing
and diligent, to be there for ever.

My dear Friend, if thou believe all that I have said, and what is that,
which J have said in comparaison of that is there? wherefore art thou so glued
unto the earth, that thou do not raise thy thoughts toward this ravishing
Heaven? wherefore do thou then below search and hunt after any consolation
seeing that thou may find all pleasures and felicities in Heaven? Why art
thou so diligent and solicitous to heap up riches, which thou must leave son
or late, and take no care to gather those treasures which will remain with
thee for all eternity? Wherefore say thou not from the bottom of thy Heart
with St Augustine?

O beautiful and glorious Mansion of God. I love thy ornaments and the
pleasures with which thou art replenished: my Heart does day and night sigh
after thee: my Soul is in a trance with the sole remembrance of thy felicity.
O habitation most happy! O Kingdom truly fortunat, exempted from hunger,
eloigned from all evils, where the day is never followed with night, where the
seasons are never subject unto any alteration, where reigns unvariable
eternity in its infinite happynes. O admirable Paradise, and never sufficiently
desired being, where the faithful Soul crowned with glory, environed with all
sorts of contentement, sasiated with blessings, singes among the Angels the
canticles of joy: God grant that purified of all my crimes which do
contaminate my Soul, I may be lodged in the meanest of thy appartements, for
there to enjoy a solid peace, and a perfect felicity? for to converse with the
Saints, and to contemplate the divine Face of my most dear and amiable Jesus,
for to singe there with the celestial Courtiers the sweet consorts of the
praises of my good God, and to see for ever the sovereigne and infinite light. O
Heaven! O Heaven that I might have thee always present before my eyes, and
engraved in my Heart: that I might have the honor to be eternally one of thy
inhabitants, O Heaven!

Dear Friend since I must make an end, and take my leave of thee: I do
rejoice exceedingly, that I leave thee in so good a residence: God of his
infinite mercy grant, that thou and I may live so well, that after this life we
may meet there, for to be never separed: let us often pray thou for me, and I
for thee, that this may be; and it will be without doubt, if we duly practice
these four words. Think well on it.

JESUS, MARIE, JOSEPH.
Poterit imprimi

J. Gillemans L.C.G.


