A Seasonable Paper, Presented to the consideration of all that profess
Christianity.
THe bent of my mind being to promote Piety and Goodness, Love and Unity
amongst Men (tho of different Persuasions) rather than Notions and Opinions,
puts me upon collecting and publishing this following; which if duly considered
by all sorts of People, might much conduce thereto. It is taken out of a Book
lately printed, entitled, An Address to Protestants, etc. The whole is large,
so have only collected these Passages, which I apprehend will be serviceable to
many. Where there is this stroke -- there is something omitted for
brevity-sake, but the sense not altered. My desire is, the reader may receive
that benefit by it, as is intended by his Friend,

J. P.

An Address to Protestants, -- by a Protestant, W. Penn.
But before I begin ( says the Author) I desire to premise (and can with much
sincerity declare) that I intend not the reproach of any Person or Party: I am
weary with seeing so much of it in the World: for it gains nothing that is worth
the keeping, but hardens to a desperateness, what is our duty to endeavor to
soften. Page 60.

I Conscientiously refuse to name Parties, because I am tender of giving the
least offense. p. 135.

Let all Asperities be avoided, Nicknames forbidden. p. 225.

Christians ought to be distinguished by their likeness to Christ, and not
their Notions of Christ by his Holy Qualifications, rather than their own Lofty
Professions, and Invented Formalities. p. 119.

He that keeps the Law of God, and abstains from the impurity of the World;
that is the good Man, the just Liver; he is the Apostle's true Jew and
Circumcision. p. 120.

Men that are angry for God, passionate for Christ, that call Names for
Religion, and fling stones and persecute for Faith, may tell us they are
Christians if they will, but no body would know them to be such by their
Fruits; to be sure they are no Christians of Christ's making. p. 242.

Holy living is become no Test among Us, unless against the Liver. The Tree was
once known by its Fruits, it is not so now; the better Liver, the more
dangerous, if not a Conformist. p. 245.

Alas! it is for want of considering that Men don't see, that to disorder the
mind in Controversy, is a greater mischief, than to carry the Point can be a
benefit; in that it is not to be Religious to apprehend rightly, but to do
well. p. 244.

The Tree was not accounted good or bad by the Leaves, but the Fruits; not by
the Opinions, but the holy living. p. 104.

Ye shall know them by their Fruits, says Christ of the Pharisees; so shall
Men know them that sincerely believe and confess Christ, by their sanctified
Manners, and blameless Conversations; And woe to them that make other
distinctions! for God has made no other; there will be but Goats and Sheep at
the last Day, Holy and Unholy, Just and Unjust. Therefore let that be our
distinction, which ever was and will be God's distinction; for all other
Measures are the Effects of the Passions and Presumptions of Men. p. 99.

A Man may falsely believe as the true Church believes; for if I believe what
she believes, only because she believes it, and not because I am convinced in
my own Understanding and Conscience of the truth of what she believes, my Faith
is false, tho hers be true; I say, it is not true to me, I have no evidence of
it p.146.

So that believing as the Church believes, is no more nor less than rooking Men
of their Understandings. p. 156.

I beseech you -- FLY ROME AT HOME; look to the Enemies of your own House, have
a care of this presumption, carry it not too high; lay not stress where God has
laid none, neither use his royal Stamp to Authorize your Apprehensions, instead
of his Institutions. p. 77.

But if I must abandon my own Sense and Judgment, and yield my self up to the
Faith and Authority of another -- What security can I have, that the Man, or
Men whom I trust, may not err and deceive me? and that deceit is irreparable.
p. 187.

To be therefore of the Church of which Christ is Head, the Redeemed,
Regenerated Church of Christ, is quite another thing, than to be of any visible
Society whatever; for in all such Communions there are but too many that have
no true Title to Christianity. p. 177.

Thou have no dominion over thy Brother's Faith, nor have thou Commission to be
Lord over his Conscience; it is Christ's Right, his Purchase, etc. -- that he
might rescue them from the Jaws of Oppression from those that usurpt their
Consciences, and made a prey of their Souls. But why do thou judge thy
Brother? Come, let us look at home, and view our Actions, and see if we are not
the Men. p. 212, 213.

Christ teaches us the Duty of Prayer, where and what; not in the corners of
the Streets, nor in the Synagogues, to be seen of Men, but in the Closet, in
the secret of the Heart, betwixt God and the Soul. p. 1

2 King. 18. 4. He took away the high Places, and brake the Images, and cut
down the Groves and broke in pieces the Brazen Serpent that Moses had made: for
unto those days the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it, and he called it
That is, a piece of Brass: thus he called the Serpent by contempt; which
notwithstanding was set up by the Word of God and Miracles were wrought by it:
Yet when it was abused to Idolatry, this good King destroyed it, not thinking
it worthy to be called a Serpent, but a piece of Brass.
Nehushtan.
LONDON: Printed in the Year. 1679.


