The SPEECH OF WILLIAM PENN To His MAJESTY, Upon His Delivering the Quakers
Address.
May it Please the KING,
IT was the saying of our Blessed Lord to the Captious Jews, in the case of
Tribute, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar' s, and to God, the things
that are God's. As this distinction ought to be observed by all Men, in the
Conduct of their lives, so the KING has given Us an Illustrious Example in His
own Person that excites Us to it; For while HE was a Subject, HE gave Caesar
His Tribute; and now HE is a Caesar, gives GOD his Due, (viz) The Sovereignty
over Consciences. It were a great shame then, for any Englishman (that
pretends to Christanity,) not to give GOD his Due. By this Grace HE has
relieved His Distressed Subjects from Their Cruel Sufferings, and raised to
Himself a New and Lasting Empire, by adding Their Affections to Their Duty. And
We Pray GOD to continue the KING in this Noble Resolution; For HE is now upon a
Principle, that has good Nature, Christianity, and the goodness of Civil
Society on its side, a Security to Him beyond all the little Arts of Government.

I would not that any should think, that We came hither with design to fill the
Gazet with Our Thanks, but as Our Sufferings would have moved Stones to
Compassion; So We should be harder, if We were not moved to Gratitude.

Now, since the KING's Mercy and Goodness have reached to Us throughout the
Kingdom of England, and Principality of Wales; Our General Assembly from all
those parts, met at London about Our Church Affairs has appointed Us to Wait
upon the KING with Our Humble Thanks, and Me to Deliver them; Which I do by
this ADDRESS, with all the Affection and Respect of a Dutiful Subject.

His MAJESTY'S most Gracious ANSWER.
Gentlemen,
I Thank You heartily for Your Address, some of You know, (I am sure You do Mr.
Pen,) that it was always My Principle, that Conscience ought not to be Forced.
And that all Men ought to have the Liberty of Their Consciences: And what I
have Promised in My Declaration, I will continue to Perform as long as I Live;
And I Hope, before I Die, to Settle It so, that After Ages shall have no Reason
to alter It.

FINIS.

