Tears Wiped off, OR THE SECOND ESSAY OF THE QUAKERS BY WAY OF POETRY:
Occasioned by the CORONATION of JAMES and MARY.
Written in the sincerity of the Spirit, By W. P. a Servant to the Light.
SOund loud ye Trumpets, now the Spirit move!
Of JAMES and MARY's Coronation speak:
Yea -- let it be the boundless sp'rit of Love,
That does all discord in a Land forsake.
Therefore prepare your well-tuned Instruments,
To Awe the minds of all our Malcontents;
Join Holy David's Harp, ye Loyal Quire,
To greet wise SOLOMON our New Crowned King,
Stifle, with Heavenly Joy, Rebellions Fire,
And Songs of Triumph always to Him Sing.
Consider how Wise JAMES has harras'd been
By Murdering Swearers; such ungodly Men
As would in JAMES, kill Charles the First again.
Echo ye Heavens! and powerful Lights display,
To make more great Thy Coronation Day;
Amazing all that dare such Truth gainsay.
For we have now the fullness of the Light,
Who long (like sullen Jews) were veiled in Night;
But, for the time to come, for Thee we'll Fight:
Yea -- girt a Carnal Weapon to our side,
To Chastize him shall Thee O King Deride.
Joash was saved from Athaliahs Rage,
And by Jehojada the Priest was Crowned,
Which in Judeah then was just presage,
Plentiful Peace should mightily abound.
JAMES, now the only Ruler of this Land,
Was long preserved from Plotters Murdering hand;
Both of Achitophel's and Belials Band.
What Mighty Joy ought we thy Friends to show,
That still we have Thee JAMES, our King below.
Inspire me now Thou mighty Sp'rit of Truth,
That in some Measure we may here set forth
The Gracious Blessings we enjoy in JAMES,
Whom all the World with us aloud Proclames.
Had that Corrupted Senate Charles o'reswaid,
To push thee JAMES besides thy Lawful Throne,
All Thy whole Land had been to Blood betrayed;
Conquering for Thee, that sits in Peace thereon.
We therefore wish that disobedient Crew
May see their error, and for Pardon sue:
And we will Learn, -- that Anthems we may Sing
With Hymns of Joy, for Second JAMES our King.
I do confess I Have heard Phanatick slaves
Sorry that Thee O King escap'st with Life,
(Where many in the Ocean found their Graves)
When that great Ship struck on the Sandy shelf.
But Heaven (that has a more than common care
Of such as Thee, who his Vicegerents are)
Secured Thee from the Surges of the Sea,
That thou might healer of our Breaches be.
Foreseeing then, this days Solemnity:
That since no Monarch from the Grave is free,
We should Great JAMES rejoice in Sacred Thee:
And (though unusual) shout our praise to Heaven,
That has a King so Potent to us given.
One that has David's Valor and Success,
Solomon's Wisdom, Hezekiah's Grace;
And may Thy Reign with Theirs take equal place.
Yea, let the Prophets Prayer against wicked Men,
Which Psalm the Hundred and Ninth does plainly speak,
Be all Thy Enemies reward and gain;
Nay more, the mark of, Cain upon 'em break.
Not, but Thy Frown will Awe Thy worst of Foes,
And then Thy Smiles will make 'em crouch with shame,
But Thy Word past is every Man's repose;
Nay, he that doubts and knows Thee, wants a Name.
All this, and more, than we can e're hold forth,
Or words can frame, O King, in Thee is found;
Time wants a President to show thy worth,
Yea, Languages a style, and sense a sound.
In all the Holy Writ we do not find
Where to compare Thy Consort equally,
As Ruth to Boaz, the same constant mind,
MARY to JAMES; but greater the degree.
In every trouble which Thou bar'st from Men,
Whose Faith in things invisible did ly;
How then was MARY, with a face Serene,
Partner in all Thy worst extremity?
When strange Commissions never seen nor Read,
Armed with Black Bills in Spanish Pilgrims hands;
When Truth Invisible with Oats did plead,
Purbeck Invaders did infest our Lands:
Thou JAMES with MARY now our present Queen,
Did Reign secure, as on the Throne thoud'st been,
Beauty and Honor still did guard Thee then.
MARY to either fitly is compared,
Because in goodness something they agree,
But we from Truth will never be debarred;
For there is between 'em Inequality:
Which must with MARY's Crown be now put on,
The best of Queens that ever Graced a Throne.
Zadock the Priest the Holy Oil has used,
The sight was grateful to thy Servants -- King;
We have the Temple of the Lord abused;
Now, we rejoice to hear 'em shout and Sing.
Yea, then I said! how have we gone astray?
Misled by Darkness from the Light of Day;
Then thus for JAMES and MARY did I Pray.
That God would great Increase unto 'em give
That a Long Race of Kings might them survive;
That from their Loins a Prince of Wales may come,
To Conquer Foes abroad; win them at home:
That here, not one disloyal Heart may be;
But all might own and bless this Monarchy.
Let Thy great Act of Grace those people free
Whose Light was Dim, for now the Sun they See;
But let Plot-Vouchers grace the Triple Tree.
We unacquainted are with mighty show,
But if our sense of this Thou will allow,
We could dispense had it been greater now.
We foolish faults had, JAMES, and not a few;
But amongst the Kings the Bible does afford,
More than their greatest Glory is Thy due;
For a Kings Splendor speaks him like his word.
We never shall Poets for Description grow,
We leave all that to Authors that bestow
On Kings their Talent, and Usurpers too.
Walk with the People, and the Rebels guide;
And then the Godlike Royal ones deride:
Though now they fa^^ and flatter on their side.
We say, Preserve thee JAMES, thy CONSORT so,
From such Time-servers, bowing but for show,
We from Great Natures Light are Loyal now.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by J. P. for Henry Playford, near the Temple-Church: 1685.


