Some of the Letters which were writ to George Fox, and others of the Quakers
Teachers, are here presented to the rest of their Fraternity, who are also
concerned deeply to weigh and consider them; and if they reap any benefit
thereby, let Him have the Glory, who is the Author of all Good. Unto whom be
everlasting praise, honor, and renown, says His Servant, and your true
Friend, J. P.
The Letters follow according to their dates.
September. 1. 78.
William Gibson,
IF it be true what Robert West has said, (as true it is) viz. That it is the
greatest Blasphemy or Forgery under Heaven, to say things in the Name of the
Lord, or that they are moved by the Lord to speak or do, and are not. Then art
thou one of the greatest Blasphemers, and one of the stoutest Instruments of
thy Master that has appeared in this our Age, and for which thou must certainly
come to Judgment. Take warning and repent, lest thou finally perish: and
whether thou hear or forbear, I am clear concerning thee.

J. P.

Another to the same Person, Sept. 6. 78.
W. G.
This is only to acquaint thee, That I purpose to be at the Meeting at the
Bull, etc. this Forenoon, where if thou art, it is probable I shall hear some
more of thy Billingsgate Rhetoric; for indeed thy Preachings and Discourses of
late, have been more fit for, and more suitable to the Scolds there, than to be
amongst any People professing Sobriety.

J. P.

Another to him, 8th (month called) April 79.
W. G.
Last sixth day (of the Week) I heard thee tell of Whirls, Rattles, etc. as
formerly I have heard thee preach of a flap with a Fox-Tail, Dog-Tail,
Picture-drawers, Stage Players, and the like: Now how much thou do frequent
the Playhouse, I cannot tell, but certain I am, thou actest the part of one of
the Stagers there, more than of a Messenger or Minister of Christ, as thou
pretends thy self to be.

Thus once more I have written to thee of thy ridiculous and foolish doings,
that if possible thou may see thy own folly therein, and repent.

J. P.

One having heard of the scurillity of his Sermons, writ thus to him.
William Gibson,
I have heard of thy late Sermons, and do believe there is few of those you call
the Priests of the Nation, but would be ashamed to utter forth such pitiful
stuff in their Pulpits as thou have done: Many have taken notice thereof; I
heard one say, that saw thee-labour and sweat so to bring out thy Matter, it
came into his mind, thou wast in his state who had that Curse pronounced
against him, In the sweat of thy Brows thou shall eat thy Bread. I heard also
another say, If that Principle they speak of bring forth such Fruits as these,
How can any sober Person believe in it? At which I was grieved, and said,
Though they all should depart from it, yet must I take it to be my Guide for
ever. Then this saying came into my mind, My House shall be called the House of
Prayer, but you have made it a Den of Thieves; therefore shall your glory be
turned into shame; the Idols you have made shall not deliver you. Repent, and
forbear to Preach till thou have got dominion over thy own Spirit; but if thou
still go on, and shall dare any more to mention His Name to cover thy own
wickedness, thou may expect something will be brought to pass whereby thou
shall be made more fully manifest to all.

A Letter to George Watts, October. 2. 79.
Friend,
UPon consideration of thy blind Zeal last first day was a Week, it came into
my mind to send thee this Enclosed, Collections I took out of W. Penn 's
Address to Protestants, entitled, A Seasonable Paper, etc.
(which sayings, tho true, yet is diametrically opposite, and quite contrary to
that Spirit by which thou art acted) but I deferred sending it, till I
apprehended thou might be more cool and calm in thy Spirit; which as yet is
not right before the All-seeing Eye, whose ways are not as yours, neither is He
confined to your Modes, Fashions, and Customs, which never can make the
Observers thereof, nor the Comers thereunto, perfect; neither do they, nor can
they make you (even the strictest observers of them) either nigher the Kingdom
of Heaven, or the Friends of God. This is Truth's Testimony. If thou have an
Ear to hear thou may hear; but whilst your Eyes and Ears are abroad, you can
neither hear or see the Leadings of the most High, nor the Worship He accepts
of this day.

The Beam, the Beam is yet remaining in many of your Eyes, that take upon you
to be Teachers of others; wherefore first let the Beam be cast out that is in
your own Eyes, before you judge, or take upon you to cast out the Mote that may
be in your Brothers: then may you witness Peace with your Maker, and Love and
Good Will to his Children, who in faithfulness are given up to follow Him,
through good and evil report. I intended, when I began, not to be so large, for
I know you are full fed with words; but to the Word of Life, many of you that
talk of it, are as great Strangers as those that never heard of it, or so much
as mentioned in their Assemblies: This perhaps you will think is a hard saying,
but it is true, and you must bear it.

J. P.

A Letter to T. G. 28th (month called) Jan. 79.
Tho. Green,
MY Love has been to thee above many of thy Brethren, because thou were not of
that rigid Spirit as most of them were; but yet I saw something standing in
thee, which was not right before the All-seeing Eye; which thy interruption of
me this day (whilst I was speaking) was one manifestation thereof: for whilst
you sit in Moses Seat, and usurp the Keys of the Kingdom only to your
Fraternity, you so far limit the Holy One; and whilst you confine Him and his
Servants, within the bounds of your prescribed Rules, Methods, and Customs,
(which can never make the Comers thereto perfect) as pertaining to the
Conscience; you can never know His Leadings, whom you profess to serve, but
will and must oppose his Appearance, if in the least it thwart, or appear in a
different manner from your prescribed and received Traditions: Let the Jews of
old be your warning! who, tho zealous for the Letters and Writings of the Holy
Men, yet were opposers of the Life and Spirit that gave them forth; because the
manifestation or appearance that was in that day, was contrary to their
Traditions and Expectations: So take heed of setting up your Shadows instead of
Substance, or of setting up your Form to oppose His Power, who leads into or
out of such things as He pleases; and who assuredly has, and will raise up
faithful Witnesses now, (as well as He did Hezekiah of old, 2 King. 8.4.) who
must testify against all Idolatry, (even in its most refined appearance) and
must be helpful to the pulling down, and dashing to pieces all Images; and tho
some of them might be set up by His appointment, (as the brazen Serpent was)
yet by reason of the Iniquity and Idolatry of the People, they must be trampled
under foot of the Upright, and ground to Powder, and testified against by the
Righteous, whose Hearts and Souls will truly and greatly rejoice thereat, when
the Hypocrite, the double-minded, and all that love the esteem and praise of
Men, will be troubled. These are true Sayings, if thou have an Ear to hear thou
may hear. I know you are full, and think you are rich; but it were better
for you that you were poor, low, and hungry, then were there some hopes you
would have an Ear to hear what the Spirit says; which says expressly, (in this
our day) That the Children of the LORD shall be taught of Him, who shall not
need yours, nor no Man's teaching, in that Worship which is Spiritual, and
which is only accepted of the Father in this Day and Hour: To which Worship,
many of you that talk of it, are as great Strangers, and as far from the Life
and Power thereof, as the very Heathen or Publicans you so much condemn. Reject
not this Testimony, for it is Truth, and must stand. Happy might it be for thee
if thou could receive it; however it is in love that I am made thus to write,
and to subscribe my self, a Friend to thee, and all Men, without respect to
Persons, Parties, or Sects,

J. P.

A Letter to W. L. 15th (Month called) May, 1680.
Mr. Lollington,
SEveral of the Enclosed A Bright shining Light, etc.
being sent me, I was willing to send you one of them, they treating somewhat
of those Matters mentioned in yours of the 3d Instant; whereby you may partly
perceive the Dispensation of God in our Day, (of which many are ignorant) and
who they are that do embrace, and are in unity with it; and who they are that
are the Resisters, Opposers, and Gainsayers of it; so that I need not say much
more of it at present, but mind you of that of the Prophet, Who has directed
the Spirit of the Lord, or, being his Counselor, has taught Him? Which saying
might serve as a Caution to all that in their wisdoms would meddle with, or
seek to comprehend the way of the Highest. It is not for Man to circumscribe or
limit the Holy One, but to be in continual subjection to his Leadings; who may
lead into, or out of Gestures, Postures, etc. as He pleases; and who may say
unto Him, What do thou? So that I am not to heed any such thing farther than
I find and feel His Presence with me in them, for therein alone stands my true
peace and satisfaction, and not in any visible thing whatsoever. This is
Truth's Testimony, if you can receive it you may; but withal I may tell you,
That the Unregenerate and Unsanctified know little of the Spirit's Guidance,
notwithstanding their great talk of the same thereof; It is only the lowly, the
meek, the poor in Spirit, that are the Inheritors and Possessors of that
Blessing, and Pearl of greatest price; happy are they that have found, or that
yet shall find It: Yea, it is of that price and true value, that the wise
Merchantman has parted with all for its sake, and counted nothing of this
World to be compared to it, or valuable in comparison of it. But who will, who
can believe this Report? The Eye that is abroad cannot see it; the lofty and
exalted Mind cannot receive it; the uncircumcised in Heart and Ears can neither
receive nor comprehend it; for as the Work of it is invisible, so the Way of it
is (this day) hid from all Flesh.

I had thoughts I might have had liberty to have answered more particularly to
what you have writ, but find it not safe to meddle much in such Matters, and
therefore may not, at present; my desire being, that my Life, harmless and
blameless Conversation, may preach and speak for me, rather than my Words: for
who is there (in this Age) that have not got a multitude of fine words,
justifying and magnifying themselves, and condemning all others? which often
put me in mind of that saying of Solomon, Most Men will proclaim their own
Glory; but a faithful Man who can find? And also that of Mr. Pen's, (speaking
of Christ's telling us at the last Day) It shall not be well Talked, or well
Said, but well Done good and faithful Servant. Now, that you and I may be of
that number, that can approve our selves in the very secret of our hearts
before the All-seeing Eye, is more to be desired than all outward Fellowships,
or any visible Gathering whatsoever; for I am of his mind, that said, A
thousand Reproaches I take up as a Crown on my Head, and go on in the Name of
the Lord with love to Truth and Peace; and tho I am not so much in the
observation of some outward Forms of Religion as formerly I have been, and as
some apprehend it their duty to be, yet I desire to be more in the Truth and
Power of Godliness, and in Works of Righteousness, Judgment, and Mercy among
Men: And if this be Apostasy, (or downright Compliance) I shall be content to
be accounted so, and to be yet more vile than thus. But this Cross is too great
for the Man of Form to take up; This Path is too narrow for the Double-minded
(or for those that seek the praise of Men) to walk in: Yet some there are that
have chosen it before all the Riches, Glory, and Esteem of this World; of which
number I desire always to be found, who am your real Friend.

J. P.

A Letter to G. F. 27th (month called) May, 1680.
George Fox,
I Had thought, that after the Book Entitled, The Quakers Unmasked, etc. was
sent you, thou would not dared to have appeared as a Messenger or Minister of
Christ, as yesterday by thy words thou seemedst to be; which tho I was not made
publicly to oppose thee, and to discover thy hypocrisy, falseness, and
temporising, of which thou art deeply guilty, (as is apparent in the said Book)
yet thou art to know that thine Iniquity is not at all hid, nor thy Sin the
less, nor at all covered from the All-seeing Eye; and tho thou have many
Proselytes, and many Hypocrites to support and uphold thee, yet know, that for
all this, thou must come to Judgment, and receive thy Reward for all thy Works
of Wickedness, and Deeds of Darkness; and for thy Babylonish Worship, which
thou in thine own Inventions and Imaginations have set up as the Spiritual
Worship of the most High, thou must certainly give an account, not only for
thine own Soul, but also for the Souls of many simple and innocent Hearts, who
have been deceived, betrayed, and beguiled by thee. This, this thou art deeply
to weigh and consider, before thou go on, or proceedest deluding and
deceiving the People with thy gilded, fine, and fraudulent words of
Infallibility, and of thy own perfect State, of which thou have often boasted,
yet have been as far from the Life and Power thereof, as many whom thou have
condmn'd for Heathens and Infidels. This is a certain and true Testimony, which
I am made to declare to thee at this time, happy might thou be if thou
could receive it; but whilst thou art so highly exalted in thy self, thou
can not, but with the Uncircumcised, must stumble and fall at the Way and
Work of the Lord, which this day is hid from thee, and all proud Flesh.

Call an Assembly of your Ministry together, for they are all gone out of the
way that leads to Purity and Holiness; They run when they are not sent, and
therefore profit not the People at all. But Wickedness, Whoredoms, Adulteries,
Pride, Envy, and Covetousness, Cheating and Cozening, breaks forth daily
amongst you; so that none turns from the evil of their ways, but are rather
strengthened therein by you that are their Teachers: For which, and other your
Abominations, the Lord's Controversy is both against Thee and Them; and must
certainly so continue, till you come to Repentance, and till you cease
declaring in His Name in your Preachments, when as you speak but the
Divinations and Imaginations of your own deceived Hearts for his Word. Away
with your pretended Ministry; away with your high Places and chiefest Seats in
the Assemblies; away with your long Prayers, and long Preachings, for they are
an Abomination; away with your Pride and Arrogance, in sitting as Judges and
Lords over your Brethrens Consciences in Matters of Worship; away with your
pretenses to Infallibility, Purity, and Perfection, whilst your Lives and
Practices declare (with an open face) you are guilty of the contrary. Away with
your set form of Words, of Thee and Thou, calling it the pure Language; away
with this great Abomination. Ye blind Guides, Is any Language pure but what the
Pure uses? O ye blind and ignorant, how can you escape the Condemnation of the
Just and Righteous One? who have set up Shadows instead of Substance, and Form
instead of Power; who strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels; even as your
Forefathers did, so do ye. What can be said or done for you, that you might be
preserved from that fatal doom which is to be pronounced upon all the workers
of Iniquity, viz, Go ye Cursed, etc? For my part I have not been wanting in
declaring what the Lord required of me concerning you; and how you have
spurned, scorned, flighted and abused me for it, you are not ignorant: But my
so speaking being not for any self or sinister Ends, but in all faithfulness
discharging my Conscience toward you, and for the rectifying of the Evils and
Miscarriages that were and are amongst you, I have had my Reward, and that
peace and tranquillity of Mind has bin and yet remains with me, which no Man
nor Men can give or take from me. Now if this be true, as most true it is, then
what will become of Thee and thy fellow Preachers, who have set your selves in
Battle, warring and fighting against this despised Worm? Have you not read,
That the Worm Jacob must thrash the Mountains? read Isa. 41.10, 11, 12, 13,
etc. and as certainly as it is written, so as certainly shall it come to pass.
If thou can receive it, thou may; however it concerns Thee, and you all to
consider, whether you are not those very Men that have trampled upon this Worm;
and whether you have not despised and rejected its Instructions? If so, then
you are to consider whether you are not those Mountains that are to be thrashed
and levelled by It, yea or nay? And if you be those Mountains, as without doubt
you are, then what is written, must be fulfilled upon you. Wherefore hearken,
ye tall Cedars, ye sturdy Oaks, ye lofty Ones, ye proud Flesh, ye self exalted
Ones, ye Daubers, ye Temporisers, ye who say, but do not, you seeming Giants
and great Goliahs; What will you do? whither will you go for help, seeing the
Lord [even the God of Worm Jacob] is departed from you? A day of trouble,
anguish, and disappointment, is come and coming upon you, which you can neither
escape nor prevent. You must reap the Fruit of your own doings, for as you have
sowed the Wind, you must expect to reap the Whirlwind, wherein is nothing but
Confusion, Darkness, Blackness, and Tempest: And this is the Portion of all the
Builders of Babel, or Babylonish Builders; and though you may think that you
have built the highest, and raised the fairest Structure of any, yet know, and
that for a truth, that not one Stone thereof shall be left upon another; and
all your Buildings, your Inventions, Imaginations, and Conceivings about your
Forms; your proud self-conceited Modes; your Impositions; your Prescriptions,
Laws, and comely Orders (as you in your fallen Wisdom call them) must all be
thrown down, laid waste, and become as a byword, or proverb of Reproach to the
very Heathen; and not only to them, but also to those whom ye have defamed and
stigmatized with the blackest of Names; and for no other cause, but only for
their faithfulness in discharging a good Conscience toward their God, toward
You, and toward all Men. These are faithful and true Sayings, if thou can
receive them, thou may; however whether Thou and You receive them or no, my
Reward is with me, in that I have thus far cleared my Conscience both
concerning Thee, and you all.

John Pennyman.

And tho I have not as yet printed and published the Book abovementioned,
entitled, The Quakers Unmasked, etc. (which if it were, would sufficiently
manifest thee and thy Ministers to be the grossest, the greatest Hypocrites,
Temporizers, and Deluders of the People that has appeared in this our Age) yet
you are to know, there may come a season when such horrible deceit and
hypocrisy must come to light, and wherein the Innocent amongst you, may not
suffer with you that are Guilty.

O George! consider how treacherous thou were in betraying thy Trust of that
rich (tho now poor) Orphan Abiah Trott, for I do assure thee, thy Friend
Richard Cannon told me, thou were a grand Instrument therein: who to give him
his due, said, He would have bin hanged at his own door, before he would have
bin so guilty and so treacherous in his Trust, as some of you that were
entrusted had been. Yea, such treachery and baseness was acted amongst you in
that Affair, that the very Heathen, whom you so much condemn, would detest and
abhor, as does

J. P.
These words are transferred from a Book lately printed, entitled, A Bright
shining Light.

The Mountain-Stone has broke Thy Toes,
Thy Vitals now must feel its Blows.
May skilful Archers every Hour
Shoot Truth's Arrows from their Tower,
Against thy persecuting Power.


They that read this Paper without a weighty Mind, or in prejudice, may judge
the Author guilty of Envy and Enmity; but he that knows what it is to deny
himself, to take up the Cross to his own Will, and to be subjected (as Peter
once was, John 21.18.) to the leading and guidance of another, will not so
judge; however, touching mine own Innocence and Integrity therein, I shall only
add these words, (formerly written, Jos. 22.22.) viz. The LORD GOD of Gods, the
LORD GOD of Gods, He knows, and Israel he shall know, if it be in rebellion
or in transgression against the LORD, then let me not be saved this day. Nay,
if the publishing thereof be not according to His Will, (who rewards every one
according to their Works) then let not my gray Hairs go down to the Grave in
Peace.

J. P.
What you hear in the Ear, that preach ye on the House tops; and fear not them
which kill the Body but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear Him
which is able to destroy both Soul and Body, Mar. 10.27, 28.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.


