A DISCOURSE Concerning the WORSHIP of GOD Toward the Holy Table OR ALTAR.

LONDON: Printed by J.G. to be sold by James Good, Bookseller in Oxon: 1682.

A Treatise, showing, That the Adoration or Worship of God in his House toward
the H. Table or Altar, is neither Idolatry, Superstition, or Willworship: but
on the contrary agreeable to the Scriptures, and warranted by the Practice of
the Saints in all Ages.
THey that go about to evince a Truth, To remove prejudice.
and to demonstrate unto the apprehensions of such as have strongly opposed it
before as an error, will find it a hard task, yea altogether impossible, unless
he can first persuade them to dispossess themselves of one Principle, which is
usually deeply rooted in the hearts of such as are already prejudiced with an
ill opinion of this Doctrine to be evinced: That is, because they would not be
thought to be so Impotent in Judgment, as so long to have believed and
maintained an Error; or out of a self-conceit, and opinion of their own
infallibility, that whatsoever they have once held, must needs be Truth,
resolve absolutely and unmovedly to defend it; never considering the connection
between the premises and conclusion of their Adversaries Arguments: or rather,
what agreement the whole Argument has with the conclusion which they have
formerly hardened: themselves to defend unalterably: therefore I entreat the
Reader, that he will for the time, at least make himself a Third Person, and
degage himself from both Opinions, as if he were Ignorant of both, that so he
may be a free and impartial Judge, not weighing how my Arguments comply with
his private persuasion, but what necessary connection there is between my
Arguments and the Cause or Conclusion I have undertaken to prove; The Order.
in handling whereof I will observe this Order.

1. I will explain the Question and state it.

2. I will prove it.

3. I will clear it from all Objections and Aspersions.

But first, Obj. from the word Altar.
I will remove one Objection against the word [Altar] What have we to do with
Altars? If Altars, we must have Priests, and Sacrifices too, for these are
Correlates, and so we shall have Judaism up again.

Resp. I grant the Antecedent, Resp. It does not infer Judaism.
but deny the Consequent. An Altar, a Priesthood, a Sacrifice, I grant; that
this will infer Judaism, I deny. For those Altars, Priests, and Sacrifices,
were but Typical shadows of the true ones; and therefore not so properly
called, but in reference to the true ones; otherwise Christ's offering himself
was not a true and Real Sacrifice, nor he a true and Real Priest, nor his Cross
a true and real Altar: but this to be false is apparent by Scripture, Hebr. 7.
The Apostle makes a distinction of a double Priesthood, one Typical, the other
Real; that after the Order of Aaron, this after the Order of Melchisedeck: that
to be abolished, this to remain for ever: that had no perfection, this had: of
this Order was our Savior a Priest, so called for this very reason, because he
offered himself a Sacrifice for Sin; so Corinth. the 9th. and 10th. he plainly
disparageth the Sacrifices of the Law, and makes our Saviors the only true and
proper Sacrifice. Therefore I invert the Argument thus, we have an Altar, a
Sacrifice and Priesthood; Ergo, we abolish the Jewish Ceremonies, for they were
not such properly, but typically; these are so truly, as being the substance of
those Shadows. Communion Service.


Besides, our Church, in the Prayer immediatlye before the Consecration, calls
our Saviors suffering on the Cross, a full, 1 Cor. 5.7.
perfect and sufficient Sacrifice. And 1 Cor. 5. Christ our Passover is
Sacrificed, etc. For he indeed is the true Paschal Lamb, of which the other was
but the Type; therefore the Church also calls that Feast still, and ever did,
Festum Paschatis, and not the Feast of the Resurrection. Pet. 2.5.


Again, Alms, and Prayers, and Praises are Sacrifices, Hebr. 13.16. Prayers,
Psalm. 141.2. They are called the Calves of our Lips. And what more frequent
than the Sacrifice of Praise? These are called Spiritual Sacrifices, in which
respect we are called an Holy Priesthood. This I speak to vindicate the word,
that it might not seem so odious, which the Holy Ghost himself still uses in
the New Testament.

viz. the Altars of Hearts, but what is all this to the Communion Table? Or
though we allow Christ to be a Priest, and his offering himself, a true
Sacrifice, and the Cross a true Altar, yet why should the Communion Table, the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the Ministers of the Gospel be called by
these Names?

By what I have before proved, Resp.
it appears that these words do not necessarily infer Judaism, but the
contrary, and so that part of the objection is satisfied.

To the other Quaeri (what reason we have to call the Holy Table an Altar,
Ministers Priests, Sacraments fitly called a Sacifice.
the Sacrament a Sacrifice) I answer, they are so, and so called in Scripture:
and Ancient Fathers, and all Churches to this time, until some Mushroom Novil
Puritans sprang up, that out of Ignorance and blind Zeal would have suppressed
them. That they are so I prove thus.

If the Sacrifices of the Law and Paschal Lamb were such, and so called by
reason of the reference they had to the true Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, not yet exhibited, then may the Sacramental Commemoration of this
Sacrifice already exhibited, be much more fitly so called. The force of this
Argument stands thus: If the Shadow may be called by the name of the Antitype,
then much more may the true, real and lively Commemoration of the thing it
self, already in act. Now Sacrifices were but so called, because they were
Shadows; the Sacrament is a true real, exhibition, and lively Commemoration of
the Sacrifice it self, and that by virtue of Christ's own words, Do this, as
often as you do it in remembrance of me. Do this, do what? This ye have seen me
do. What Is that? He took Bread, gave Thanks, brake it, said, this is my Body,
Take, Eat: He took Wine, poured it out, said, drink ye all of this, this is my
Blood which is shed for many, for the Remission of Sins, etc. Mark it, what was
the breaking of his Body in the Bread, the pouring out of his Blood in the
Wine, was it not a Sacrifice? sure it was, for it was for the Remission of
Sins. Now no Remission without Blood, no Blood without a Sacrifice, so the
Apostle argues to the Hebrews. Again, he says not which shall be, but which
is broken and poured out, as already done, when as yet he was not Crucified:
which argues that this Sacrament was instituted in memory of Christ's Sacrifice
already done, though instituted before it was done. Again, do this in
remembrance of me, Sacrificed for you, of me broken for you, of my Blood poured
out for you, that is, of my Sacrifice for your sins. For, for what else could
our Savior be remembered, or what else do the Elements represent or commemorate
but that Sacrifice?

Thus then you see that as the old Jewish Sacrifices were Typical Sacrifices,
so the Christian Sacrament, is a memorative Sacrifice: And that one and the
same thing might be both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice, none will deny that
considers the Paschal Lamb was both: Yet that was but a Typical Sacrifice, and
a Typical Sacrament; this both a true Sacrifice and Sacrament. For although
that Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, was performed once for all, yet the
Commemoration of it was to be often iterated in the Church, till Christ's
second coming.

Again, why should we not as well call it a Sacrifice in memory of Christ's,
which it signifies, as a Sacrament in token of his which it Seals, or in token
of a Covenant which it ratifies. The Scripture, I am sure, no where calls it
by the name of Sacrament, Sacrament, the word not found in the Bible.
for there is no such word in the Bible. And therefore they that will have a
Proof out of the Scripture for every thing they say, It Is a Seal to the
Covenant, and therefore a Sacrifice.
and give no respect to the Custom and Language of the Church, must desist by
their own principles from the use of this word; for they can have no Authority
for it, but the constant and unanimous tradition of the Church.

Moreover, God never made Covenant with man, but with Sacrifice. For a Covenant
since the fall, was always made for the redintegration of our peace with God,
violated by sin: Now there was no peace, that is, no Covenant renewed, where
there was no first remission of sin past; and no remission of sin without
satisfaction of Justice; no satisfaction without the blood of a Sacrifice, viz.
Christ's Sacrifice. For that is the ground of our Covenant with God, and
therefore wheresoever it is renewed, that Sacrifice is withal commemorated; in
virtue whereof it was at first made, and ever since renewed.

Besides, as in Sacrifices, God in token of Covenant and Atonement, with man,
did as it were eat with him, and Feast him at his own Table (eating and
drinking, having been always esteemed tokens of Peace and Friendship) (For the
Sacrifices were first presented, and given up unto God, consecrated unto him in
Recognition of his Lordship over all Creatures, then afterward Slaughtered and
Offered, part whereof was consumed, the other part was for the Sacrifice to
Feast withal in token of Reconciliation with God) so also is the Sacrament a
Foederal Rite of our Address unto God, to renew a Covenant. The Bread and Wine
are first Consecrated and made the Body and Blood of Christ, that is, a
memorial of that Sacrifice which is the ground of our Covenant, and then are
given as meat from Gods Table, to be a Sacrament sealing unto us his
Reconciliation, in virtue of his Sons Sacrifice there commemorated. You see
then, that this Sacrament is, how it is, and why it is a Sacrifice.

Now if it be truly a Sacrifice, Holy Table may fitly be called an Altar.
the Holy Table may fitly be called an Altar: For as the Cross was the Altar of
our Saviors Sacrifice corporally offered; so is the Table the Altar of his
Sacrifice mystically offered in the Supper. And as a Cross did suit to his
Body, so a Table to the Bread. As he did not institute any Carnal Body and
Blood to be the memory of his Sacrifice, but Bread and Wine; so he did not
institute a Cross for an Altar, but that which was proportionable to the signs
which he instituted. As in the Old Law, it was not necessary that the Type
should in every thing be so Analogal, as to have a man Crucified for a
Sacrifice, and a Cross for an Altar, to represent the Sacrifice of Christ; but
a Beast for the one, and a Table for the other: so neither is it necessary in
the New Testament, the substantial Body of a Man should be the sign of Christ's
Sacrifice, or a Cross of an Altar for the memory thereof. And this I have the
more fully enlarged, to answer those, who will perchance confess our Saviors
Cross to have been an Altar, but not our Tables.

Furthermore, Table and Altar promiscuously used.
what great material difference is there between an Altar and a Table, that we
are so scrupelous? were not the Altars of the Old Law Tables? else what means
the promiscuous use of these words, Mal. 1.7.
Ye offer polluted Bread upon mine Altar (mark it) and ye say, wherein have we
polluted thee? The answer of God by his Prophet, is in that ye say the Table of
the Lord is contemptible. That which in the beginning of the Verse is called an
Altar, in the end is called a Table.

Obj. The word does not infer Popery.
What Is this but by little and little to b^ing in Popery underhand, when we
begin to use their Language? for so Popery came in, and got head at first.

Resp. No such matter, Let the Papist take away their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation or Corporal presence, and we shall not differ from them in
the use of this word; for it is not theirs, but the Speech of the Scripture and
the Primitive Church. The Papist may with as good reason say, that the Table is
transubstantiated into a Cross, as the Bread into the Body. For if our Savior
by those words (This is my Body) did mean to exhibit substantially that once
offered Sacrifice, even that very Body Crucified, every time the Eucharist
should be administered, and so to make it a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Quick
and Dead, then it is necessary that he should mean also to turn the Table into
the Cross. For that was the real Altar of his real Sacrifice. And therefore if
they will have the true Body and Blood, literally understood to be then
Crucified and Offered: I see not how they can avoid the inferring of a true
Cross, whereinto the Table must be likewise turned. For a Table was not the
Altar of Christ's Bodily Sacrifice, but a Cross. I know no reason why I should
imagine the same Indentical, Numerical, real bodily Sacrifice, and not the same
Indentical, Numerical real Altar. The same Numerical Sacrifice (say they) was
offered on the Cross; nay, his Crusifying was his Sacrificing; but no
Crucifying but on a Cross: therefore if his Numerical Sacrificing be there, his
Numerical Crusifying is also there; if his Numerical Crusifying, then his
Numerical Cross. These things do necessarily result one from another, and all
jointly show the absurdity of the Popish Error.

But now, because they mix falsehood with truth, shall we relinquish the truth?
Because they make the Sacrament a real Corporal Sacrifice, shall not we hold it
to be a commemorative one, as Christ teaches us? Because they say in the
Sacrament Christ is Bodily, shall we therefore deny that he is there really? So
neither must we deny the Table to be an Altar, because they hold
Transubstantion and say Mass at it. For this is to refuse Gold because of
Dross, Wheat because of Tares, Corn because of Chaff, which is mere folly.

But come we now to show the use of these words out of Scripture. The use of
the word Altar in Scripture. Hebr. 13.10.
The Apostle says expressly we have an Altar, we under the Gospel; for he makes
an Antithesis or Opposition between the legal Altars and this, in that those
who Minister at the Tabernacle, have not right to eat of things offered upon
this. And why so? Because while they retain the Ceremonical observances, now
abolished, they argue Christ the true Sacrifice not to be exhibited, and
therefore have no right to eat of the Sacrifices of our Altar, which
commemorate Christ already Sacrificed; or else I know no reason but the Jews
should have as much interest in Christ as the Gentiles, and be as much
partakers of this Altar, would they believe in him as we do. But to wait at the
Tabernacle, that is, to observe legal Rites, cannot consist with our eating of
Christ in the Sacrament, or participating of our Altar, because the one makes
Christ not come, the other commemorates him already come. That this is the
meaning of the Apostle is evident, because in the following verses, he compares
the Type with the Antitype, and shows how Christ did answer and fulfill all the
Jewish Sacrifices, and instead thereof appoint his own, and consequently
abolish the former, together with the Ministry of the Jewish Priests, which
the Apostle makes the reason of this Speech, We have an Altar, whereof they
have not right to eat, etc.

Besides, And that Altar is the Communion Table.
what other thing can be meant hereby, but the Communion Table? For it is an
Altar from which some thing is eaten that was Sacrificed; for nothing was eaten
on the Altar but what was offered to God in Sacrifice. But what other Altar can
that be but the Holy-Table, whereat we eat the Lords Supper, and commemorate
his Sacrifice? You see by this then that the Holy-Table was thus called even by
Saint Paul. If you say, he called it so improperly, and Anologically in
reference to the Jewish Altars, This I have disproved, in showing that those
were rather improperly termed Altars and Sacrifices in reference to ours,
whereof they were but Types.

Now having proved an Altar, by your own consequence we must have a Sacrifice
too, and a Priesthood, for these you say infer one another as Correlates. But I
will not be beholden to you to make this my Argument, but will prove out of
Scripture, The word Sacrifice to be applied in Scripture to our Sacrament.
Matt. 1.10.
the word Sacrifice to be applied to our Sacrament.

God by his Prophet foretells the Jews, that whereas they had polluted his
Altars, he had also rejected them and their Sacrifices, and would appoint
himself a new People, and new Sacrifice. In every place (that is not in
Jerusalem only, and in one place) Incense shall be offered unto his Name, and
Sacrificium Purum, a pure Sacrifice or Offering, for so the word signifies in
the Hebrew. Now what other Incense have we but Prayer? What other Sacrifice but
the Lords Supper? Which he calls a pure Sacrifice or Offering, which God has
appointed to commemorate the Death and Sacrifice of his Son, instead of the
Jewish Sacrifice which only Typified it.

This is the Interpretation of the most, and most Ancient Fathers. For among
all the Ancient Fathers both Greek and Latin, there is nothing more frequent
than the use of these words Sacrifice, Priests, Altar, when they speak of the
Sacrament, Holy-Table, and the Ministers of the Gospel. No man can deny this,
that has but cast his Eyes upon their Writings, who are every where full of
these expressions. He that shall vilify their Authority in this, let him give
me better for the contrary, or I shall conclude him ignorant and impudent.

Add the constant use of these words in the Church even to this day, both of
the Eastern Church of the Greeks, who have no Communion with the Church of
Rome, and the Western Churches besides the Roman, i. e. the Reformed Lutheran
Churches and our own, wherein these words were never out of use; but that of
late some Novellists who love to antiquate all things that are Ancient, that
their own modern intentions might be more in credit, have labored to possess
men with an ill opinion of them, by telling them they were Popish names, a
simple reason. For if these names be therefore naught because the Papists use
them, then, seeing a quatenus ad de omnis valet consequentia (as Logitians
speak) then all other names which the Papists use are naught, and we must not
call the Lords Supper a Sacrament because of them, nor Christen onr Children,
John, Thomas, Robert, etc. because they do so. Must we run from the Papists in
every thing, because they err in many things? This is to run from Sense and
Reason.

Thus have I showed how the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a Commemorative
Sacrifice, and the Holy Table an Altar' that it is so called in Scriptures,
Fathers, and all Churches. Now why are the Ministers of the Gospel called
Priests?

The word Priest (if we look to the Notation and Original of it) is the only
proper word for the Ministers of the Gospel; Priest the proper name of the
Minister of the Gospel. 1 Pet. 5.1.
for it is nothing but the contraction or corruption of the word Presbyter,
which signifies an Elder. So that Priest and Elder is all one, and wheresoever
we read the word Elder, we may as well read it Priest; as the Elders I exhort,
that is, the Priests I exhort who am also a Priest. Now Christ would have the
Ministers of the Gospel called Priests or Elders, not in respect of their Age,
but in regard of their Function and Pre-eminence over the People, as being
their Teachers and Instructors, in which respect also the People, though for
their Age they may be Elder than the Priest; yet in regard of their
subordination to him, are called Younger.

Again, Ministers of the proper name, of the Priests of the Law.
as the word Priest is the term proper to the Ministers of the Gospel; so is
the word Minister proper to those whom we call Priests of the Law. For the word
in the Old Testament which the Translators were pleased to render Priest (not
observing this notion which I have told you) does not indeed signify any such
thing, though that also be a word of Dignity; (...) which we translate Priest,
signifies one that Ministers about Holy things, and therefore the Greek word
(...) and the Latin sacerdos do more truly express the meaning of that word,
than our English Priest; for we should rather render it a Holy Minister, or a
Minister about Holy Things; or one that attends about holy service;) Neh.
10.36. Esaias 61.6. Jer. 33.21.
and therefore Scripture it self gives this interpretation of their names in
very many places. For though there were diverse Offices in the Jewish
Hierarchy, as the High Priest, the Priests, the Levites, Nethemims, Porters,
Singers, etc. yet were they all Ministers about Holy Things, though some in a
higher, others in a lower rank. For the Levites Ministered immediately to the
Priests, the Priests to the High Priest, and he immediately to God: as in our
Church, the Deacon (whose name signifies a Minister) Ministers to the Priest,
and the Priest immediately to God. Therefore Priest, Levite, Ezr. 7.24.
Nethemims, etc. are all sum'd up in this name of Ministers, see Joel. 1.9. and
13. where they are all called Ministers of the Altar. So Joel 2. Ezech. 46.24,
etc.

Thus you see what the Hebrew word signifies, which we turn Priest, and what
the Greek word Priest signifies, which we would not have the Clergy called by,
and yet it is the very word given them by the Holy Ghost, in the New Testament,
viz. Elders.

Now I pray, The Dignity of the Priests.
if they who waited on the Altar, were called Ministers of God, or of the
Sanctuary, or of the Holy Things, why may not we of the Gospel be so called,
that is, Priests, for that the Interpreters meant when they translated the
Hebrew Cohen? which word likewise signifies a Prince, to intimate the great
Dignity of that Function which consisted in Ministering unto God about Holy
Things. And of no less Dignity is the word Priest or Elder. And therefore these
terms were premiscuously given to the Jewish Clergy, and an Elder with them
sometimes signifies a Prince. So the Elders of the People, of the City, of the
Congregation, fignifies Rulers and Governors.

To be God's Ministers is to be the Peoples Elders; We are the Ministers of
God, not men. 2 Cor. 6. 4. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Romans 13. 6.
for we are not the Ministers of men, but of God, and so we are styled,
Ministers of Christ, Ministers of the Spirit, God and Christ set us on work, he
sends us forth, to him we Minister, though for you. When we administer the Holy
Word, the Sacraments, we are not therein your Ministers, but his Dispensers or
Stewards: For we do it, not at your appointment or command, or by your
Authority, but by Gods, from whom we have our Calling and Commission. As the
King is not his Subjects Minister, though he does administer Justice to them,
and therefore he is called Gods Minister. Angels likewise Ministering Spirits to
God, even then when they are sent out for the good of them, who shall be Heirs
of Salvation. Psalm. 103.21: 104.4.
For though the material Object of their Ministry, or that whereabout their
Ministry is conversant, be men, yet the formal Object, or he in reference to
whom this Ministry is executed, is God. Hence ye Priests, ye Ministers of his
that do his pleasure; and he makes his Ministers a flame; and Daniel, says of
them thousand thousands Ministered unto them.

Thus you see then whose Ministers we are, Gods, Dan. 1.10.
not men's. Secondly, What a Dignity this is, it is no less than what is
attributed to Kings and Angels. You see likewise that what the Interpreters
translated Priests, signifies that which you call us, Ministers, and the
executing of their Office, Ministering or Ministration. As also that the word
Elder, Luke 1.23.
that the Holy Ghost calls us by, is all one with the word Priest. And
therefore if you be so much against the Jewish terms, you should rather call us
Priests than Ministers: but indeed we are both, and the Holy Scripture uses
both words promiscuously, as well in the Old as the New Testament. For we are
Elders in respect of the people, Ministers in respect of God, and we Minister
to God about Holy Things; unless you will say that our Gospel is not so Holy as
their Law, our Preaching as their Expounding, our Prayers, and Service, and
Sacraments, wherein is the Body and Blood of our Savior, are not as Holy as
their Incense, Oblation and Sacrifice; for about these things are our Ministers
conversant.

Now I come to the main Question, concerning Adoration or Worship of God
before, or toward the Altar, in our ingress into his house, or at any other
time when we shall approach thereunto. Where first, I will show you what is
meant by Adoration or Worship, Secondly, what is meant by the House of God,

1. By Worship, What is meant by Worship.
I do not understand here in the Latitude of the word, the whole Act of
Religion, the whole Duty of Man, which sometimes is generally so called, the
Worship of God, the Fear of God, nor yet only or primarily the inward Reverence
and Devotion of the heart, but in special, the outward expression of Reverence
and Humility in the posture or gesture of the Body, not excluding, but implying
the inward worshipping of the mind. In this sense the word is often taken in
Holy Scripture, as in the second Commandment, Thou shall not bow down to them,
Genesis 24: 26.48.5. Rev. 19.10.
nor Worship them. So Saint John fell at the Angels feet to Worship him: but
the Angel refuses it, and bids him worship God, that is, give the outward
Worship that he was ready to do to him, to God, to whom alone it was due. For
had not the outward Worship been an Act of Religion in regard of Saint John's
intention, and inward Reverence, the Angel needed not to have refused it; for
outward Worship if it be only Civil, is such as one man may give to another, a
Subject to his Prince, much more to an Angel.

You see then the Holy Scripture by the name of Worship, does oftentimes mean
in special the outward Adoration of the Body in visible gestures; and so do I
here. Now this Act of outward Worship, I make a part of Religion, which that
you may the better conceive, I will tell you the Nature and Parts thereof: For
it is not generally believed that outward Worship is due unto God, and
consequently that it is part of Religion.

Religion, Religion, the Nature and Parts.
which is derived from a word that signifies binding, Implies three things: 1.
An Act of Duty. 2. The Object of that Act, God. 3. The Bond or Tie imposed upon
us for the performance of such a Duty to such an Object.

The Object of Religion is God, most Infinite, most Glorious, most Excellent
and Perfect, and therefore our Act of Duty, in reference to such an Object,
ought to have three Properties: Properties of it.


1. It must be an universal Act, or Act of the whole Man, Universal of Soul and
Body.
Soul and Body, of all the Faculties of the Soul, and of all the Members of the
Body. All are to concur in this Act of Duty to God, and that for these Reasons:

First, Because God is to be worshipped by us as men; now, Men we are not
without our Bodies; nor our Actions, the Actions of Men without our Bodies,
Actiones sunt suppositorum, say the Schools, Christ had not been true Man
without a Body.

Secondly, Our Bodies as well as our Souls are Liable to rewards and
punishments, and therefore with them must God be worshipped, if we expect they
should be Blessed; and with them we should be Damned, if we deny God's Worship
by them.

Thirdly, Bond of Religion.
The common Bond which ties us to this Act of Duty to this Object, requires
outward Worship of the Body, which Bond is the right which God has to require
this Duty of us, which is grounded upon his absolute Dominion and Sovereignty,
and that is founded on his Communication of Essence or Being unto us. He made
both Body and Soul, and wherefore, but that both should serve him? Again, 2
Cor. 6.20.
Again, his continual preservation of both, Entitles him to the Service of
both; Lastly, his Redeeming of both, multiplies his claim of Obedience and
Worship of both.

Fourthly, Mark 12.30.
Our Savior commands this universal Act, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength.
i. e. with thy Body also, for there is strength in that. Thus you see the Act
of Religion must be an universal Act, and consequently outward Worship and
Reverence is comprehended under it.

2. The Act of Religion must be the most excellent, Intense.
most intense, and perfect we can perform, so that all other Actions must be
hereunto subordinate; For he is most excellent and perfect, and therefore
deserves our best performances. So that as he is to be worshipped with all of
man, so with the intensest Devotion, Zeal and Reverence of that All: The whole
Activity of all must be taken up in this Act of Duty or Service.

3. Constant.
It must be a constant, continued, uninterrupted Act, because Gods Right and
Dominion over us is constant and permanent. Not that we must always be
conversant in every part of Divine Worship, always bowing the Body, always
Praying, or praising with the Tongue, always hearing, always meditating of him
in our hearts, always at Church: But so as all our Actions, whither we eat, or
drink, sleep or wake, talk, walk, work or play, should be to his Glory, all
should tend to him as to the Center, all ordered and governed by his Will, all
should be subordinated unto Piety, and that always.

Thus I have shown what Religion is, and that outward Worship is a part of it.
Now I come to a more precise and special consideration of outward Worship in it
self; What outward Worship is.
And this is nothing else but an expressing and testifying of the mind. For
though I do consider these Acts of outward and inward Worship in the
explication of them distinctly, yet I deny them to be separated in the true use
and practice: For the whole Act of Adoration, concretely taken, does imply
both; The defination.
whence it is defined, a yielding of Honor to the thing worshipped, by the
Recognition of its Dignity and Excellency, and by a religious submission of
Body and Soul, viz. by inward motion of the Will, and outward testimonies and
expressions of the Body.

Where note, The parts.
three Acts concur to the complete Act of Religious Worship. 1. The Act of the
Understanding, Estimation.
whereby we apprehend the excellency of the thing we Worship: For the Will
cannot incline it self with a reverential esteem toward that which the
Understanding does not first conceive excellent, and worthy such reverence. 2.
The Act of the Will, Affection.
which, upon the preceding Act of the understanding, apprehending the Object
excellent, does inwardly incline it self thereto, in its affections of Love and
Reverence. 3. Outward expressiion.
The Act of the Body, whereby we do by some outward tokens of respect and
honor agnize the excellency thereof, which we conceive in our minds, and
reverence in our hearts, by a submission of our wills thereto. Both which
inward Acts are not only testified by the outward, but intended, increased, and
consummated thereby.

All these three Acts must concur in one Worship or Veneration; For if the
first be wanting, we shall Worship with the Athenians, an unknown God. If the
second, our Worship will be Hypocritical. If the third, it will be maimed and
imperfect. Now this third and last Act of bodily Worship, which is the thing in
Question, being the Effect of the two former Acts, and the witness of them, is
by a Synechdoche more especially called Adoration. Adoration and its kinds.
Nudatio.
Of which there are reckoned up four species or sorts: 1. Nudatio Capitis,
uncovering the head. Geniculatio.
2. Geniculatio, bowing of the knee. 3. Incurvatio, Incurvatio.
bowing of the body. 4. Prostratio, Prostration, Prostratio.
or falling down. The first of these is proper only to the Western part of the
World, where the fashion is to testify our Worship to any body by uncovering
the head, (I speak of men). In the Eastern Countries they never were wont to
bare their heads, nor is it the fashion there to this day: But the other three
have been always used in the Service of God, by Jews, Greeks, Christians, and
all Nations of the World.

It is observable, Very frequently mentioned in Scripture. Genesis 24. 26. Exo.
4.32. and 2.27. and 34.8. 2 Cor. 7.8. and 29.29. Esaias 44.47. Dan. 3.6. Job
1.20. Matt. 2.11. and 20.26.
you seldom read of Worshipping in Holy Scripture, but there is some Gesture
expressed with it, as bowing the head, falling down, bowing to the ground. The
Jews in dirision of our Savior, could not mock a Worship, without expressing
it by bowing, Matthew. 28.9. Did not Saint Paul Worship, when he bowed his knees
to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ? Ephesians. 3.14. And what is our Saviors
reward now he sits at the Right Hand of his Father, which the Holy Scripture
expresses by bowing the knee at his Name, is it not worshipping him? that you
may see how little, or no Worship, was used by the Saints of God in the Old or
New Testament without external Adoration or Bowing, Abraham's Servant, the
Israelites, Jacob their Father, Moses, Job, David, Come let us Worship, and
fall down and kneel, etc. (as if no worshipping without these Demonstrations).
And the wise men, and the Leaper, and Mary Magdalen, and Saint Paul, all these
could not worship without bowing, or kneeling, or some bodily testification of
their inward Reverence, Submission, and Humility.

Thus you see the meaning of the word Worship or Adoration, the necessity of
it, being an Act of Religion, and the commendation of it, in that it is the
continual practice of God's Saints recorded in Scripture.

Come we now to consider, Of the house of God.
what is meant by the house of God, by which I mean the Christian Oratories and
Churches, places devoted and set apart for the solemn and public Worship of
Almighty God. And first, I will show the necessity of such places, and then the
Holiness of them, which two things, many will hardly believe.

The necessity I prove, The necessity of Churches proved.
because it is a principle in Nature; the very Common Law of Nature did ever
suggest unto men, that God was to have a place set apart in peculiar manner to
his Worship. This I will demonstrate first by reason, and then confirm it by
example.

1. By reason.
I suppose none will deny, but that it is a main Principle in Nature, 1. That
there is a God. 2. That he is to be worshipped. 3. That there must be some time
set apart for his Worship. Now if we hold (as who does not?) that it is part of
the Moral Law, that God must have a distinct and peculiar time consecrated and
set apart for his Worship, which is the Effect of the fourth Commandment; it
will then also follow, by the same Law of Nature, that he must have a place
Sanctified unto him. Therefore the fourth Commandment does (though not
directly,) yet by necessary consequence enforce and enjoin a Holy-Place, as
well as a Holy Day, or time: For time, and place are both alike necessary
Circumstances of Divine Worship: And he can no more be worshipped without a
place, than without a time; And therefore if the time ought to be consecrate
and solemn, so must the place likewise.

2. By examples of the Old Testament.
This may be confirmed from the example of God's Saints, approved by God
himself from the beginning. Before ever there was a Tabernacle or Temple made
by God's special appointment, Genesis 8.20. Genesis 12.7.
Noah built an Altar so soon as he came out of the Ark, and there called upon
God with Sacrifice. Abraham builds an Altar (that is a special place to
invocate at) in the place where God appeared to him: c. 13.4.
and wherever he came in his Journeys, he still erected an Altar, or place of
Worship; and when ever he came into any of tose places afterward, there he
still worshipped God at the place where he had formerly dedicated. The same I
might show of Isaac and Jacob, who still erected Altars in the place where they
Pitched their Tents, and that without any special appointment of God. Jacob
vowed a place for Divine Worship, by the name of Gods house, where he would pay
Tithes of all that God should give him. Yea Moses, Genesis 20.22.
before the Ark and that glorious Tabernacle were made, pitched a Tabernacle
for the same purpose, without the Camp, whither every one that sought the Lord,
was to go; Ezekiel. 33.7.
which he called the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or rather of Meeting,
because God meets with man there, as I shall show hereafter.

Thus you see men naturally were wont to accommodate the Worship of God from
the beginning, with consecrate places, as well as times: Yea, before the Law
was given of any set or precise time; for that was not until the Decalogue was
given by Moses: Which argues, that Nature likewise had taught them that the
work was honored and dignified by the peculiarness of the place appointed for
it: And that such a place best beseemed the Worship of God, the most peculiar
and incommunicable Act.

In the New Testament it is likewise apparent, Of the New Testament.
that Christians had their peculiar Oratories, and set places for their
Assembling and Meeting to celebrate Gods Worship: 1 Cor. 14.8.
For Saint Paul gives Rules of behavior how to carry our selves in such
places, Let the Women keep silence in the Church: which that he understands not
of the Company only gathered together, but of the place likewise where they
were met; it is evident, because he puts a distinction between this and other
places: If they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home; for
it is not permitted a Woman to speak in the Church. where you see, he puts a
plain difference between their own Houses, and the places of public meeting
for God's Service, which he could not do, if there had been no such places. So
likewise, 1 Cor. 11.22.
have ye not houses to eat and to drink in, or despise ye the Church of God? He
chides them for their Irreverent receiving of the Lord's Supper, and puts a
difference between their houses, and the places where they met for that purpose.

Thus much to evince the necessity of Houses and Oratories for God's public
Service. The Sanctity of Churches.
Come we now to prove the Sanctity and Holiness of them, where we will
consider, 1. What it is. 2. Where it is. 3. How long it is.

1. There is a double Holiliness, one Positive, the other Relative: What this
Holiness is.
The Positive is either essential, as God is, whose Holiness is his essence; or
communicated, as is the Holiness of Saints and Angels, which consists in
positive habits of Holiness inherent in them, and imparted to them by God, the
fountain of Holiness. Relative.
Relative Holiness is so called, because all such Holiness consists only in
the Reference and Relation the things invested therewith, have to God, who is
Holy, and to the Holy end whereunto they are destined. Common to persons and
things.
And this Holiness was not only proper to men, but common to all other things
that might be dedicated and consecrated to God. In this sense men are often
called Holy, either in regard of their Function, or some State and Condition
which puts them in peculiar relation unto God.

In the first respect, three sorts of people were called Holy, Kings, Priests,
and Prophets: Who therefore were solemnly Consecrated with Holy Oil, and termed
God's anointed. In the other respect, all the first born of men and beasts,
all votaries, as Nazarites, were likewise Holy unto the Lord. Nor were men only
thus Holy, but all other things that might be dedicated unto God, and were so,
as all Places, Vessels, Garments, Times; all things, as Holy Oil, Tithes,
Incense, Sacrifices, Oblations, Vows, etc. which were in special order to God's
Service, and thereto devoted; this is plain in the Old Testament.

Now this Holiness did not make the persons, or the things Holy, by any
positive Inherent Holiness, by any Sanctifying Graces infused (for a man might
be Holy in regard of his Function, and yet unholy in his life; witness Hophny
and Phineas) but by reason of the Holy Object, and the Holy end and use
whereunto they had relation. This latter Holiness we ascribe to Churches, and
to all other things whatsoever given to God, and set apart for his Service.

Now that Churches have this Holiness, Churches are relatively Holy proved.
I prove, 1. That places in the Old Testament, dedicated to Gods Worship, were
Holy, all will grant: For 'twas a received maxim among those Ancients, that a
place consecrated to God, did hallow the whole Country, and that the Land was
unhallowed where there was no place set apart unto God. Josh. 22.19.
Witness the story of the Altar built by Gad and Reuben, and the half Tribe
upon the Banks of Jordan, which Joshuah supposed they had built for this cause,
least the Lord of their possession, being cut off from Canaan (where the Lord's
Tabernacle was) by the River Jordan, so having no place consecrated therein to
the Worship of their God, might be an unclean and unhallowed Habitation. For so
says Phineas, and the Princes of the other Tribes, sent to diswade them, If
the Land of your Possession, be unclean, etc.

2. God would have such places to be reverenced. And therefore to show he has
as much care of the place of his Worship, as of the time, being both equally
Holy, Levit. 19.30
he enjoins them both together, ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my
Sanctuaries.

It remains that I prove places under the Gospel dedicated to God, to be
likewise Holy, That such places under the Gospel are Holy, proved.
though not with such legal Holiness and observations whereby the Temple of the
Jews was hallowed; yet with such Holiness as they might not be any ways
profaned or diverted to common uses.

This I prove by our Saviors scourging out the Prophaners of the Temple, which
that you may not think far fetched, and from my purpose, consider, 1. What part
of the Temple this was. 2. The reasons why he did so. 3. The time when.

1. What part of the Temple our Savior cleansed.
It was neither the Inner Temple, where the Priests alone came; nor the middle,
where the Jews and Circumcised Proselites were permitted to bend; but the
outward, which was common to all Nations that were (...), Dr. Parkers defense
agriast J. O. p. 154.
Worshippers of the God of Israel, though they did not tie themselves to legal
observances. This third, the Jews scarce accounted sacred, the other two they
did, and were so strict, that no uncircumcised person might enter into it, even
at this time, when our Savior exercised his Authority. And in this Court did
they usually sell their Sheep and Oxen, at the Feast of the Passover, to such
as came far off to Sacrifice, and could not conveniently bring them with them.

You see our Savior vindicates the profanation of this outmost Temple: And
this is farther manifest by the place of Scripture quoted by our Savior, which
otherwise would be impertinent: My house shall be called a house of Prayer for
all Nations; but ye have made it a den of Thieves. Now no part of this house,
was a house of Prayer for the Priests and Jews: This then was the Gentiles
Oratory.

2. The Reasons
Why did our Savior cleanse this? Not because it was a place of Legal Worship
or Service, for so it was not; but because, 1. It was a place dedicated to God,
it was his house. 2. Because it was a place destined to Prayer, a Holy and
Religious Act.

3. Consider the time, The times.
or rather times that our Savior did this; It was not only once, but twice.
The first time he went up to the Passover, when he began his Prophetical,
Office; and the second time he went up to the Passover to finish that, and to
enter upon his Priestly Office, and to put an end to Jewish Ceremonies. How
unseasonable had it been to vindicate the violation of Typical and Legal
Sanctity, which within few days after he was utterly to abolish by his Cross,
unless he meant to leave his Church a lasting Lesson, what reverence and
Respect he would have accounted due to such places as this was, which he thus
vindicated. For we find not in all the Gospel, any other example of vindictive
Authority used by our Savior, but only this, in freeing his Fathers house from
Profanation.

2. But if this Argument be not sufficient, add here to what the Apostle says,
He that defiles the Temple of God, him will God destroy. He speaks indeed of
the Bodies of Christians, which are Temples of the Holy Ghost, or should be:
But the reason holds as well for other Material Temples, as well as their
Bodies, which are so called Metaphorcally. For why will God destroy him that
prophanes the Temple of his Body? Why, but because God has made it, and
Consecrated it to his own Use and Service; it is Gods Temple. If this be the
reason, then it will hold for Churches likewise; for they are given and set
apart for God, and for his alone use. They are his, not ours: and therefore to
esteem them as common, is to provoke God to destroy us, for such our
Sacrilegious Profanation.

Lastly, The Apostle, where he forbids those things to be done in the Church,
which may be done in private houses, as for women to speak, to be uncovered,
men to be covered, as also to eat there, their ordinary viands, and to do other
such common Actions, what does he therein but argue the Sanctity of them, and
their separation from Profane and Common uses?

If you ask when this Sanctity or Holiness does first begin to separate such
places from common uses: When this Holiness begins.
I answer, at what time they are at first dedicated: For from that time they
stand in relation to God. This may appear from the story of Ananias and
Saphyra, who for purloyning part of that, which they had only in their hearts
vowed unto God, were convicted of Sacrilege, and for example struck dead
immediately.

If you ask how long this Holiness lasts upon them; How long it lasts.
I answer, so long as the Relation which makes them Holy remains upon them;
that is till God shall give up his Interest and Right in them. Not only while
Divine Duties are exercised therein, but so long as the place is in order to
such Holy use. As a Priest does not lose his Relative Holiness in regard of his
Function, after he is come out of the Church, and there executed his Office; so
neither does the Church: For a Priest is even as Holy when he is out of the
Church, and has finished his Ministry, as when he is in the execution
thereof. And this to have been the Nature of all other Sacred things, to retain
their Sanctity, as long as the Relation they have to God remained on them, I
shall prove hereafter.

Having spoken of the Lawfulness of outward Worship in God's House; I proceed
to show the Lawfulness of specifying or determining this outward Worship
toward some place therein, more than others Secondly, I will prove the
Lawfulness of determining our Worship toward this place, viz. the Altar, or
Holy Table. The Lawfulness of both I will prove two ways; 1. Negatively, by
proving them to be neither Idolatrous Worship, nor Superstition, nor
Will Worship. 2. Affirmatively, by proving this Specification of our Worship to
be consonant to God's Word, and to the approved Practice of the Saints in all
Ages.

First. It is lawful to determine our Worship toward some place.
It is lawful to specify or determine our Worship of God in his house, to some
place. 1. Because it is necessary man should tender his Worship toward some
place in special, it being a bodily Act, and he must look and bow one way,
either to the right, or left; to the upper or lower end; unless he will turn
round as he Worships, or look nine ways at once, that he might not be thought
to adore the place he bows toward.

Secondly, And to one place rather than another. which is no Idolatry.
As our Worship must be done toward some place in special, so it is lawful to
do it toward one place rather than another. 1. There is no Idolatry in it; for
unless we make the place the object of our Worship some ways, it is no Worship
of an Idol: But we tender none of our Worship to the place. You may as well say
we cannot look up to Heaven when we say our Prayers, but we must Worship the
Heavens. Besides, if to Worship God toward one place rather than another, be
Idolatry, then Daniel when he Worshipped God toword the Temple, and the Jews
when they worshipped toward the Altar and Ark, committed Idolatry. For if they
could not Worship God toward one place more than another, but they must Worship
the place, Certainly' God, who is Jealous of his Glory in point of Idolatry,
would never have commanded or permitted it. What was then no Idolatry, cannot
be now; for Idolatry is the same thing now and then, and the second commandment
did alike concern them and us.

And as there is no Idolatry, No superstition.
so there is no superstition in it: For we no ways circumscribe God's
Immensity, or omni presence, or confine it to a place hereby, no more than
Solomon did, when he built a Temple for him; or God himself did circumscribe
himself, when he commanded a Tabernacle to be set up for him to dwell in.
Neither was it in his heart, that men hereby should have such a conceit of him,
as if he could be limited or contained in any place. Nor indeed had they any
such conceit, for says Solomon: The Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain
thee, how much less the house that I have built? Now, if we do not imagine that
God cannot be confined to any Church, why should any dream that we confine him
to some place in the Church more than another? Do you think God is confined in
the Church, when you go out of your Houses thither to worship him? would you
think well of them that should so judge of you? Why should you then judge of us
that we tie God to one place in the Church, because we worship him toward one
place rather than another?

Nor that it is Will Worship, Nor Will worship.
I shall prove by showing it consonant to God's word, which thus I do:

That which is decent and orderly, But Consonant to Gods word.
is not only Consonant to, but Commanded by Scripture. But to Specify our
worship to one place is Decent and Orderly. Ergo. If the promiscuous and in
different Worship of God toward any place, left to every ones discretion, be
indecent, and disorderly, and a confusion, then the determining of it to one
place is Orderly and Decent. But etc. Ergo. For tell me, is there any Order
where there is not Conformity, and Uniformity? Is there any Conformity or
Uniformity that when Men come into the Church, one should bow toward the Font,
another toward the Pulpit, a third toward the Table, a fourth toward the
Windows, one one way and another another? Surely this is not Conformity or
Uniformity, and therefore not Decency; and therefore a breach of the Apostles
command, and a disorderly Service of the God of Order. If any think this
various worship Orderly, I ask, whether he thinks it would be orderly for one
to come into the Church creeping, another going, another reeling, another
dancing; one Covered, another bare? If not Order in this, neither in the other;
for the Ground of Order is Uniformity: but there is no more Uniformity in such
Worship, than in such coming into the Church.

(2) It is Lawful to determine our worship toward the Altar, or Holy Table.
Lawful to Adore towards^ the Altar, proved Neg^tively.
That it is neither Idolatry nor Superstition is apparent by what I said
before; for we neither tender any worship to the Table, nor Circumscribe Gods
presence there. When a man pulls off his Hat at his coming into the Church, he
may as well be said to adore the Stones or Walls, and to Confine Gods presence
there; for he does not come into his own House in that manner.

And that it is not will worship, Affirmatively Romans 12.1.
I prove, because it is agreeable to the analogy of Faith, that requires our
worship or service should be reasonable, and such is this. For if we adore,
Necessity enforces us to bow to some place; Decency requires to bow to one
place, and Reason would that place should be the that fittest place. One place
in the Church is more Holy then another.
Now the fitness of this place is to be judged by the Dignity and Excellency of
it, and that is to be measured by the Degree of Relation it has to God, and
the Highness of the use, whereunto it is appointed. Now what part of all the
Church, or what thing in the Church has so near a Relation to God, as the Holy
Table? or what is appointed for so high and Holy an Use as that? That which
has a nearer relation to God, and a higher use than other things, must needs
participate of more External Sanctity, and Dignity than other things. Else you
may say the Belfry is as Holy as the Pulpit, or Communion Table, The H. Table
more Holy then the rest.
and as excellent. But the H. Table has nearer relation unto God, and is
destined to an higher use than any other thing in the Church, Ergo it is more
Holy and excellent, and consequently the fittest place to tender our Devotions
toward.

There is nothing likely to stand in competition with it, Than the Pulpit.
but the Pulpit, or the Font; but neither of these have so near a Relation or
so high an use First the Pulpits dignity proceeds from the Word of God therein
read or preached; but Gods Spirit has not made so near a Union between the
word and it self, as the Son of God has done at the Sacrcement celebrated on
the Altar.

As for the Font, True it is, Then the Fon^
the Scripture calls it the Laver fo Regeneration, the New Birth, and that by
the washing thereof we receive remission of Sins. Baptism the Analogy of it
But the Analogy of that Sacrament is only thus, that as in our first birth,
when we come out of our Mothers Womb, we are washed from the pollutions thereof
with water; so in our second, or new birth, they that were born into the
Church, and made Members of the same, were washed from the pollutions of their
Sins, by the Sanctifying of the Holy Spirit, who in Holy Scripture is
frequently Signified under the name of Water. John 7.38, 39.

Now though our blessed Saviors death and bloodshed be the ground of that
Sacrament, yet it is not his Blood that is represented by the water, but the
Sanctifying of the Holy Spirit; whence our Savior said to Nicodemus Vnlhss a
man be born again of Water and of the Spirit. etc

Besides Baptism is the Sacrament of our Initiation, the Lords Supper, of our
Conformation; Baptism might be Administered to Infants; the Lords Supper, only
to men of Ripe years. By Baptism we have only the beginning of our Spiritual
Life; by the Lords Supper we have our Conservation in it, and Continual food
and nourishment; This is the Commemoration, Representation Exhibition, and
Application, of that one most perfect Sacrifice of our Lord, once offered upon
the Cross; So that upon this Table is prepared God's Heavenly Banquet for our
Souls, our Manna, the Bread of Life, in Comparison whereof, all Earthly Feasts
and Dainties are but poor, Course, and despicable. From hence we drink the Cup
of Salvation, and Heavenly Benediction; yea, we eat and drink the very Body and
Blood of our Savior in a Mystery; Whence the Ancient Fathers are wont to call
them Reverend and Dreadful Mysteries, the Viands of Immortality, the earnest of
our Inheritance; and the place in Reference thereto, The Holy Altar, the Sacred
Table, the Seat and Throne, and Chair of Estate of our Lord Christ Jesus.

Thus I hope I have proved this Table to be the Highest and most Honorable
part of the Church, and therefore the fittest, toward which our Devotions to
God should be tendered. Now I shall prove it to be Consonant to Scripture, and
approved by the Constant practice of the Saints in all Ages.

Perhaps you expect some place of Scripture containing this Proposition in
express terms; But this Demand were unreasonable; For if we should believe no
more than what we have express words of Scripture for in the New Testament,
Then we shall be never able to prove our Baptizing of Infants, The Analogy of
the H. T. a Rule in many things.
or our substituting the Lords day in place of the Jewish Sabbath, which are
two points of main Consequence; and yet we have no Rule given expressly
concerning them in the New Testament: Nor was it needful; for in such things
where God has not given, or prescribed to us any new Rule to guide us, In
Tithes.
he has refered us to the Analogy of the Old, This the Apostle teaches us,
where he proves the due of the Ministers, miantainance under the Gospel from
the Analogy of the Old Law, Do ye not know that they that Minister about Holy
things live of the Holy things of the Temple, 1 Cor 9.13.
and they that waitat the Altar, are Partakers of the Altar? even so has the
Lord Ordained that they that preach the, Gospel, would live of the Gospel. But
where has God Ordained that, but in the Old Law, whence the Apostle proves
this? for what need God give a new Commandment concerning Tithes, in the
New Testament, while the Reason and Ground of the Commandment first given,
does as much concern us as them? It was reason that they who waited at the
Altar, should live of it: It is as much reason that they who Preach the Gospel,
should live by it. God has reserved to himself the Tithes to bestow upon his
Ministers, in the Old Testament, for their maintenance; and it was not needful
he should give any new Command for Tithes under the Gospel, seeing he never
abolish't them; that he has not abolish't them, is plain, because he has not
abolish't the cause for which he did at first Ordain them, viz, the
mainitainance of his Ministers, as the Apostle here shows. Thus you see the
folly of those, that will admit of no proofs out of the Old Testament, for any
thing, even there where is the same ground and reason which the Apostle
confutes here by his own practice, and by citing a place out of Deuterinomy
25.4. Thou shall not muzzel the mouth of the Ox which treads out the Corn.
which, says the Apostle, God spoke altogether for our sakes that are Ministers
of the Gospel.

And whence arose the Ancient practice of the Church in Baptising Infants, I
Pedo Baptiand the Lords day
but from the Analogy of Circumcision? or the Hallowing of every first day in
the week, as one in seven, but from the Analogy of the Jewish Sabath? By the
same reason it was not necessary for God or Christ in the Gospel to give us any
new rule for the manner of our worship of him in his house, Eusebius. line 3. line
14 Ir. line line 3. line 3.
or to specify the place toward which we should Adore him, in express words,
having therein left us to the Analogy of the Old Law, there being the same
reason to tie us to worship God toward this place, that there was to tie the
Jews, to worship him toward the Altar; I might allege to this purpose a place
out of Clemens (a man of the Apostolic age, and whose name, says St. Paul,
was written in the Book of Life) in his true and genuine Epistle to the
Corinthians We p. 52. where he says, ought to do all things rightly, and
orderly, which our Lord has Commanded us to Celebrate, our oblations and
Lyturgyes at appointed times; for he would not have these things done rashly,
and out of order, but at set times and hours. He has likewise defined by his
most High will, where and by whom he would have these things performed. But
where I pray do we find any of these things Specified by God, unless he has
left us to the Analogy of the Old Testament?

For the only reason that moved the Jews to worship toward the Ark was the
Memorial of his Name, that is, The same Reason ties us to wor^ship God toward
the Altar, that tied the Jews to worship toward the Ark.
of his Special presence. The whole Temple was the Place of Gods Special
Presence, but the Ark was (as it were) his Front or Face, where he did most
chiefly testify his Presence, Simil.
as the whole Chamber, where the King manifests himself to his Subjects, is
called the Presence Chamber, but the Chair of Estate does most principally
represent the Kings Person.

But first I will show that places in the Old Testament, set a part for Gods
Worship, were places set a part for the Memorial of his Name, and therefore
Sacred; and also that God did promise a special Exhibition of his presence and
blessings in those places. This I prove out of Exodus 20.24. where God, after
the promulgation of the Decalogue, forbidding the People, by Moses, to make
with him gods of Silver and Gold, but that they make him an Altar of Earth
(such as their Condition then permitted, while they were journeying into the
promised Land, afterward of Stone) and thereon Sacrifice their burnt
Offerings; he adds, In all places where I Record my Name (that is, where I
cause the memorial, monument or remembrance of my Special presence to be)
thither will I come to thee, and Bless thee. The memorial or monument of His
Name is a Token or Symbol whereby he testifies his presence, Covenant and
Commerce with man. Of these the Jews had two in special; First, the Altar with
their Sacrifices on it, whereat God did often manifest himself by Consuming the
Sacrifice, and was always present. For this promise, here spoken of, was made
before ever the Ark was in being, or before there was any Command for making of
it; And therefore before the Ark of the Testimony was made, they did Exhibit
their Reverence and Worship toward the Altar. Afterward, when the Ark was
made, as a standing monument and memorial, they tendered their worship toward
that, and the Altar jointly; For the Ark was within the Vail, Exodus 30.6.
and the Altar before the Vail, without: And that the Sacrifices upon the Altar
was called likewise the Memorial is apparent by the 2.5.6. and 24. Chapt. of
Leviticus, But the chief Memorial, after it was appointed and made by God, was
the Ark of the Covenant or Testimony, which was therefore set within the Vail.
Things are Capable of different degrees of Relative Holiness.
(which by the way, Argues that things are capable of deffrent degrees of
Relative holiness thereafter, as they shall have a nearer, or farther Relation
to God; and participate a less, or more holy use; whence the destinction was of
Holy, and most Holy in the Temple and Tabernacle) Again, so especial a memorial
of God was the Ark, that it was called by Gods very Name. Hence the Philistines,
when they heard that the Ark, 1 Samuel 4.7.
was brought into the Camp of Israel, by the shouting of the People, they said,
God is come into the Camp, meaning the Ark, which was the Symbol of Divine
presence. But more epecially, it is thrice called by the Name of Jehovah, 2 Samuel 6.5.14.21.
where David is said to dance before the Lord, before Jehovah, when yet it was
but before the Ark. Psalm. 47.6. 2 Samuel 6.15.
So likewise God is gone up with a shout, and the Lord with a sound of a
Trumpet, when the Ark was carried up out of the Land of the Philistines, and
brought into the City of David, by David, with the shouting and the sound of
the Trumpet. Phinehas wife called it the Glory. i. e. The place of Gods
Glorious presence. The Glory is departed from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.22.
for the Ark of God is taken.

Now that God has as eminent a Memorial of his Name among us in our Churches,
as the Ark, I shall easily prove. For did not Christ ordain the Eucharist to be
a Memorial of his Name among us Christians, when he says, This is my Body, do
this in Rimembrance of me? Did God ever say more to the Jews, to argue his
special presence, either at their Altar or their Ark, then what our Savior
has said of the Sacrament, This is my Body, i. e. My Person is mystically
united to the Sacrament, and therefore Expressly calls it his Memorial. Our
Memorial more Eminent then their.
Why should not the places then appointed for the Station of this Memorial
under the Gospel, have as great Sanctity as that, whereby Gods Name was
recorded in the Law? What had the Jewish Memorial to make it Holy, which is not
Comprehended, nay, excelled by the Christians? Is not Christ's Body better than
their Manna? Are not our Gospels better than their Tables? Ask Saint Paul, Who
makes a comparison between the Law and the Gospel, and from the Excellency
thereof, concludes the dignity of our Ministry above the Jewish, in as much as
they were Ministers only of the Letter, we of the Spirit. Now what had the Ark
to make it so Holy, more than the Manna, and the two Tables? and why then
should not our Gospels, and our Sacrament placed on the Altar far surpass them,
and dignify the Table above the Ark.

Our Sacrament, Our Memiral Obj. all is uos ever present upon the Alter.
the Christians Memorial is not present upon the Table, as Manna, and the
Tables were in the Ark.

Resp. It is not necessary it should be, it is sufficient, they are wont to be
there, and that the place is appropriated thereto. As the Chair of State loses
not its Relation to the King, and respect is done to Him toward it; though he
be absent Moreover note, that the Ark of the Covenant was not then in
Jerusalem, when Daniel opened his window to pray thitherward, and that the
sacred Cabinet, with the things contained therein was wanting all the time of
the Second Temple, instead whereof they made another to represent it.

You see then, that according to the Analogy of the Old Testament, we are as
much bound to Adore God toward our Holy Table, as they toward their Altar or
the Ark: The only reason, that they tendered their devotion that way, being, for
that it was Gods Memorial or place of special presence: And because we have as
Sacred a Memorial of Gods presence and Covenant, as they had, we have the same,
nay, greater reason to oblige us to Worship toward this place, this being far
more holy than theirs.

Again, as God promised to meet the Jews at such places, where he did record
His Name, and there bless them. The same promise is made to us by our Saviour',
Math. 18.22.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there I will be in the
midst of them. Where take notice of a special prensence; For Christ is every
where, in Him we live, we move, and have our being; He is never from us, and
therefore if there were not a promise of a special presence, what great matter
had there been in our Saviors words? And to what purpose were that presence,
but to meet with them and bless them? Now if Christ has promised this in every
place, where men are assembled in his Name, that is, to Praise and Glorify his
Name in Public, how much more in that place where his Name is perpetually
recorded, and that by his own appointment? For a special promise of Gods
blessing and meeting us when we call upon him, and bow to Him toward this
place, does not confine Gods blessing to the place no more than that promise to
the Jews, did hinder Gods blessing them in the House, Deuteronomy. 28.
and in the field, in their going out and coming in, which he promised, if they
obeyed.

Or think you, when David said, Hear the Voice of my Humble Petition when I cry
unto thee, when I hold up my hands toward the Mercy Seat of thy Holy Temple,
That he thought God could not, or would not hear him any where else? Or that
Solomon thought God could not, or would not hear any prayer but what was made
in his Temple? certainly he did not. For the reason why he beseeched God to
have respect unto the Place which he had made, and to hear the Prayers of those
that prayed in it, or toward it, was only this, because it was built for the
Memorial of Gods Name, for the place of his special presence, and God had
promised to place his Name there. And mark Gods Answer, 2 Chr. 7.14. 2 Chr.
7.14.
If my People shall humble themselves and Pray, etc. Then will I hear and
forgive. Now mine eyes shall be open and mine ears attent to the Prayert that
are made in this place. Would you know the reason why God would hear in this
place rather than in another? (Though God did not abridge himself of hearing in
anyother place) It is expressly set down in the next Verse, For now I have
chosen and Sanctified this house, that my Name, (that is my Memorial, or
special presence) might be there for ever, and my Eyes and my Heart shall be
there perpetually. Is there not the same reason for Gods presence in our
Churches, as in their Temple? if they be as much Sanctified to this end, viz.
Gods Memorial, or Name to Inhabit in, as that was? And to what other end were
these ever Consecrated?

Now, unless you can show this promise of Gods meeting and blessing men by a
peculiar manner, in all places where he recorded his Name, was proper to the
Jews, or has been since reversed by God, then certainly our Churches have as
much of Gods special presence as the Temple; And God will there meet with us,
and bless us especially; and we are to adore God as much toward our Memorial,
as the Jews toward theirs.

Thus I have proved the Lawfulness of Adoration toward the Altar, out of
Scripture. Now for the Opinion, and Pratise of the Church.

That it was the Opinion, and Practice of the Old Church, 1 Kings 8.22. 2 Kings
19.14. 2 Chr. 7.3.
is apparent by what is said Hezekiah in his distress went into the Temple, and
their Prayed toward the Place of his presence, Viz. the Mercy Seat, and
therefore compellates God by this Title, Thou that dwell between the
Cherubims. Might not the King have Prayed at home? was not God present in his
house? or had he confined him between the Cherubims? No, but Hezekiah knew that
God had more especially promised his Presence in this Place, and therefore here
he comes, and prostrates himself before Gods Memorial.

How the Christians Esteemed ever and reverenced their Churches, Vid. etc. And
how highly they regarded their Altars, Chrisost. Hom. 20. In the Second Epistle
to the Corinthians. Optatus in his 6th. Book, describing the Dignity of the
Altar, illustrates it from this, Viz. That it was the Seat of the Body and
Blood of Christ Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople, falling down at the foot
of the Altar, besought God that he would subvert the furious Plots and
Endeavors of the Arrians; the next day Arrius, as he was exonerating nature,
withal voided his Guts and Bowels, Nazians. Or. p. 1. or in some 25. tells,
That his Sister Gorgonia, being Sick, applies her self to the chief Physician
of all mortals, and casting her self down before the Altar, and Invocating him
who was Honored upon the same, she recovered her former health. By which
Examples, it may seem that God, by his miraculous benefits, has confirmed this
Reverence. Tertull, tells how penitents, after they are restored to the Church,
at their entrance into it, were wont to cast themselves down before the Priests
(from whom they were to receive absolution) and to bow themselves submisly
before the Altar of God, etc.

God cares not for any complements, He requires the Heart, Object.
and the Inward Devotion thereof, and so our Savior teaches us to serve God,
John. 4.23.
The hour comes, and now is, that they that worship the Father, must worship
him in Spirit and Truth.

This Text is much abused, to prove that God, in the Gospel, allows not of
External or Bodily worship or Service, but requires this of the Spirit only,
and consequently to make this the main difference between Gods worship under
the Old Testament and the New. Now, first, I will show the absurdity of this
meaning which they give of the words, and then declare the true sense.

This sense is inconsequent from our Saviors Words; The absurdities of the
Puritance exposition.
for he did not speak any thing to the woman about Bodily worship, but only
about the place of worship, and the Object. For her question to our Savior
(perceiving him to be a Prophet) was about a main controversy between the Jews
and Samaritans (who were bitter Enemies) about the Place of worship; They
mistake the Scope.
so whether Mount Gerizim or Jerusalem were the place appointed for Gods
worship? This you may see is nothing concerning the manner of worship, whether
it should be Outward or Inward. But our Savior, in answering, waves the
question, and tells her, that was not so material a controversy, but that there
was a greater Question than that about the place, Viz. about the object of
their worship; for you, says he, worship you know not what, but we Jews know
what we worship. After which, follows the words cited, But the hour comes,
etc. This is the first absurdity, it has not Consistance with the contest.

Secondly, They add to the Letter.
Their interpretation adds to the very Letter of the Text; For our Savior
says not, we must worship him in Spirit (only,) there is no such word. This
exclusive particle our Savior uses not: So that though he might mean, that we
must worship him chiefly, or Principally in Spirit, yet it follows not, but we
might worship him with our bodies also Subordinately, for the Principal does
not exclude the Subordinate, but include it: And none dare say, that outward
worship is opposite to inward. This is the Second Absurdity; they add to the
letter what our Savior never said or thought.

Thirdly, This Exposition is directly contrary to the words; For our Savior
says, God must be worshipped in Spirit and Truth; but God is not, nor yet can
be worshipped in Truth without Bodily worship; for his worship is not true,
It Is conerary to the Doctrine and practice of Christ, and of all Christians in
all Ages.
unless it be entire and Universal, as has been shown: and entire it is not,
without the Joynt-worship of the Body.

Fourthly, This Exposition contradicts the Ordinances of the Gospel expressly,
together with the practice of our Savior, his Apostles, and the Church in all
Ages; For the blessed Sacraments are External Rites and Services. Baptism,
wherein we make our first Stepulation with God, to become his Servants; The
Eucharist which is substituted in place of those Bloody Sacrifices of the Law,
to be a Rite and mean of our Address; to Invocate and give thanks to his Father
in the New Testament are they not External Ceremonies and Services? Did not the
Apostles, and the whole Church then, and the whole Church after them,
supplicate God the Father by this Rite? They continued breaking of Bread ( i.
e. in the use of the Holy Sacrament) and Prayers: And Therefore in the
Primitive Church, they used to say all the Service at the Altar, to Signify
that they sent up their prayers in the Name of him, whose Sacrifice, the Ground
of all atonement and Intercession, was in that place Exhibited and
Commemorated; yet it seems very Novel to us, to have part of our Service read
there.

But least you might say, the meaning is, not that God will have no External
Service, but he will be worshipped by no External Gestures or Postures, I say
this also contradicts our Saviors Practice, who himself lifted up his Sacred
Eyes to Heaven; when helprayed for Lazarus, fell on his Face when he Prayed in
his Agony, etc. What was Imposition of hands, but an External gesture, when God
was invoked by way of benediction? besides, I see no reason, why, in the point
of Evangelical worship, Gesture should be more excepted against than Voice; Is
not Confessing, Praying, Praising, an External Bodily worship, as well as that
of Gesture? why then should the one derogate from the worship of the Father in
Spirit and Truth, and not the other? In a word, there never was yet in the
World, any Society of men, that worshipped the Father in such a manner as this
interpretation does emply, and therefore this cannot be the meaning.

Our Savior intends here to reprehend the Idolatrous worship of the
Samaritans, The true sense
who worshpped they knew not what, Viz. God under the Representation of a Dove,
as the Israelites in Jeroboams time, and long after, under the similitude of a
Calfe. The Samaritans Idol.
This was the Object of the Samaritans worship, as appears out of the writings
of the Jewish Rabbis. This was their Idolatry, they worshipped God in a Bodily
shape; and the reason which our Savior gives, seems to emply this; For God
(says he) is a Spirit, i. e. he has no body, nor is he such, therefore he
must be worshipped as a Spirit, for so indeed he is; and not by any bodily
Representatation.

So that the sense here is this, The hour comes, and now is, that the true
worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit, (that is, conceiving of him no
otherwise than in Spirit) and in Truth, that is, not under any Corporal or
Visible shape; for those that Worship under any Corporal similitude, do indeed
belie him: For the Apostle says of such, as changed the Glory of the
Incorruptible God, into an Image made like to Corruptible man, Romans 1.
they changed the truth of God into a lie. Hence Idols also are called Lies,
Amos. 6.4.

Some interpret these words (the true worshippers shall worship God in Spirit
that is, no longer by Jewish Ceremonies, but in and by Christ, who is the
substance of those shadows. This sense, though it be true, and plausible, yet
it is not congruous to our Saviors reason; For God (says he) is a Spirit, and
must be, etc. If this be the reason, then God should never have been worshipped
with Jewish Ceremonies and Rites; for God was a Spirit from the beginning, and
manifested himself so to be, even to the Jews, who Worshipped him with Rites
and Ceremonies. Therefore I adhere to my first sense, Thus your main Fort is
blown up.

The Second Objection drawn from Goos Protestation against Sacrifices, Michel.
6.6, 7, 8. Hos. 6.6. Isaiah 1. Psalm 51. with the Answer, Vid.

In a word, Religion, as man has both a Body and Soul, the Soul of our Service
is the Service of our Soul; but the Body of that Soul, is the Service of our
Body; one must inform the other, and both make a complete man of God. For as
the Body without the Soul is dead, so the Soul without the Body is imperfect.
God loves no maimed Sacrifice, God calls for the Heart, because he knows it
commands the whole Man, and therefore if he have the Heart at his devotion, he
is sure of the Body also.

Obj. Suppose all this, God is to be adored outwardly as well as inward ly; Yet
this manner of Adoration is Dangerous, and may become many ways Evil. For, 1.
It is Scandalous to weak brethren, who hereat are offended. 2. It may be an
occasion to some Ignorant Ones to Commit Idolatry, by Adoring the very Table.
3. It is a fair Introduction to Popish Superstition.

1. Every Scandal or offense taken, is not a Scandal given; Therefore that is
properly called Scandalous, which in its own nature tends to give offense, not
that which through willfulness or blindness, may, by accident, become such.

Resp. Resp.
Was not Christ himself a Scandal and Rock of offense? to the Jews, a
Stumbling Block? to the Greeks foolishness? was not his Cross a Scandal? should
not therefore Christ have come and been Crucified, because this proved an
occasion of Scandal? but who are these weak Ones? and how is this an offense?

For the weak Ones, Who are the weak.
they are such as usually think themselves strongly grounded in the Faith, and
able to confute this Worship we here maintain: Such as though they be Women and
Weavers, think they can teach twenty of us threadbare Scholars for all our
Learning. These are the weak Ones forsooth, weak I confess in their knowledge,
for they are blind, and therefore the bolder; but in their own conceit strong
enough.

But how are these offended? Why are they offended.
Are they drawn to imitate us, in our Worship waveringly, and doubtingly, not
knowing, (through the weakness of their Judgment) whether they sin or no,
Scandal.
but relying on the knowledge and conscience of him whom they imitate, thereby
ensnare their consciences in sin? This is properly a Scandal, 1 Cor. 8.
as the Apostle shows expressly, were he makes that a Scandal given, when in a
thing in it self indifferent, as Eating of meat Sacrificed to Idols, not as
such, but as bought in the Market by a man of knowledge; who knows that meat
commends not to God, and takes no notice of the Idol to whom it was offered,
but Eats is as Common, or Ordinary. When, I say, this Act of him that has
knowledge, does occasion one weak in knowledge, to Eat the same meat with
conscience of the Idol, grounding himself upon the example of him, whom he
imitates, and so offends, Thus then comes in the Scandal. The strong Eat of
that without conscience of the Idol, among the weak or ignorant that know not
how to make such a distinction; They imitate the strongs example, as thinking
what is lawful for the strong, is lawful for them, and so Eat of it with
conscience of the Idol, or as devoted to an Idol, which is Idolatry. Thus the
strongs knowledge is an occasion of Sandal to the weak, that is, it makes the
weak offend in doing that without faith and know ledge, which the strong do
withfaith and knowledge. But do these weak ones imitate us there in, and
Worship God in this manner? They had rather run to New England, than make a
leg toward the Altar in the Old. How are they then offended? I Will tell you,
they are vexed at it, they Rail upon us for it, they Calumniate us for
Idolaters, they Scoff at us as Superstitious and Foppish, and thus they are
offended.

Again, there is a great deal of difference between Adoreing God toward the
most fitting place in his House (which I have already proved a necessary part
of Divine Worship) and a thing indifferent, which in its own nature may prove a
Scandal, as the Eating of meat Sacrificed to Idols, and the like. For then we
should do no part of Divine Worship, least some should imitate us to do it
amiss: We should not come to the Lords Supper; because some that are ignorant
come thither only for fashion, because they see others do it, and understand
not what it is, and wherefore: They think it lawful for them to do as their
betters and wiser do, and so they Eat unworthily and ignorantly, which others
do worthily and in faith, and so offend in and by others knowledge. What then?
Is the Sacrament and the Eating thereof a Scandal? No, what is the reason?
because in it self, it tends not to make men offend by unworthy receiving. 2.
It is no matter of indifferency. 3. Because those that are ignorant and weak,
are so wilfully, having means to be better instructed and informed. So is it in
this case, this Worship of God, I have proved a thing Necessary, not Arbitrary.
2. In it self it tends not to make any offend, either by Worshipping the Table,
or the place we worship toward: For then God should have done all, in
permitting and approving such Worship amongst the Jews, whom he would by no
means put upon any ocoasion of committing Idolatry, to which they were to prove
of themselves. 3. There are none but have means to be better instructed;
therefore if any be offended, God forgive them, and send them more wit.

The Ignorant may be seduced or misled to worship the Table, The Ignorant may
be seduced:
or place it self, or to tie God to one place more than another.

Answ. This Objection is partly answered in my discourse of Scandal. Now I say,
1. A good and necessary Duty must not be omitted, because some may make ill use
of it. 2. It Is a thing very unlikely, that any should think we Worship the
Table, when we Bow before it, and so imitate us in that, any more than they
should think, when we put of our Hats coming into the Church, that we Adore the
Stones or Walls.

It was the Ancient reproach of the Gentiles to the Christians, that they
worshipped the Sun, because they Adored God toward the Altar, which was set at
the East end of their Churches: As also, that they Eat man's flesh, and drank
man's blood, because they did Eat and Drink the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Holy Sacrament. Should the Christians have left of these Duties, because malice
or ignorance might make such constructions thereof? But what if it be granted,
some ignorant men will Adore the Table? To what purpose serve we that are
Ministers, but to instruct them better, and to inform them how, and in what
manner they ought to serve God both in Body and Soul? what else is our Errand?
what the end of our Preaching? Is it not to teach men the difference between
Good and Evil? Right and Wrong? and to do Bonum vene? Those that may be
seduced, are to be better instructed.

Obj. 3. This opens a door to Popery.
They tend to bring in Popery, and lead us unto other things that are Popish
and Superstitious.

Answ. 1. It Is not Popish in it self.
There is not the least Popery in this. 2. There is no just fear of bringing it
in by this. 1. The Papists do not Adore God before the Altar, but the Host and
Crucifix set upon the Altar, and make that the Immediate and formal Object of
Adoration, viz. Their God Almighty in a Box, or piece of Wafer-Cake, which they
say is the true Body and Blood of Christ. Moreover, when they Adore Images,
they say, They do not Adore them, but those whom the Images Represent, Image
worship.
and put them in mind of. Now, they grant that they Adore the Image relatively,
or transitively, though not ultimately or chiefly: and therefore they Worship
the thing represented in and by, and with the Image. This I speak, because some
say the Papists have as good excuse for their worshipping of Images, as we have
for our Adoration before the Altar. Whereas we utterly disclaim any kind of
Worship to the Altar any ways, we make it no Object of our Worship either
Relative or Transitive; We make it no Representation of God, we Worship not God
in it, nor by it, nor with it, but only toward and before it, because it is
the fittest place for us to tender our Service of God toward, being the place
of his Memorial in a special manner, and consequently of his presence. We
disclaim all Popish destinctions, and in no wise make the Table the Object of
our Worship: Nor herein is our Protestation contrary to our Action; for if the
Action, in its own nature, were Idolatrous, it had been so in the Jews.

2. Neither does it introduce Popery. For the Lutherans, Not apt to Introduce
it.
who are bitter Enemies to the Papists, and the Papists to them, do observe
this sacred Rite: Nay, the Papists love and like us the worse for it. For they
basely belying us, say, we Adore the Table, which they do not, but God who is
upon it; and so accuse us of worse Idolatry than we do them; as if we worshipped
a Table, and made that our God. But they Slanderously and Maliciously traduce
us against their own^ knowledge. To Idolize the Table, we abhor and detest, and
no man of common sense, except blinded with malice and prejudice, as they are,
will believe them.

You see how far this is from bringing in Popery. The truth is, This vain fear
begets the other extreme.
this vain fear makes us to run into almost as great an absurdity; for we are
all for extremes. Because men will not be Superstitious with the Papists,
therefore we must be Profane, Sacrilegious and Irreverent with the Puritans.
Because the Papists Worship God falsely, therefore we must not Worship him
after a true and due manner agreeing to his Word. Because they Superstitiously
adorn their Churches, therefore we must let them lie like Barns, Stables, nay,
rather Sties. I am ashamed to think that Christians, People of worth and
fashion, should esteem the Church, though never so squalid, ugly and deformed,
the Windows broke, the Roof untiled and Leaking, the Walls hung with Cobwebs,
broken, patch't and ill-favored, the Holy Table standing like an Alehouse
Table, either with out a Carpet, or with such a one, as a man would scarce wipe
his shoes withal, a Scurvy, Lowsy, Moth-eaten tattered piece of Darnix, or
other cloth: That men of worth should esteem this place handsome enough to
serve God in, to Feast with God in, to be partakers of his Holy Supper in, who
would think high scorn to be no better accomodated in their private Houses and
Parlours. Would they think these things handsome at home? how then can they
think them handsome in Gods House? I appeal to the Reader, whether many
Gentlemen's Kichens be not handsomer and better adorned than many Churches? I
wonder what slovenly god these men fancy to themselves, that can be contented
to be no better accomodated in his House, than with that which they themselves
in their own Houses count ugly and unseemly. If it were but for this one piece
of slovenly Devotion, I should love nasty Puritanisme the worse while I lived.
I pray God amend such horrible profaneness and abuse. Why we make Obeysence when
we come into the Church.


Why must we make courtesy when we come into the Church? can we not stay till
we come to our Pews, and then fall down to our Prayers?

Why do we when we come into our Neighbors House, before we speak to him, put
of our Hats, and then say by your leave? Gods peace be here? Why did our
Savior command his Disciples when they entered into a House to salute it? is
it seemly and comely to salute a man's House, when we come into it, and is it
not much more seemly to express Reverence and Obeisance to God, when we ^es
foot into his?

Obj. But it troubles my Devotion.
But this will trouble my Devotions, distract my thoughts, and hinder my inward
Reverence, while I am thinking of making a Leg or Courtesy.

Answ. Tush, never fear it, I Will warrant you no such matter. Is there so much
art to be used in making a Leg or Courtisy, that it must needs trouble your
thoughts; and put out of your mind the inward Reverence and thought of God?
This were strange! Let me ask one Question, does Sighing and looking Sadly, and
Weeping, hinder your Grief? Does a merry countenance hinder your Joy? Does
paleness and trembling hinder your fear? Do your outward signs of Love hinder
the Love of your Heart? Nay, rather, Do not these outward Actions increase and
perfect the inward passions, which show forth themselves in them? why then
should Reverence, which is likewise a Passion, being mixed of Love which looks
at God as good; and fear which looks at his Greatness, why, I say, should this
be hindered by the outward bowing of the Body, more than any other passion? Nay,
why should it not rather perfect and increase it? Why should it not make us
think and say, how dreadful and Reverend is this place? this is surely none
other but the House of God, and Gate of Heaven.

Does it distract the inward respect of Children to their Parents, to give them
outward Reverence? to kneel to to them and ask them blessing? Does it not make
them rather have an higher and greater esteem of them? Why then should it not
be so between God our Heavenly Father and us? Nay, why should it distract our
Devotion more to bow to God when we come into the Church, than to kneel in our
Pews? I see no reason of the one more than the other.

Were God to be seen with bodily eyes, or did he express some visible sign of
Glory, as he did to the Jews, sometimes in a thick cloud, sometimes in a
shineing light, then we would all fall down with fear and Reverence, and why,
but because of Gods Presence? who yet is no more in such a symbol or sign,
than he is in our Churches. For God is not visible, nor were it lawful for us
to worship such a sign, but him whose presence is manifested thereby; though we
have no extraordinary sign of his Presence, yet as I have showed, we have a
standing sign and Memorial of his presence, and he is as much to be seen in
this as in that, for he is not visible in either. Is it not then our want of
faith, who are wholly immersed and drowned in sense, that we will not worship
God unless we see him with our Eyes, or else some extraordinary Amazing sign of
Him?

Obj. Yet for all this, what needs so much Cringing, Why bow to the Altar every
time we come by it.
and Bowing, and Ducking, and Adoring when we come in, and when we come out,
and and as often as we come before the Holy Table?

Answ. Why do Parents bring up their Children and Servants to show Reverence to
them, as often as they come by them, or go in and out before them? Is there not
as much reason that we should be as observant of God our Maker and Redeemer, in
his House, by giving him humble and dutiful worship toward the place of his
Holiness, Memorial and special presence? I appeal to your selves, either it is
Idleness in you to bring up your Children so, or no superstition in us to
Reverence God in this manner, as often as we come before him and approach near
him. Whether you are more to be Reverenced by your Servants and Children, than
God our Lord and Father by us his Servants and Children, speak you.

Obj. Show it in the Canon or Rubric.
But why should we do that which is not commanded neither in the Canons, nor
the Rubric.

Resp. Although it be not Commanded any where, yet the 7th. Canon, of those
made 1640. commends it to the practice of all good people.
Why should you rail at those for doing of that which was never forbidden
either in Canon, or Rubric? But I answer, the Reason why this is omitted in
our Liturgy is, because at that time when that was composed and Reformed, our
Church thought it superstitious, to make any such injunction, because it was
then a Catholic and received custom so to do; and they did not think any
Chistian would be so Reasonless as to refuse and dislike it.

So likewise, there is no command of Organs in Cathedrals, for Anthems and
Hymns, for the Rite of breaking the Bread and pouring out the Wine when the
Priest pronounces the words of Consecration, yet all these are, and ever were
piously done and used in our Church, without any explicit command or
Injunction of the Church; and are sufficiently commanded by the alone force and
Virtue of the Catholic custom of the Church, which carries with it the force
of an Implicit Law.

Besides, that our Church does allow, and in a manner command it, does appear
both in that this was never expunged out of diverse College Statutes, (which do
expressly enjoin it) at that time when all our Statutes were purged and
reformed, and also because many Sacred Rites and Forms still used at the
Coronation of our Kings, and by the Statutes of the Kingdom prescribed, do
enjoin this Adoration: for in them the King himself, as also the Archbishop of
Canterbury, is Commanded often humbly and lowly to adore God toward the Altar;
and also may be further inferred from the prescibed forms of Service for the
Knights of the Garter, at the time of their Installation, wherein they are
enjoined lowly and reverently to Adore God toward the Altar at least Twenty
times while the Sacred Solemnities are Magnificently transacted. The Ancianes
Adored toward the East, but why to the Altar?
To this add the constant practice of almost all our Cathedral Churches ever
since our Reformation, which does argue at least an Implicit Command.

Obj. If you stand so much upon Antiquity, the Ancients worshipped God toward
the Orient; and this Justin Martyr in his Answer to 118th. Question, affirms
to have been a Tradition received from the very Apostles. Why then should we
tie our worship so much toward the Altar? Worshipping Toward the East. Why


Answ. Then it follows that the Ancients did specificate their worship toward
one place, which is much scrupled at. But they worrshipped toward the Orient,
because the Altar stood there, and so they tendered their worship to God toward
both jointly, and therefore toward the East because the H. Table stood there.
Now the reasons why the site of the Churches were East and West, and the East
the upper End, were, both that herein they might differ from the Jews, and
Ancient Heathen, who both worshipped toward the West, the Jews god, the
Heathen gods Ape, the Devil: And also for other ends, as because our Savior,
in whose name we Christians worship the Father, is called the East, and the
whole work of our Creation and Redemption was performed in the East, and many
such Reasons they had why they should make the upper end of their Churches
toward the East.

Seeing then that the East was the upper end, Reason taught them to Place that
which was most Sacred and worthy in the uppermost place, as we our selves use
to do with persons, and things which we account most excellent and worthy. So
they did not adore toward the Altar, because it was set in the East, but
therefore they adored toward the East, because the Altar was placed there, as
in the highest and worthiest place. But in case some of the Churches were
irregular, and stood not East and West, yet they still placed the Altar, in
that place which was accounted uppermost, and thitherward did tender their
Devotions, even toward the Altar, wherever placed. And this is plain out of
St. Chrisostom's and St. Basill's Liturgies, yea, the Liturgies of all the
Greek and Latin Churches and Fathers, which enjoin Adoration toward the Altar
wherever placed.

Obj. Conformists Loose in their Lives.
They that are so ceremonious, are commonly men that have no-Religion in their
Lives, but are all Outsides.

Answ. It Is no Argument, which is fetched from the wickedness of the Person
against the unlawfulness of the Action; for by this way of Reasoning, to
Administer the Holy Sacrament, to give Alms, etc. should be concluded evil
Actions, because wicked men often do them. If the Action in it self be not evil,
it is no matter what the person is; indeed they that do a good Action ill, to
them it becomes Sin; as to give Alms to be seen of Men: so to give God outward
worship is good, but he that gives it Him without inward worship, and
submission of his will to His command, he plays the Hipocrite, and so his
worship becomes sin to him. Our Savior forbids not his Disciples to do that
Righteousness which the Pharisees did, but to do more to exceed it; Nor did he
forbid them to make clean the Outside, buthe forbad them to content themselves
with that, and commands them to make the Inside clean in the first place. Nor
did he forbid men to do the less things of the Law, but commands them to be
more careful of the Greater; not only to Tithemint, but chiefly to Respect
Righteousness and Judgment. These ye ought to have done, and not leave the
other undone.

Besides, the Objection spoken in General, of all that outward Decorum in Gods
worship, is a false Slander; for there are a great number of Holy and Pious
men which serve God entirely both with outward and inward worship; and there
are many notorious Debauched livers that are not for outward worship. Our
Savior bids us Judge a Tree by the fruits; we can look no further than the
outside; If I see a man worship God, with his body, devoutly and reverently, I
shall rather think and believe he worships God with his Soul too, then he that
pretends only to inward worship, and affords me no outward mark or sign of it.
I shall rather judge that to be Gold which Glisters, than that which does not.

FINIS.

