SOME GROUNDS and REASONS FROM THE Law of God, And this NATION, To Manifest the
Unlawfulness of the Practice of those MAGISTRATES, and Others, who Commit Men
to Prison, or Fine them for not Putting Off the Hat, or not Standing Bare
before Them, to Convince them of their Error therein.

And also, To Remove Prejudices, and Stumblingblocks out of the way of the
Honest-Hearted, and to Satisfy All that are Moderate therein.

Cook, Misera servitus est ubi Lex est incognita aut Vagabonda, etc.

It is a miserable Bondage, where the Law is either Uncertain or Unknown, etc.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-Spread-Eagle and Windmill in
Martins l'Grand, 1660.

Some Grounds and Reasons drawn from the Law of God and this Nation, to
manifest the Unlawfulness of the Practice of those Magistrates, and Others; who
Commit men to Prison, or Fine them; for not putting off the Hat, etc.
GReat and many have been the Sufferings of the Innocent in all Ages, who could
not Conform to the Lusts and Wills of Men, but stood Witnesses against them (
on the Lords behalf) for Righteousness Sake, that what is Written might be
fulfilled (in this Age also) viz. That God never left Himself without Witness:
And therefore have they Suffered most through the abuse of the Law, ( for whom
the Law was not made) and that saying has been fulfilled in our days; The
Ignorance (or Malice) of the Judge, has Proved the Calamity of the Innocent,
and the Zeal without Knowledge or Mercy, has let in Iniquity and Oppression
like a Flood.

For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression: Now, if there were any
Law for the putting off the Hat, it ought to appear by the Common Law, or
Statute Law, of England.

If the keeping on the Hat, be an offense against the Common Law, then it must
appear so, either amongst the Records of this Nation, or the Judicial
Determinations and Conclusions of the Chief Courts of Justice, Consistant with
the True Foundation of the Law.

If against the Statute Law, then it must appear so, either amongst the
Parliament Rolls, or the Printed Books proceeding from thence.

But that it is an Offense, either against the Common Law, or Statute Law,
there is not so much as the least tittle of Law (as ever we could here of) to
prove it.

It is said to be done against Good Manners: But Evil Communication, is that
which Corrupts Good Manners; and whatsoever is more than Yea, Yea, and Nay,
Nay, comes of evil, says Christ Jesus the Son of God; and as to Good Manners
which you say it is against, produce your Law for such Good Manners, and let us
See what it Is, and what it Requires.

It is said to be done against the Usage and Custom of England: Which Reason
is not of Force with Wise Men, until it be proved that Custom, because
Custom, is a binding Law; which says Cook, is not; for Evil Customs ought
to be abolished; and that Custom which is to be Reckoned a Law, ought to be as
says Cook, From some Reasonable Cause or Usage.
et excerta Causa rationabili Vsitata.

It is the Usage, and Custom of England, for Men and Women to Salute one
another, and to speak one to another, and to come into Courts, with Cloakes and
Coats, and Gloves and Boots, and yet not an offense to leave them undone, or
to come without any of these coverings; for things which are in a man's power to
give, or not to give, and what he is content not to receive of others (as such
things as these are, take them in the best sense, as they are peculiar to every
man, and at his Choice whether he will give them or not) cannot be made
Criminal, if he do not give them.

And therefore, as The not putting off the Hat, (no more then any other
Garment) is any offense against the Law of this Nation, so neither is it an
Offense against the Law of God, or Right Reason.

Not against the Law of God; for there is neither Precept, or President in the
Scriptures that makes it so, but the contrary; For David who was a King, not
only covered his own Head, but also all the People that were with him covered
their Heads, 2 Samuel 15. 30. And Moses the Judge of all Israel (was so far from
Commanding the head to be uncovered) that he said, uncover not your heads least
ye die, (Lev. 10. 6.) which we Instance, to show that they were not offended at
the people for standing covered before them. So it is manifest, that the
Rulers, and Judges, in these days, that command the contrary, and take Offense
if people be Covered, are led by another Spirit, ^^an those Servants (of God)
were led by, who had learned to be meek, and lowly in heart, as Christ taught
(and still teaches) his Disciples, being the same Yesterday, to Day, and for
Ever: Who also said, (and still says) How can ye Believe, that seek Honor one
of another, (Mark that) and not the Honor that comes from God only; and the
Apostle that abode in his Doctrine said, He that Respects persons commits sin,
2 Jam. 9. And Mordecai (the Servant of God, an Israelite indeed) durst not
(notwithstanding the Kings Command) Bow, and Reverence Haman, though he was a
Chief Prince, Hester 3. 12.

And let it be Considered by all the POWERS of the EARTH, Whether the same God
will not Appear for the Deliverance of the Jewes-inward in these days (in
scorn called Quakers) whose praise is not of men, but of God, as he did for the
Jewes-outward in those days.

Not against Right Reason; for man is either Free, or a Servant by Nature,
according to the Spirit that Rules, and has Command in him.

And though a Man refuse to be uncovered, notwithstanding the Judge or Justice
of Peace, etc. Commands it, yet this does not make it an offense; for the
Judges, and Justices, are only to put the Laws in being in Execution; so that
it is no Contempt to deny to obey their Commands, in a thing, which neither the
Law of God, or Right Reason, or this Nation Requires to be done.

This Act of putting off the Hat, has been in this Nation always taken to be
an Act of Civil Courtesy, which a man might do or not do, to whom he would,
and when he would, and not of Duty; and so the practice of it amongst People of
all Sorts, High and Low, Rich and Poor, and in all Places, as well in the High
Ways as elsewhere does manifest: And it is no other than a mere Voluntary
Complement; the Refusal whereof, was never held An Offense, till of late
Years, and that by some particular Persons.

It Is true, that people for the most part stand bare in all Courts of Justice
in this Nation; but this is more than is Required by any Law, either of God or
Man; for that which is required to be done to Magistrates, is Honor and
Obedience; which is sufficiently demonstrated by a Submission to all lawful
Commands, and not by any Complement, or Act of Courtesy; neither by putting
off the Hat, is true obedience, love or hatred known; but rather generally
known to give nourishment to dissimulation and hypocricy.

Besides, to Command any Person to put off his Hat (especially for a Magistrate
to do it himself) is absurd; for that is to use it contrary to the end, for
which it was made; which is to cover the Head, and to keep it from Cold and
Rain, whereby sickness may be prevented; and not to keep it in the hand; and a
Wise Man begins from the End of a Thing, and weighes every Thing as it is
there; as says Cook, to bring Errors to their First, is to see their Last,
etc.

Again, whether the Condition or health of a Man's Nature will give him leave to
stand bare or not, the Magistrate is not a Competent Judge; but the party
himself: And therefore its against Reason that it should be in the Magistrates
Power, to Command the Hat to be put off by Him, whose Nature cannot bear it;
and also it is the same, as to Command Him to put off any of his other
Garments; and it also destroys propriety, which a great Part of the Law is
made to preserve, with Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; which is
Destroyed and vacated, if any Judge or Justice may at his pleasure Command our
Hats from us, or take them off our Heads without our Consent, either
immediately, or by our Representatives.

From all which it is clear, that those Magistrates that Fine and Imprison
Innocent Men (who for Conscience sake cannot bow to their Wills by putting off
the Hat) they are neither Warranted by the Law of God, Right Reason, or of this
Nation; but on the contrary such Actings are merely Arbitrary, against Reason,
and very Absurd; and is an Invasion upon the Liberties of the Freemen of
England, which the Laws aforesaid were made to preserve.

And it is all one to Command our Money-out of our Purses, as our Hats off our
Heads, Whereby several have had their Hats taken away and never restored.
without our Consent, as aforesaid: And therefore let all (in the Fear of God)
consider what they do when they Abuse and Wrong the Innocent; for that, which
neither Religion, nor Law requires, least the Lord God reckon that which is
done unto them (in this Case) as done unto Him; and he will not hold them
Guiltless, who thus Offend the Innocent, neither will he acquit them in the
Day, when he shall make Inquisition for the sufferings of his Chosen; but shall
give them their Portion with the Rebellious, who say in their hearts, either
there is no God, or else we will not have this Man to Rule over us; and so cast
his Law behind their backs, and break his Bands asunder: but let not such
deceive themselves, God will not be mocked;

For as they measure unto others, even so shall it be measured to them again.

But our desire is, that all might be saved and come to the knowledge of the
Truth, through believing in the Light, and Gift of God; that gives to every Man
the Knowledge of His Words and Ways; that so he might be led out of the
Fashions and Customs of the World, and Receive an Inheritance amongst them that
are Sanctified with all the Children of Light.

The Scripture speaks of double Honor, Which is due to Them that RULE WELL; Is
that double Honor to put off two Hats, or to make two Legs? or to stand twice
as long Bare to such a One, as to him who deserves single Honor? or is it not
Highly to Esteem him, and Love him, and this to be Demonstrated by a dilligent
Readyness, and Faithfulness to Serve him, and Obey his Just Commands?

Published by us (not to upbraid any, but to reclaim them that are out of the
Way) who suffer Imprisonment for the Testimony of a Good Conscience, because we
cannot Sin against God, in respecting Men's Persons.

John Pennyman. Thomas Coveney. Humphrey Woolrich:

London, this 3d of the 10th month, 1660.

ANd herein do we testify our Subjection and Readiness, to Obey Magistrates
and Rulers, in all their Just Commands; and that not for Wrath, but for
Conscience sake (though We meet with Sufferings and Imprisonments, because we
cannot Respect Their Persons, and give Them Flattering Titles, least for so
doing, our Maker should take us away, Job. 32. 21, 22.) And therefore, Do we
Appear and Yield Obedience, when they Justly Require Us; though others, who are
Remiss, and Negligent therein, go Free; and hereby this Scripture is
fulfilled, He that departs from Iniquity makes himself a Prey.



FINIS.

