THREE LETTERS Tending to demostrate how the Security of this Nation Against al
Future Persecution FOR Religion, Lys in the Abolishment of the Present Penal
Laws and Tests, and in the Establishment of A NEW LAW For Universal Liberty of
Conscience:

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold, by Andrew Soul, at the Three Keys, in
Nags-Head-Court, in Grace Church Street, over against the Conduit, 1688.

Three LETTERS, etc.
The First Letter.
SIR,
UPon the receipt of your last Letter, I was, at first, a little troubled to
perceiv the censorious Judgment you pass upon my Politics, in reference to the
grand business of Liberty of Conscience. But after a little consideration I
comforted my self. For I not only remembered your constant favorable regard
toward those of different Persuasions from yours, but I observed also, even in
that very Letter, that you agree with me in this Fundamental Principle, That no
Man ought to be Persecuted for Matters of mere Religion. And this agreement in
so great a Principle made me hope that, notwithstanding our present Difference,
it would be no hard matter for you and me to agree in our particular
Conclusions, and consequently in our Conduct. To procure that Agreement there
is nothing requisite but Honesty and Sense. Let us but examine thoroughly whither
that Principle leads, and let us be true to the result of our own Examinations,
and the Work will be don.

But perhaps so strict a subjection as this to the consequences of that
Principle, however just and reasonable in it self, may seem unto you a little
unseasonable in this Conjuncture* Nay, I must acknowledge to you* that I my self
also am not so much Master of my Passions, as to let Reason have always that
absolute Dominion that belongs to it. The fear of being deceived, by a Party of
Men who plead for Liberty, makes me sometimes doubtful in determining upon the
practice of what I acknowledge to be a Duty. I am convinced that the Interest Of
this Nation, as well as the Laws of Christianity, requires an Absolute,
Universal, Equal, and Inviolable Liberty of Conscience. Nothing that dos not
tend to the Ruin of the Government, or to the Prejudice of the People, which is
but one and the same thing, should be made the occasion of laying any Restraint
upon any Man. But where I see ground to fear that the granting of this Liberty
should serve only to put a Power into their Hands that now demand it, whereby
they may be able hereafter to take it away from others, truly in that case I am
apt to hesitate upon the Point; or to say better, I confess that I hesitate not
at al. For I would by no means that a specious hope of Christian Liberty should
betray the Nation into a New Unchristian Slavery.

Thus far I am sure I agree with you. We would have Liberty with Security of
its continuance: not otherwise. Now I entreat you to examine whether or no, in
the rest, you agree with me. I ask then, If so be it can be demonstrated that
the Penal Laws, and Tests too, may be taken away without exposing the Nation to
any hazard of Persecution by the Roman Catholics; Nay, if a far better Security
may be provided against that Persecution than those present Laws and Tests do
afford us; will it not be an Act of Equity and Wisdom, as well as Christianity,
in that case, to abolish them? This Security being supposed, nothing can hinder
us from complying with that Design, but such Considerations as arise from the
Covetousness and Ambition of engrossing al Honorable and Profitable Employments
unto our selves, and those of our own Persuasion. But will any Considerations of
that Nature, when they interfere with a Public Interest and an avowed Duty, be
justifiable, or even excusable, either before God or Man? I cannot doubt but
your determination in that Point will be the same with mine. Those
Considerations are too sordid to be of any weight with an Honest Mind.

Your Objection, I know, in reading these Questions, will arise from a
Diffidence that any new Security of this nature, either will or can be granted
us. There indeed perhaps you and I may differ in our opinions. But however, to
com as near as we can, I will at present suspend my own Hopes, and concurring
with your Doubts, consider only what is our Duty, and the Duty of al honest
Men, even in this supposed doubtful Conjuncture.

An Example in the like case, not many years ago, when the Nation was in as
great a ferment as it is now, may direct us. Those that supposed there could be
no other real Security, against the fears that possessed them, than that Odious
Bil of Exclusion which they promoted in Parliament, professed nevertheless
their constant willingness to listen unto any Expedients that should be offered
for that purpose. If they did not then comply with any of those Expedients, it
was the heat of Faction that hindered them; and they have since on al occasions
acknowledged their Error. Let us therefore profit by their Example. Let us
imitate them in that reasonable disposition which they professed, and be careful
to avoid those heats which caused their actual miscarriage.

In a word, let us, at least, put the Thing to a Trial. Let it be referred to
the Wisdom of a Parliament to weigh the Expedients that may be invented or
offered for our Security. Let Moderate Men be chosen into that Parliament; and
not such as ar engaged, by along habit of Persecuting, to keep up the present
Penal Laws, as Tools already fitted for their hands. Til we be called to that
Election-Work, let us each of us endeavor to dispose our Selves, dispose One
Another, and as occasion offers dispose our Friends, to that Spirit of Wisdom
and Moderation which is now so necessary. And til this Business have been
weighed in Parliament, let us a little suspend our Judgment upon it, and have
always a great care that we obstruct not the Good we desire by heighting any
doubtful Jealousys to an irreconcilable Extremity.

These ar the Rules of my Politics, which I hope you will now look upon a little
more favorably then you seemed to do in your last Letter. At present I will
trouble you no further. But if what I have now said prove acceptable, I shall be
very ready, upon your desire, to explain further my inmost thoughts upon any
the nicest Circumstances of this great Affair.

I am etc:
The Second LETTER.
SIR,
I Am heartily glad that my last Letter has given you any measure of
Satisfaction. But I perceiv by your new Quaerys, that I have engaged my self,
in the close of that Letter, to a greater Task than I was aware of. It is not
enough to have satisfied you so far as I have gone, but I must either continu to
answer your new Difficultys, or else join with you in owning them to be
unanswerable. I must either show you the very Expedients that may be contrived
for securing us against any future Persecution by the Roman Catholics, or else
acknowledge that no such thing either can or will be don. That is a little hard.
The thing may be felzable, tho I should not be able to demonstrate it. Others
may know more than I can. Nay, indeed the truth is that I know so little, and
others have already said so much upon this Subject, that, as I cannot pretend
to make any new Discoverys in it, so neither am I willing to repeat just the
same things that you have read els-where: And between those two Difficulties I
am something straightened in complying with what you desire. Nevertheless since I
am engaged, I will rather hazard to repeat what may have been hinted at already
by others, than refuse to explain unto you my own Conceptions.

The Security we demand must be considered either as it lys naturally in the
thing it self; I mean in the Repeal of al Old Penal Laws and Tests, and in the
Sanction of a New Great Charter for Liberty of Conscience; or else as it may be
fortified by such Expedients as the Wisdom of a Parliament may think sit to
propound, and His Majestys Goodness may vouchsafe to grant.

But this last Consideration belongs not to my Province. It becoms not private
Persons to anticipate. Parliamentary Deliberations, much less to prescribe
Rules unto His Majestys Conduct. It suffices me, in that respect, to know that
His Majesty has been pleased, by often reiterated Promises, to assure us that
he will concur with his Parliament, in any thing that may be reasonably offered
for the Establishment of such a Law of Christian Liberty as may never be
broken. I am not curious to pry further into those matters, until His Majesty
shall think fit in his Wisdom to disclose unto the Nation the Treasures of his
Goodness. And to speak freely to you, as a Friend, I am yet the less curious
about it at this time, nor any ways impatient to know more, until a Parliament
may be ready to deliberate thereupon; because I know already, that there are a
sort of Men in the Nation who watch upon every occasion, with all the Arts that
Malice can invent, to blast any thing that shall be offered for the advancement
of this Christian Design. Leaving therefore the consideration of this
Accessional Security that we look for, I will now apply my self to consider
only what prospect of Security the thing it self dos in its own Nature afford
us.

When we discourse about this Security, I suppose we both of us understand it
only with relation to the hazard that may arise from taking away the Tests.
For as to the Penal Laws, singly considered, I think al Men that have Souls
large enough (as I am sure you have) to prefer the general Good of their
Country before the narrow Advantages of a Party, will agree that it is no less
the Interest of this Nation to abolish them, than the Duty of al Mankind to
forbear Persecution.

There is no hazard in the abolishment of those Penal Laws. Now what the hazard
may be in abolishing the Tests, will be best perceived by considering the effect
of their imposition. The effect, in which the Protestant Interest consists, is
that the Roman Catholics ar thereby excluded from al Places of Public Trust,
either Civil or Military. This, I should have said, is the Intent of them. But
how far the real Effect falls short of that Intent, and how far it must needs
fall short thereof in the Reign of a Catholic Prince, is too evident to need any
demonstration. Nevertheless, supposing that the Roman Catholics were indeed
thereby debard from entering into any Public Employments, What is the advantage
that Protestants, or that the Nation in general, pretend to receiv by their
Exclusion? I know you will tell me that we have thereby our Security against that
Principle of Persecution which we think inseparably joined to their Religion.
They will not be able to impose their Religion upon us, nor persecute us for not
receiving it. That is the true End, and we will suppose it to be real Effect, of
the Tests.

You do not pretend sure that the Exclusion of the Roman Catholics from such
Employments is any Security to our Civil Rights, or to the Fundamental
Constitution of our Government. They are English Men as well as we. The Civil
Rights of English Men ought to be no less dear to them than to us. And if any
malicious Surmizer should presume to imagine that His Majesty had a design to
raise his own Prerogative upon the ruin of the Peoples Libertys, we have reason
to believ, by many past instances, that Men of another Religion, much more
numerous and powerful than the Roman Catholics, would be found no less ready
Instruments, but far more proper ones, for the effecting of that work. The best
defense that I know against those imaginary fears, and the most becoming
dutiful Subjects, is to comply cheerfully with his Majesty in all things
reasonable; that so an unreasonable Refusal may not force him upon new Methods,
and make us feel in the end what we are perhaps too slow to conceiv, that Omnia
dat qui justa negat.

But I return to the consideration of our being secured against Persecution by
the Exclusion of the Roman Catholics from Public Employments. In very good
time, that the Church of England* now looks for such a Security! I am sure
others have not been secured against it, by the public administration of Her
Members. However, let us consider how it is that the Tests secure us, or how it
is that they hinder them from entering into those Employments. It is not as a
Wall or Barricado that confines them to a certain Enclosure, out of which they
cannot move; nor is it as a Charm or Spel that, by any Magic Virtue, hinders
them from acting. It is only as a Law, which, by the penalty annexed to it,
aws their Minds, and makes them fearful to transgress it. They dar not enter
into Public Offices, lest they should be punished for the Breach of that Law
which forbids them to do it. But, pray, Who is it that should punish them for
that Offense? They know very well that in this Reign they are in no danger. That
Law is now dispensed with. The only Bridle therefore that restrains them from
transgressing it, is evidently the fear of its being Revived in the Reign for
the next Successor; because it is a Law whose Penalty they will be always liable
unto, whenever the Government shall think fit to exact it.

Now if this be the only Ground of their Exclusion from Public Offices, and
consequenly of our pretended Security; I say if it be only the Force of a Law
that works that effect; pray let us consider if another Law might not be
contrived, to secure us much more effectually against Persecution, that this
Exclusion of them either dos or can do.

Let us therefore have a Law enacted, which, in Abolishing al those Penal Ones,
and all the Tests too that are now complained of, shall Establish a Universal and
Equal Liberty of Conscience, as a Magna Charta of Religion, with all the
engaging Circumstances that the Wit of Man can invent to make it inviolable.
Let that Liberty be declared to be the Natural Right of Al Men, and any
violation thereof be therefore accounted Criminal. Let not only every Actual
Infringment of that Law, but every Motion, Proposition, or Contrivance, expressed
either in Word or Deed, tending any way to the invalidating of it, be esteemed
and declared an Undermining of the Fundamental Constitution of our Government,
and accordingly to be punishable with the utmost Severitys, even as Felony or
Treason. Let the Extent of this Law reach al Conditions and al Degrees of Men,
Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military, from the highest Lord to the meanest
Beggar. Let not future Parliaments themselves be exempted from the danger of
infringing it; but let any Proposition tending thereunto, tho even in either
House of Parliament, be not only reputed a Transgression thereof, but expressly
declared to be the highest and worst of al Transgressions; and let no
Parliamentary, or other Privilege whatsoever extempt any such Offender from the
severest Punishment, no more than they can do it now from that of Treason. And
after all this, and what more the Wisest Heads may invent, let The King himself
be humbly beseeched to suffer in it a Clause, by which, reserving al other
Rights of his Prerogative inviolated, he may solemnly renounce the only Right
of Dispensing with this Law, or of Pardoning any Transgressor of it in any case
whatsoever.

Supposing now that such a Law as this should be Enacted, I beseech you to
consider if it do not answer the end of securing us against Persecution,
infinitely better than the present Tests that exclude the Roman Catholics from
Public Employments. It will secure, in the first place, all the Dissenting
Protestants from the present Penal Laws, which the Tests do not: And it will
indeed secure al Partys against al Persecution, in every respect far better
than they do. It will do it in a direct manner: Whereas they work only by a weak
and strained Consequence. It will do it upon the solid grounds of Religion,
Truth and Equity: Whereas they are built only upon precarious, partial and
unjust Principles. It will be declared to be in its own Nature Indispensable:
Whereas they are every day dispensed with. It will be Established by a more
solemn Sanction: And it will be enforced by more awful and terifying Penaltys.

These Advantages, as you see, do al appear in the simplest prospect that we
can take of the thing it self, in its own Nature; in the mere Abolishment, I
mean, of the Laws of Persecution, and the Establishment of a Law of Liberty;
without the help of any further Expedients. That is the only thing that I
proposed to my self to explain. And I cannot but now hope that even this
explanation, how imperfect soever it be, will convince you that it is not so
dangerous a Work to abolish the Tests, nor so difficult to establish a lasting
Security against Persecution, when those Tests shall be Abolished, as some People
industriously endeavor to persuade us. But I perceiv that I have been already
too tedious upon this Argument. Wherefore without further Application or
Improvement thereof, I now refer what I have said to your Examination, and
submit to your Judgment, resting always etc.

The Third LETTER.
SIR,
SInce I have had the good fortune to please you the second time, I am resolved
to try it a third. I have endeavored, as you have seen, to make it appear that
it is not impossible to contrive a more Equitable and Vnexceptionable Law than
the Tests, which will secure us also infinitely better than they do, against the
danger of being Persecuted by the Roman Catholics. Now you answer me that this
Law, tho it should be consented to, would be less Security to us against the
Roman Catholics than the Tests: because by it they would be admitted into the
Legislative, as well as Executive, parts of our Government; whereas by the other
they are wholly excluded from both. And an Exclusion, say you, especially from
the Legislative Power, is a far better Security than any Regulation whatsoever
that can be made about their conduct in it: because, when once admitted into
that capacity, there will be still reason to apprehend lest they should break
through the Rules prescribed for their Conduct, and change even the Laws
themselves at their pleasure.

This is indeed very specious. But I entreat you to consider, in the first
place, That the Exclusion we talk of by the Tests is only Imaginary, not Real.
We please our selves with a Notion, while we are frustrated of the Thing. A
Dispensation dissipates all that Bulwark into Dust and Air: While on the
contrary the Regulation I have propounded is to be declared and made absolutely
Indispensable. Which is no inconsiderable advantage on the side that I incline
to.

But this is not al. Your Objection prompts me to a further Defense of my
Proposition. Nothing will serve your turn but an Absolute Exclusion of those
that may have a mind to hurt us, from al manner of share, either Legislative
or Executive, in our Government. Be it so. I am very well pleased to join Issu
with you upon that Point.

The Hurt we fear, and desire to fence against, is Persecution. Let us
therefore, in God's name, exclude al Persecuting Papists, and Protestants too,
from those Employments. But let al those that have a Spirit of Moderation and
Charity, joined with other necessary Qualifications, be promiscuously admitted
into them, whatsoever be their profession of Religion. It is not the Notion of
Transubstantiation that hurts us. Why should we therefore make that the ground
of an Exclusion? Let us go to the true Ground of the Matter, and do our Work at
once, effectually.

In a Word: Let this Act it self, that we are projecting, be the Fundamental
Test for the Admission of al Persons into al manner of Public Employments, or
for their Exclusion from them. Let every Member of both Houses of Parliament,
before they are admitted to sit there, be obliged to subscribe a Declaration,
importing That they solemnly profess, and, in the presence of God, sincerely
acknowledge the natural Equity of this Great Law; and that they in like manner
promis never to infringe it, nor either directly or indirectly to promote any
design of undermining or invalidating it in any manner whatsoever. Let al those
that shall presume to sit in either House, without having first subscribed that
Declaration, be liable to the severest Penaltys that shall be annexed to the
foresaid Law. And let al future Acts (if any such there should be) passed by a
Parliament not so qualified as by this Law shall be required, be declared
Illegal and Null. Nay further, if it may be thought any strengthening to our
Security, let also Al other Public Officers, as well as the Members of
Parliament, be obliged, upon their entrance into those Offices, to subscribe
the same solemn Declaration, upon the hazard of the same Penalties, and of the
Illegality and Nullity of al their Proceedings. Let all that Govern, or Teach,
or any way Officiate in Ecclesiastical Affairs, either in Church or
Conventicle; Al Judges, Justices, Juries, Magistrates, Military Commanders both
by Sea and Land, with all the Inferior and Subordinate Officers depending upon
any of them, from the highest to the lowest, be Al subject to the same Rule.

This is the Test against Persecution that we have been long since advised to,
by One of the earliest and strongest Writers upon this Subject; but which the
Nation seems not yet to have enough reflected upon. If this be not judged a
sufficient security, I wish those that perceiv the defects of it would propound
unto us any thing better. I shall be always for choosing the best. But however,
in the mean while, I think al Men must agree that, if it be indeed Persecution
that we desire to fence against, this is infinitely a better security in that
respect than the present Penal Laws and Tests ar. And therefore, provided this
may be granted, I cannot but yet hope that there will appear to be among us Men
Wise enough, and Honest enough, and those too, Numerous enough, to sway the
Nation to consent to their abolishing.

I have said already that, upon the supposition of this Security there can be
nothing but private Ambition or Avarice capable to raise an opposition against
this generous Design of Universal Liberly. But surely no private Interest will
be capable to bear up long against the general Interest of the Nation. Now it
has been often asserted by many, and demonstrated with great evidence, that
those whose Interest it is to desire Liberty ar far more numerous than those
that oppose it. But if in that there should at present be any mistake, I am
sure, when once this Liberty shall be established, it will then be visibly and
indisputably the Interest of al Partys to maintain it. All the several Interests
of the Nation will be then drawn up into one Circle, and the Extremitys will
touch each other. The Church of England and Protestant Dissenters, how opposite
soever in other respects, will thereby become inseparably cimented into one Common
Cause. And, tho we should suspect the Roman Catholics to have contrary
inclinations, yet the strength of the others Union will oblige them, for their
own Safety, to concur in promoting the general Good.

Yet for all this, I will not stick to acknowledge that such a suspicion of an
inclination to Persecute, in any that may be uppermost, is not altogether
unreasonable. The Examples of Persecutions raised at one time or other, by all
Partys that have had the power to do it, authorize those Fears. But for that
very reason, I say, that this is the fittest time that ever we can expect, to
settle this Liberty in England: because the Power is now in the Hands of the
weakest Party, which is therefore least able to strain it. And if once that
Settlement be made, the united Interest of al Partys in the Advantages it
brings along with it, will in human appearance secure it against the possibility
of ever being shaken hereafter.

These Considerations, you see, afford a second Prospect of our Security in the
establishment of a Law of Liberty; in that it will be the Interest of al Partys
to maintain it: And they afford also an Incitement to set about that Work;
because of the seasonableness of the opportunity: Which things deserv
exceedingly to be attended unto. But after so palpable a demonstration, as I
think I have given, of that Security, in the frame of the Law it self, I have
no mind now to intertain you with any thing that may appear more speculative,
tho in effect it be no less solid.

My meaning in this is, that I have shown only the Possibility of this
Security. But whether or no it will be just granted in the manner that I conceiv
it, is what I cannot answer for. I rather hope it will be made much better. But
however, after this plain appearance of the possibility of the thing, I think I
may resume what I said in my first Letter, as an Advice of some weight; That, in
this Conjuncture, it is both the Duty and the Interest of the Nation to put
this business to a Trial, in a Grave and Moderate Parliament; and not by any
means to make that impossible, by Faction, Jealousy, or Despair, which seems
easily obtainable by a prudent Conduct.

Let this be our constant Aim, to have Liberty settled by a Law. That is the
Mark that* I shoot at* And I would be very loath that other Peoples Errors, or
Humors, should make me miss it. We ought Al to be singly* intent upon our own
Duty; and if we keep so, we cannot fail to know it. Which way soever we turn
our Reflections, in these matters of Politics, they will always bring us back to
the same Center. The General Good is the Rule and Touchstone, by which al must
be tried and measured. That General Good can never be attended unto, much less
procured, without the General Satisfaction of al Partys; Nor that Satisfaction
without this Equal and General Liberty which I have been pleading for.

Now therefore that every one may the more easily discern their own Duty, while
we are in this evident possibility of obtaining such an equal and secure
Liberty; I would have the Church of England, in the first place, Consider with
how much Justice the Odium of a Self-interessed and sordid Partiality, will be
cast upon Her by all Men, in case She still continu to obstruct it. Let Her
consider that, and be Ashamed. In the next place, If the Protestant Dissenters
should suffer themselves to be fooled out of this Liberty, by the cunning of
their Old Adversarys; I would have them consider how obnoxious they yet ly,
even at this very hour, to the Redoubled Lashes of the same Laws under which
they have so long groaned. Let Them consider that, and Tremble. And if the
Roman Catholics should ever attempt to overstrain the Advantages they may
receiv by this Liberty, when it shall be established; I would have them Consider
that in gaping for the Shadow, they will be in danger to lose the Substance. Let
Them consider that, and be Wise. I have now don. Lonely again beg of you to
pardon the tediousness of al these Considerations, and to believ me to be most
sincerely and affectionately

Yours, etc.

FINIS.

