THE Quakers Unmasked; Their Double-dealing and False-heartedness Discovered;
BY Collections taken out of their own Writings, which were Communicated to G.
Fox, G. Whitehead, and others of their Preachers and Leaders.

WHEREIN May be seen some of their Contradictions, Confusions, and Temporizing:
With some Observations thereupon by another Hand.

ALSO, One of the Forms of their Oaths, used amongst themselves, with their
Definition of an Oath: Likewise a Letter and Paper formerly sent to the
abovesaid G. F.

Whereunto are annexed some Remarks, etc. Also what an Oath is. In a Letter to
E. S. Esquire LICENSED, June 19. 1691

The Leaders the Leaders of this People have caused them to Err, because they
received not the Truth in the Love of it; Therefore are they given up to Strong
Delusions, to believe (and to tell) Lies.

The Day is come, and now is, that the Hidden Things of Esau 's Nature, are to
be, and must be brought to Light.

O thou Sword of the LORD, How long will it be ever thou be quiet? Put up thy
self into thy Scabbard, rest and be still. How can it be quiet, seeing the LORD
has given it a Charge?

LONDON, Printed for J. Gwillim over against the Great James in
Bishops-gate-street, and R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1691.

The Author of the following Collections to the READER.
IT can hardly be credited by any, the care and fear I have had concerning the
said Collections, lest they should have become public in the last two Reigns,
which I would not they should for the Treasures of this World. This is a
faithful and true saying, whether it can be believed or no.

But now Liberty of Conscience being established by Law, I gave Ten of 'em, [i.
e. The Quakers Unmasked,] to be shown or sold to any sober Person; unto which
some of the Leaders of that People have lately put forth an Answer; and finding
they are so far from acknowledging any thing to be amiss in their said
Writings, that they endeavor either to cover, excuse, or justify them, which
has necessitated me to cause them to be reprinted in Quarto, that whoever have
seen their Answer, may, if they please, compare it with this.

And notwithstanding I sent them the said Book privately in writing, in the
year 77. (hoping thereby to have prevented their farther exposing others;) yet,
about a year after, I met with a Book of theirs, entitled, The Way cast up,
etc. and therein several passages against the Presbyterians, accusing them of
Rebellions, Seditions, and Fighting Principles. p. 23, 52, 53, 54. And in the
year 81. they put forth another Book, calling it, Peaceable Advice to the
Presbyterians, etc. and therein, p. 1. accused them again with the same
Principles; which being Printed at such a juncture, when the Popish Plot was
endeavored to be stifled, and turned upon the Protestants, caused a great
grief not only to my self, but to many others; some of whom writ to the
Quaker's Bookseller, desiring they might be stopped considering the season, etc.
But they not prevailing in, their Request, I bought many of 'em, and went to
several of their Meetings, where I spoke these Words, viz. I met with one of
your Books against the Presbyterians, and as a Witness against that
Hypocritical, Deceitful, Daubing, Temporizing Spirit that writ it, and the
Publishers of it, I am made to tear it in pieces before you. Which having done,
they threatened to have me called in Question for it, etc. I say, considering
these things, and that what I had writ to them in private did not hinder them
from this continued exclaiming against others about these matters. It was
thought meet to have 66 of The Quakers Unmasked, privately printed in Folio;
which were chiefly intended to be given to some of the said People, so that it
is plain my purpose and intention therein was only to prevent, if possible,
their doing any more such things for the future; but not in the least to expose
them to the then Governors, who I feared would have been but too severe, and
too much exasperated against them for it.

And though I have been made thus to advise and caution them from their running
into these and many other Evils, (which they have run themselves into:) Yet
alas! they have slighted, scorned, and rejected every thing I proposed, that
might any way have conduced to their present Happiness, and everlasting Good;
which being my chiefest end, aim, and endeavor; whether they will yet hear, or
forbear, I am clear, and have that Reward with, and in me, which no Man non Men
can give, or take from me.

J. P.

This following was writ by the Person that caused the 66 Books aforesaid, in
Folio, to be printed.
The Publisher to the truly Christian Reader.
THE following Tract Providentially coming to my Hand, and being desired to
Read and Consider it, I spent some Hours therein, to my no small Consternation,
upon a double account. First, That the Land of my Nativity was not long ere
this, an Aceldama, being so generally Apostatized from the Truth, and become a
second Sodom. Secondly, To consider, That the Principal and Forwardest LEADERS
of the People, who (while Faithful) were begirt with the Power and Strength of
the Almighty GOD of Jacob, and brought to their PISGAH-SIGHT, should turn again
to their Onions and Garlic, throwing by the ROYAL LAW of LIBERTY, and
Reespouse Egyptian Bondage.

What shall we say to these things! Oh that the Souls of all that are yet
Faithful, and have according to their measure, been given up to the Guidance of
the Spirit, would Cry mightily unto the GOD of their Salvation; That every one
concerned in the following HURRICANE, (which they have been formerly warned
off, in Love and Meekness, about four years and half since,) may remember from
whence they are Fallen, repent and do their First Works, (which is the
principal End of the Printing hereof,) that so the Still Voice, may be Restored
in all our Habitations, That all Weapons of War may be turned into Plow-shares
and Pruning Hooks, and every One confess, The LORD is GOD, who only must and
will be Exalted. Amen, amen, says the Soul of thy Friend,

J. G.
Note. Where any Words are added that were not in the Manuscript, or in that
Printed, they are put in Italick between these Marks, []. excepting 5 short
Sentences in Black Letter, p. 3, 4, 5, which were left out for brevity but are
now put in only to show they do not in the least vary the sense, as the Quakers
allege in their Answer, no more than any other passage they have mentioned
therein does.



To the Reader. The three following Letters were writ to Mr. J. O. The first
was Printed the other not.
First Letter to Mr. J. O. sent with the following Book then not printed.
I Having been ill and weak in Body near upon a Month; it put me upon a deep
search and examination, concerning the Cause thereof; and finding my self clear
in HIS sight who justifies in secret, I matter not who condemns: And now being
a little raised up, and restored for a season from the Grave, I have further
considered what my Work and Service is in my Generation; and do find a
necessity laid upon me to be Instrumental for the discovering, unmasking, and
manifesting your Preachers and Leaders, who have long exercised Tyranny and
Cruelty over the Souls of the Righteous, and who (by their Threats and
Flatteries) have caused many innocent Men and Women to bend and bow under them,
contrary to their own Consciences; for which they must certainly give an
account; and so must you that are the Upholders of them.

The Book herewith sent, I desire may be showed to the Persons to whom it is
directed; it will concern you to consult and consider how the Truth (which you
have so long talked of in Words) may be Cleared, and the Hypocrite and Deceiver
made to bear his own Burden, of which if I may be assured, my End in sending it
will be fully answered, and it will be a sufficient Recompense for all the Care
and Pains I have taken therein, and shall endeavor to prevent and stop its
farther Publication. But if in the Pride of your Hearts, you shall kick and
spurn against it, reject and despise my Counsel herein given you; then know
that your Iniquities will be upon your own Heads, when I shall be clear in my
Conscience concerning you.

I am a Lover of TRUTH and RIGHTEOUSNESS, In whomsoever: But an utter Enemy to
Deceit and Wickedness, In whomsoever:
I got one to Copy out the Book fair over, but am not so well to see it
carefully Examined; therefore if you find any mistake in the Quotations, let me
know it in two or three Weeks time, and it shall be rectisied before it go
farther.

10. Oct. 1677. J. P.

Second Letter to Mr. O.
IT IS now near 6 Weeks since I sent you the Quakers Unmasked, etc. which I
desired might be imparted to G.F. G.W. etc. from whom (or some of you) I
expected an Answer; but not hearing from any of you concerning it, I take it
for granted you are satisfied I have not wronged you in the Quotations, and
therefore it may be returned by this Bearer.

20. Nov. 77. J. P.

But instead of returning the said Book, as I desired, he sent me part of a
Letter writ to him by G. W. which occasioned me to write this following Answer.
Third Letter to Mr. O.
I Perceive by a Letter directed to you, there is an Answer to the Book I sent
you; but it seems I must not see it before it is Printed, as you have mine;
neither may I see the Falsehood, which in diverse particulars, as to matter of
Fact, (they say) I am guilty of, that if any such (...) be, it might be
amended; but they act herein more like Politicians, than either Miniters of
Christ, or just Men; and deal by me in this, much as you did with J. Whitehouse
against whom your Meeting drew up a Charge, yet would not give him a Copy
thereof; but when it came to be your own Case, that some of your Friends were
accused for Miscariages, then you could say, It was below the Justice of all
Nations not to give a Copy of the Charge. Thus you can say, and unsay, do and
not do, as suits best (not with Truth, but) with your own Self Ends and
Interests. If Truth and Plain-heartedness were with you, why should not I see
your Answer, [before publication] as well as you see my Book? But Guilt and
Deceit makes shy. Call a Council of your wisest Men, to consult what you had
best to do in this matter, in which your chiefest Preachers are greatly guilty
of abominable Wickedness in the sight of GOD and just Men: And if a necessity
be upon me [as now it is] to publish mine, (if you will not do the thing that
is right to prevent it,) to bring out yours; then say the wise are taken in
their own Craftiness, [which is now fulfilled].

I cannot but wonder at their saying, that it is a violation of the Act of
Indemnity what I have done in this business, when they (as well as my self)
know that all things of that Nature are thereby pardoned, as to Men: But their
transgression is of a deeper dye, than the breach of Man's Law only; for they
have pretended to be Ministers and Messengers of the most High GOD, and what
they writ was by His Authority, when really and truly it was but the
Imaginations and Inventions of their own deceived Hearts; to manifest which,
and to undeceive the Minds of the Simple, who are beguiled (as my self once
was) by their specious and high Pretenses, I have taken the pains to write out
some of their Messages, which do apparently show they are but pretenders only;
and have made use of the Name of the LORD to cover and carry on their own
designs; and when it suits not with their Interests, then would they have such
Messages hid, and not brought to light.

Are these the Ambassadors of the most High, who for any worldly ends, or
carnal considerations, would have His Commands and Requirings stifled, which
they said they gave forth in His Name? Surely their Hypocrisy and Deceit
appears, and will yet appear more and more.

Behold, you great Goliahs! your strength is in an Arm of Flesh, but mine is
only in the Living GOD, before whom all your deceitful Covers are manifest,
which will stand you in little stead in the Day of Distress, that is coming
upon you; for He will certainly plead with you for all your Abominations: You
are full of designs to keep up your Esteem amonst the People; but the LORD (by
whose Power I am raised up against you) will bring you low, and utter disgrace
will come upon you, because you have not sought His Glory so much as your own;
and if thou continues and joins with them in their Sins, thou must not expect
to escape their Judgments.

It is certainly so, that I have been your truest Friend, (though accounted
your Enemy,) and have in all Faithfulness discharged my Conscience toward you;
and what I am to do farther in this matter, it concerns me diligently to wait
upon HIM who gives Wisdom to the Simple, to confound the Wisdom of the Wise;
and I am assured that Simplicity and Innocence will stand, when all the cunning
Contrivances of Men shall fall. I am

The Friend in Truth, without Flattery, J. P.
Dec. 19. 77. I desire G. F. G. Whitehead may see this, or any you see meet.



The PREFACE
WHen I have considered how the Quakers, ( i.e. G.F. G. Whitehead, and the rest
of that Temporizing, Imperious, Lording Party,) have Writ and Printed against
the Presbyterians, Independents, and others for being Engaged in the late Wars,
and what opprobrious, villifying, and reproachful Terms they have given them
for the same, it has exceedingly amazed and astonished me, that they who were
so Great Justifiers and Encouragers, not only of what had been done in the late
Wars, but also did incite and encourage those that were therein engaged, not to
leave off until they had set up their STANDARD at the Gates of Rome; as may be
seen in their own Writings here following: And yet for them to upbraid others
with that which themselves for many years were so deeply concerned and engaged
in, is such a piece of Wickedness as can hardly be paralleled by any sort of
People professing Christianity.

This, this their Baseness, I have in secret acquainted them withal, but no Ear
or Heed would they give to what I said, but still went on in their accustomed
manner to Defame such as had not been more engaged, if so much as themselves,
in the late Wars; yea, and that in the most revengeful and highest aggravating
Terms, that 'twas possible for their Penn to express; witness those Words to
the Nonconforming Ministers, in Answer to Mr. Faldo (viz.) But why, poor
Nonconformists, after all their Preached up Battles, Spoils, Plunders,
Sacrileges, Decimations, etc. Again, They are true Gospel Ministers, whose
Gospel is Peace on Earth, and Good Will toward Men, and not Garments rolled in
the Blood of Kings and Princes, Rulers and People: No Worldly Armies, Battles,
Victories, Trophies, Spoils, Sequestrations, Decimations, and the like
Blood-thirsty and Tyrannical Projects, in which John Faldo and his poor
Nonconforming Ministers have had their Hands, almost over Head and Ears, till
they had well nigh lost their Ears and their Heads too. Much more of this
Nature may be seen toward to the latter end of the lesser Column of this Book.

What People, setting these aside, could have had the Face and Confidence to
have writ such Language as this? Certainly not any; especially when they
themselves had been engaged in the same Cause and Quarrel with those whom they
now so much Reproach and Vilify.

The Consideration of these things, with their pretending themselves to be the
Only People of the LORD, and of their being the Only Ambassadors and Ministers
of Christ, with the Discharge of my own Conscience, put me upon gathering these
their Writings together, and having them so placed, that those of the meanest
Capacity may easily discern and see them to be as great Dissemblers, Deceivers,
and Deluders of the People, as have appeared in this our Age.

Reader.

THE first Column is what they writ before the King came in, the other is what
they writ since his Return; and as for the Quotations, I have endeavored
faithfulness therein, and have cited both Book and Page, where their Words may
be found, but they have left out many Passages, and altered several Words (that
suited not with their Interests and Designs) both of E. B's and F. H's in the
Re-print of their Works, which thou will have notice of as thou read: And
where I have abbreviated any of their Writings, or lest out any of their Words,
which were not so material to be put in, or too large to insert, thou will find
a little stroke, thus -- but have not in the least either wronged the Matter or
Sense thereby, as thou may see if thou peruse the Books I have quoted.

But before thou proceedest to read farther, I am willing thou should hear
the Testimony they give of their own Writings, viz.

If there you own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, you will own oue
Writings, which are given forth by the same Spirit and power. See G. F's. Answ.
to the Westmoreland Petition, p. 30.

You might as well condemn the Scriptures to the Fire as our Queries. Our
giving forth Papers or printed Books, it is from the immediate, Eternal Spirit
of God. You are now Answered from the Mouth of the Lord. See G. F. and R. H.
Truth's Defense, etc. p. 2, 104, 107.

Now if this their Testimony be true, then their Writings are to be had in as
great and as venerable esteem as the Scriptures, or any holy Man's Words are;
but if it be otherwise, then are they Liars and false Prophets; and to be
avoided and witnessed against. Let these following Collections manifest the
Truth thereof.

[ And now the time is come, that as they have laid open the Deceit,
Wickedness, and Hypocrisy of other Professors that went before them; even so
must their Deceit, Wickedness, and Hypocrisy be also laid open; For the LORD
whom I no Respecter of Persons.

But who shall live when GOD does this!]

J. P.

Geo, Fox's Judgment CONCERNING KINGLY GOVERNMENT.
Taken out of a Paper of his, written to the Presbyterians and Others, before
the KING was Restored.
TO all you that desire an Earthly King in England, -- Who profess your selves
to be Christians, whether Presbyterians or Others. -- Do not the Priests,
Presbyterians, and many of the Rulers cry for an Earthly King? -- And is not
this the same Nature the Jews were in? And do not they in This Crucify Jesus?
Are not all these Elders Christians, that will dote so much of an Earthly King,
Traitors against Christ? -- Now Elders, if you say, Peter said Honor the King;
-- This does not hold forth that Peter bid them set up an Earthly King over
them, neither do you read -- that there were any Earthly Kings since the days
of the Apostles, but among the Apostate Christians, etc. -- And all these
Antichrists and Presbyterians imitated Elders over them all. -- Will Christ
Reign and these Kings that have been made? For Christ is King alone, and makes
his Disciples Kings, -- to Reign upon the Earth. -- These are true Christians,
and will these have any more Kings among them, but Christ, who are Redeemed
from the Earth and earthly Kings? -- I say, That is the false Church that does
not live upon the Heads of these Kings. -- Such as have the Prophets, Christ,
and the Apostles Words; the Sheeps Clothing, but out of the Life and Power
that makes such work for an Earthly King. -- Herod the King was Mad at the
Child Jesus, and sought to slay all the Children in Bethlehem of Judea; There
is ehe fruits of Earthly Kings, and such a King would our false Christians and
Elders have.

The Children of Israel, when they grew, would have Kings like other Nations,
that when People were gone from the Lord God, -- then they set up Kings; and
when the Children of Israel served not the Lord God, but went after other gods,
-- they desired a King, which the Lord gave them in his Wrath, Sam. 8. And in
this manner, Should a King Reign over them, the King shall take your Sons and
appoint them for his Chariots, etc. -- (this is the fruit of your Kings) -- The
King will take your Fields, your Vineyards, your best Olive Trees, and give
them to his Servants. (this is the Fruit of your Kings, etc.) Ignorant and
foolish People that would have a King and Kings since the days of the Apostles.
-- The People will not hear when all these Fruits of these Kings are laid down
to them. -- But says Christians and false Elders, there shall be a King over
us, and we also will be like other Nations. -- So the Christians go out from
Christ, and set up Kings like Heathens, Hos. 13.11. -- You ignorant and
foolish, that is, looking after Kings, which turns from the Lord. -- This is to
you Christians, that would have another King. -- You may see what work there
was with the Kings of Edom and Esau. -- And when the Children of Issrael grew
into Esau's Nature, they would have a King. -- So the Antichrists they will
have a King, -- as other Heathenish Nations would have, they will fight else,
and this is Esau's Nature. -- Now David and Solomon there are Figures in their
being Kings. And see what work the Kings of the Midianites did, and the
Children of Isral's Kings, who said, Thou art our King, Reign over us, both
thou and thy Sons. -- These, like our doting Christians, would have a King. --
And read what work the Children of Israel made (when they were as Judges in the
fear of the Lord) with the Kings of the Earth, the Kings of Canaan. -- You may
see what work the Children of Israel had with Sihon King of the Amorites, and
Sthon King of Heshbon, and strange Kings of Bashan, Josh. 13 -- And you may see
in the 12th. of Joshua, what work he made with the Kings, etc. And how God had
hardened the Hearts of the Kings that they might be destroyed by them that had
no King. -- How they over-threw the Kings when they kept faithful to the Lord.
-- Josh. 11. And how the Lord fought for Israel, and what work Joshua made with
the Kings, how he brouhht them out of the Care: A fit place for them [saith G.
Fox] for all Kings that be made in Men's earthly Wills. -- The Rocks and Caves
are their Shelter in time of Distress. -- And you may see what Fear and Dread
was in all Nations and People, while the Children of Israel went on in the Name
of the Lord; and so it will be again, when People go on in the Name of Christ,
what a dread they will be in all Christendom to all Kings, and all such upon
the Earth who are Kings and Princes made, but not by Christ; for all the true
redeemed ones, are Kings and Priests, that reign upon the Earth, that knew
their- Election before the World began. You may see in the third Chapter of
Deuteronomy: How the Word of the Lord was fulfilled: How they went over the
Kings and smote them in the Power of the Lord God: -- And as the Children of
Israel dwelt in the Fear of the Lord, the Kings fled before them: -- So will
they do before all them that live in the Power of God. -- The Shout of a King
was among the Children of Israel, while they felt the Lord of Hosts was among
them; they trod down the Earthly Kings: -- and all these Novice Christians that
are crying up Earthly Kings, and following Kings, and fighting for the Kings of
the Earth, are not such as follow the Lamb.

We know that these Kings are the Spiritual Egyptians got up since the days of
the Apostles. Josiah and such as feared the Lord (in the time of the Law and
the Prophets) the Lord accepted, which Kings was among the Jews, but you never
read of any among the Christians, but among the Apostates since the Days of the
Apostles.

All which (and much more) you may read in the forementioned Paper of G. F.
Page 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 26, etc.

Observe. Here by way of Interrogation he affirms: That they who cry for an
Earthly King, do in this Crucify Jesus, and are Traitors against Christ, and
that true Christians will not have any more Kings among them but Christ: That
the fruit of Earthly Kings, is to be mad at the Child Jesus, as Herod was: That
they are Ignorant and Foolish People that would have a King and Kings, since
the Days of the Apostles: That these Kings are the Spiritual Egyptians, etc.

G. Fox to the Protector and Parliament. p. 62. 1658.
AND now, Oh Protector! who have tasted of the Power of God, -- Take heed thou
loose not thy Power; but keep Kingship off thy Head, which the World would give
thee; and Earthly Crowns under thy Feet, lest with that thou cover thy self,
and so loose the Power of God. When the Children of Israel went from that of
God in them, they would have Kings, as other Nations had, as Transgressors had,
and so God gave them one.] -- And ye Powers of the Earth, take heed of making
Earthly Kings, or looking after Earthly Kings, lest you hurt and undo your
selves and others, but mind the Witness of God in you, that you may see what
the Children of Israel went from, when they set up Kings as other Nations, --
Ye Heathens, -- that set up Kings, and know not the Lord, etc.

From a Lover of your Souls and Eternal Good, and Establishing of
Righteousness,

G. F.

Again, A Word from the Lord, etc. p. 15, 1654. (he says)
THE Word of the Lord God to you who are called Presbyterians, [and to you that
read the Common Prayer.] You are wholly in Darkness, given up to it, [and so
your dark Minds have the Common Prayer.] And such would have a King to Reign,
for there is that Nature that would have an Earthly King to Reign, in which
Nature lodges the Murderer.

G. F.


Obs. [ But the Quakers Messages and Addresses to K. Chapter 2. and K. Ja. they are
for having an Earthly King to Reign, and consequently are by themselves judged
to be in the Nature, wherein lodges the Murderer.]

Of the Great Success that George For told Oliver he should have had, if he had
been Faithful; in a Letter to him, Dated 11th. Month 1657. See Council and
Advice, etc. p. 26, 27.
OH Oliver! Had thou been Faithful, and thundered down Deceit, the Hollander
had been thy Subjects and Tributers; and Germany had given up to have done thy
Will; and the Spaniard had quivered like a Dry Leaf: -- The King of France
should have bowed under thee his Neck; the Pope should have withered as in
Winter; the Turk in all his Fatness should have Smoaked: Thou should not have
stood trifling about Small Things, but minded the Work of the Lord as he began
with thee at first. Sober Men and true Hearts took part with thee: Oh take
heed! and do not slight such, lest thou weaken thy self, and not disown such as
the Lord has owned; thy Dread is not yet all gone, nor thy Amazement; Arise
and come out, for had thou been Faithful, thou should have crumbled Nations
to Dust; for that had been thy Place; now is thy Day of Trial, etc.

G. F.


Obs. The Success here spoken of should have befallen him by means of his
Armies, wherein sober Men and True Hearts took part with him; such he exhorts
not to slight, nor disown such as God had owned. Suitable to this he says (in
his Paper against Kingly Government, page 27. Why did you put out such as fear
God out of the Army, which might have been a Blessing to the Lord in their
Generation?

Obs. This shows, That in G. F's Judgment (who pretends himself Infallible)
such as Fear God, and Quakers, might fight, and that it was ill done to put
such out of the Army.

This following Letter shows that G. F. approved of Olivers Authority, about
which he gives him and his Soldiers Charge, p. 36, 37.
Friend,
THou should have invited all the Christians upon Earth in all Nations, that
are against Popery, to thee; to comein and join with thee against Popery, for
thou have had Authority, stand to it, loose it not, nor abuse it, nor let any
other take thy Crown, and do not stand cumbring thy self about Dirty Priests;
-- and thou have had Power over Nations, for Nations begin to be on heaps; and
invite all them that profess against the Pope in all Nations, to join with thee
against him; and do not loose thy Dominion nor Authority, nor the Wisdom of
God, but with that thou may order all; [ That will keep thee single in Heart
and Mind to the Lord;] and let thy Soldiers go forth with a free willing
Heart, that thou may Rock Natious as a Cradle; and keep thou in the Fear of
the Lord, and all the Soldiers, and them that are under thee. This is a Charge
to thee in the Presence of the Lord God, that thou, nor them may loose the
Dread of the Lord, [ for that strikes a terror in the Hearts of all People] etc.

I am a Lover of thy Soul and eternal Good, an Establisher of Righteousness.

G. F.


Obs. Is not this a Just Authority which so great a Prophet exhorts him to
stand to, and not to loose nor suffer any to take his Crown. And yet this
Authority is to be defended and enlarged by Soldiers, who are charged to go
forth with a free willing heart, and to keep in the fear of the Lord, which
argues they were in the fear of the Lord; and so either Quakers or as good as
Quakers.

In another Letter the same G. F. salutes Oliver thus, p. 27.
Dear Friend,
BE still and in the Council of God stand, and that will give thee Wisdom that
thou may frustrate Men's Ends, and calm Men's Spirits, and Crumble Men
under; and arise and stand up in the Power of the Lord God, [ The Lambs
Authority,] and fear not the Face of Man, but fear and dread the Lord God; then
his Presence, and Wisdom, and Council, thou shall have to throw down the
Rubbish, and quell all the bad Spirits under thy Dominion; -- therefore live in
the Power of the Lord God, and feel his Hand that is stretched out over the
Nations; for a Mighty Work has the Lord to do in other Nations, and their
Quakings and Shakings are but entering: So this is the Word of the Lord God to
thee as a Charge to thee from the Lord God, etc.

The same G. F. in the Name of the Church of Christ, and Elect Assembly, --
Known in the Nations by the Name of Quakers, To Rich. Cromwell Protector, p. 47,
51.
Friend,
LIve in God's Wisdom if thou will reign in his Power and Strength, then none
shall touch thee, and all them that fear God will be on thy side, and take thy
Part, and be one with thee in all thy Sufferings, yea, till death. And G. For
after six pages of Instructions to him, concludes with these Words, viz. The
Lord God Almighty preserve thee in his Wisdom, and Counsel, and Strength over
the Heads of his Enemies in thy self, and in the World both. -- And Friend,
take heed of putting of honest godly Men out of the Army, [ or putting them out
of their places, being Justices of the Peace.] In so doing, thou will lame thy
self, and weaken thy Authority, and remove thy self out of the Hearts of them
that fear God.

G. F.


Obs. He approves of his Power, and prays for his Victory over his Enemies in
himself and in the World both, (And pray was not the King and his Party some of
those Enemies;) and he warns him of putting honest godly Men out of the Army,
as he had done his Father before.

But when Richard was gone off the Stage, and the Officers of the Army in
Power, then G. F. applies himself to them in these words,
OH Friends! The Power of God ye have abused; -- the Just have been trodden
under Foot, -- who have been put out of the Army and Public Services: -- Now
had you been Faithful in the Power of the Lord which once stirred, this Nation
needed not have been afraid of any Nation upon the Earth; but your Dread would
have sounded over the World: But when you lost the Power of God, -- with which
you had brushed at the Outside of Things, then you turned against, and put
them in Prison (meaning the Quakers) that struck at the Root. -- And had you
been Faithful to the Power of the Lord God which first carried you on, you had
gone into the midst of Spain, into their Land, to require the Blood of the
Innocent that there had been shed, and have commanded them to have offered up
their Inquisition to you, and gone over them as the Wind, and knocked at Rome
Gates before now, and trampled Deceit and Tyrants under, and demanded the Pope
himself, and have commanded him to have offered up all his Torture-Houses, and
his Wracks, and Inquisition, (which you should have found as black as Hell) and
broke up the Bars and Gates where all the Just Blood has been shed, which
should have been required, and this you should have required, and this you
should have seen done in the Power, when you had been the Dread of all Nations,
and you had been a Dread to them, and should have set up a Standard at Rome,
and then you should have sent for the Turks Idol, the Mahomet, and plucked up
Idolatry, and cried up Christ the only King and Lord, and then People would
have said you had gone on in the Cause of God and his Truth, etc. -- And so if
you had gone to have made Inquisition for Blood, and to demand all the
Inquisitions abroad in the whole Christendom, whereby the Innocent Blood has
been shed; then all the People in the whole Christendont that feared the Lord
God would have said with one consent, These are the Men that are gone out for
God's Cause. Many valiant Captains, Soldiers, and Officers have been put out
of the Army -- because of their Faithfulness to the Lord; -- it may be for
saying Thou to a single Person, or for wearing their Hats, etc. -- Oh how are
Men fallen from that which they were in at first! when Thousands of us went in
the Front of you, and were with you in the greatest Heat, etc. -- Oh what a
Sincerity was once in the Nation! What a dirty nasty thing it would have been
to have heard talk of a House of Lords among them? Oh! how is the Sincerity
choked, smothered, and quenched, by the Fatness of the Earth, whereby they
have forgot ten the Lord, and his Arm and Power that once carried them on.

And if ever you Soldiers and true Officers come again into the Rower (i. e.
the Spirit) of God which has been lost, never set up your Standard till you
come to Rome, and it be a top of Rome, then there let your Standard stand, and
look at the Power of the Lord God, and never heed Gold nor Silver, for the
Power of the Lord will give you enough, etc. See To the Council of Officers,
page 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8.

G. F.


Obs. He says it was the Power of the Lord God that first carried them on, and
had they been Faithful, they should have required Innocent Blood of Spain, and
knocked at Rome Gates, and trampled Tyrants under, and demanded the Pope
himself; and this they should have done as an Army [in the Spirit and Power of
God, which they had lost] setting up a Standard at Rome, commanding the Turk,
and crying up Christ the only King; [then all that feared the Lord [Quakers as
well as others] would have said, -- These are the Men that are gone out for the
Cause of God and his Truth]. Then he complains, That many valiant Captains,
Soldiers, and Officers have been put out of the Army, -- because of their
Faithfulness to the Lord; that is, for being Quakers, as he intimates; Then he
cries out, saying, Thousands of us went in the Front of you. This was a time of
Sincerity, when it would have been a dirty, nasty thing to have talked of a
House of Lords. He counsels them not to stop till they have set up their
Standard at Rome, and [never heed Gold nor Silver; for the Power of the Lord
will give you enough; so E. Borough says to the Army, God will give their [the
Papists] falslly consecrated Vessels and Treasures a Spoil and Prey to you, if
you be faithful.]

Compare this with what they say in the other Column.

NOW I shall come to cite some Passages out of E. B's Books, he was one of
their Chief Preachers, and in very great Esteem amongst them, his Works they
took care to reprint in Folio, but withal to expunge some Passages, and alter
others, which discovered too much of his Oliverian and their Fighting Spirit.
This Man is charged by Jeremiah Ives, to have justified the late War against
the King, and is defended by Geo. Whitehead, another of their chief Preachers,)
saying, Serious Search, p. 35, 36.

Thou art pleased to tell the World twice or thrice over, that we justify the
late Wars against the King: -- And why so? Because E. B. in severely warning
the late Powers of their Downfall, did by way of Reproof tell Oliver what God
had done for him, even in the same Letter to him, wherein he plainly also
tells him of the Great Oppressions which the People of God suffered under
him, etc. See (says he) E. B's Works, from page 551. to page 583. how plainly
and faithfully he did warn Oliver and those Men then in Power, of their
Overthrow. To be sure E. Borough was no Temporizer.

Now we are to see whether E. Borough does not Justify the late War against
the King. Counsel and Advice. Printed 1659.
In his Letters to Oliver, Protector, May 1657. he has these Passages, Page 4.
THE Lord gave thee the Necks of Princes to tread upon, -- and their Dominions
to inherit, and thou wast set a Ruler in much Dominion, and have savor in his
Sight, and in the sight of many People, who wished well unto thee for a
Blessing: Many Victories honorable and remarkable was given unto thee, over
them who had exalted themselves against God, and ruled in Tyranny over his
People; whom the Lord pitied, and thou an Instrument in his Band, wast
ordained by him to lead forth a People, whom he Blessed with thee, against a
cruel People, and Generation of Oppressors, who exercised Tyranny over the
Lord's Heritage, till they were taken away, and cast out, and are a Reproach
unto the Lord and his People unto this day; and even so shall all be that
follow their Example, and are Oppressors and Tyrants over the Seed of God, as
they were.

Note, These Lines in Black Letter are all left out in his Works, p. 552.

In another Letter to him he writes thus, dated September 1657. Page 16, 17.
Friend,
IT is upon me, and also I am pressed in Spirit thereunto, to give unto thee,
even unto the Oliver, Protector, the perfect measure of thy Dominions, etc. --
Many Enemies thou have which watch over thee for Evil, and not for Good, who
would rejoice in thy overthrow. And first there is a People scattered through
all these Nations, who are full of Wrath and ravening Envy toward thee, Even
of those known by the Name of Malignants Party; in whose Hearts, to this day,
there is continual hatred, and evil surmising lodges against thee, and all thy
Offspring; and I believe -- that daily advantage they seek against thee, by
subtle Conspiracies and secret Plottings of Maliciousness in their Evil Hearts,
seeking by all means, if it be possible, how to be avenged, and not slipping
any advantage how to revenge themselves and the Cause of their King. -- I know
the Lord has Cursed them and their Endeavors to this day, and thou have had
Dominion and Power given thee of God to bruise them and to break them to
pieces; and what thou have done unto their King should not be reckoned against
thee by the Lord, if now thou were Faithful to what he requires of thee, etc.

Note, And promote their Cause, is put in instead of The Cause of their King,
p. 559. And the word blasted is put in instead of Cursed. And all the Words in
Black Letter are left out in his Works, p. 560.

Obs. How he calls the Protector and his Party, a People whom the Lord blessed,
against a cruel People and Generation of Oppressors, that is, those called the
Malignant Party, that were for the King; he says also, The Lord has cursed
them and their Endeavors to this day, and that if the Protector would own
them, (the Quakers,) they would own him in the Face of all his Enemies, p. 21.
the chief of which were then the King 's Party. How should they do that without
fighting?

And in a Letter of his to the Protector and Council. 12th. Month, 57. he
says, p. 23.
WHat! Has the abundance of this Worlds Glory and its Treasure quite overcome,
and stolen away your Hearts wholly from all sense and seeling of the unjust
Sufferings of your Brethren (meaning the Quakers,) who have in times past, as
faithfully as your selves, served the Nation with their Lives and Estates, to
the purchasing of this Peace and Freedom out of the hands of Tyrants?

Tyrants is left out, and the word Opposers put in its stead. E. B's works, p.
563.

In another Letter to the Protector, which was given to him the 6th. Month,
1658. about a Month before his Death, he writes thus, p. 33.
ARise and stand up for the Lord, and he will give thee strength and Victory,
and will make thy Horn as Iron, and thy Hoof as Brass, to push down and tread
under the High Places of Idolatry in all the Apostatized Churches both Papists
and others.

And as concerning thy War and Armies abroad in Spain; something there is in it
known to the Lord, seek not thine own Honor in it, but be Faithful, and leave
the issue of all things to the Lord; make no Covenant with Idolaters, but tread
down their Idol-Gods that they have set up; and hew down their Mountains in
which their Confidence stands, and Plow up their ground, that the Seed may be
sown after thee. It Is Honor enough to be the Lord's Plowman, p. 35. These
foregoing Lines in Black Letter, are left out in the reprinting of his Works,
p. 568.

Obs. How he exhorts the Protector to push down, and tread under the High
Places of Idolatry: and where? In all the Apostatized Churches, both Papists
and others: And this he intimates is to be done by his Armies, and he would not
have him to make any Covenant with Idolaters, etc. These are the Men that in
their Declaration (since the King came in) deny both the Spirit, Principle, and
Practice of them that use any Weapon to fight for Christ or his Government. And
yet hear in the following Passage, how this E. Borough declares to Governor
Lockart and the Officers in the Name of the Lord, that if they went forth as an
Army in that Spirit that was among the Quakers, they should then overcome their
Enemies, Take his own words as reprinted and not expunged, and so owned afresh
by G. F. [G. Whitehead] and their Party. 1672.

An Alarm sounded in the Pope's Borders. 1659 E. B's Works. p. 536.
AND this lay upon me to declare in the Name of the Lord (to Governor Lockart
and his Officers,) That if they did enterprise any business, as they were an
Army, in a Spirit in Opposition to us, and in that Spirit that did reject us,
and deny us, and gainsay us; then should they never prosper in any Enterprise
whatsoever: But if they went on in any degree in the Fear of the Lord, and in
that Spirit that was among us, then should they overcome their Enemies, and
none should have Power over them to overcome them.

Obs. What was it they were to do as an Army [in the Quakers Spirit?] See that
in his Instructions to the English Army, etc. in and about Dunkirk, viz.

AND that there be no more a looking back -- till you have visited Rome, and
enquired after, and sought out the Innocent Blood that is buried therein; and
avenge the Blood of the Guiltless through all the Dominions of the Pope, the
Blood of the Just cries through Italy and Spain, and the time is come, that the
Lord will search it, and seek it out, and repay it, and it would be your Honor
to be made use of by the Lord in any Degree in order to this Matter. -- And
this also believe, that the Lord will do it, or make way hereunto, even by you,
the Men of our English Nation, if you be faithful, etc. p. 537.

What are these few poor Islands that you have run through, and laid many
Mountains low? they are but little in comparison of the great part of
Christendom in which Idolatry and great Oppressions do abound, which the Hand
of the Lord is against, and which he will take Vengeance upon, p. 538.

But there are many Mountains in the way, wherefore hew down the Tops, strike
at the Branthes, make way, that the Ax may be laid to the Root of the Tree,
that your Sword, and the Sword of the Lord may neither leave Root nor Branch of
Idolatry, Oppressions, and Tyranny; -- your Sword is to be lifted up against
them. It is the Lord's Work, I know, to make Men truly Religious, but yet the
Lord may work by you to break down the Briars, and Thorns, and Hills, that have
set themselves against the Lord. P. 538. God will make their Riches and their
falsely consecrated Vessels, and Treasures, even a Spoil and a Prey unto you, if
you be faithful, etc. p. 539.

Your work has been, and may be honorable in its day, -- and your Victory
has been of the Lord -- So be low in your own Eyes, -- and seek the Glory of
God, and the Freedom of the Oppressed, and in that you will be Blessed, and
prosper, till you have set up your Standard at the Gates of Rome. p. 540.

I am a Lover of your Souls, -- E. B.


Obs. That both the Army-Sword, and the Sword of the Lord were not to leave
Root or Branch of Idolatry. In so doing, he promises them Blessing and
Prosperity.

The same E. Borough to Rich. Cromwell chosen to be Protector, See Council and
Advice, p. 53.
AND as for thy Father, the late Protector, great things and honorable did the
Lord do for him in raising him up, and casting out his Enemies before him; and
giving him Victory and Power, and Renown through Nations; and we know the Lord
showed favor to him, and gave him Strength, Wisdom, and Valor, and a Right
Spirit; and he was called of God into that great Work to subdue the grievous
Tyrannies once ruling over Tender Consciences, and to break down the great
Oppressions which for Ages had caused the Just to groan, and the Lord was with
him in Victory, and went before him, and was his Defense, and preserved him
from great dangers; and from the Wills of all his Enemies, and made him
prosperous against them all. -- And as for thee who art now set up in his
stead, we certainly believe that the Hand of the Lord is in this Matter, etc.
Note, Tyrannies is left out, and the word Cruelty put in, in his Works, p. 574.

As concerning the Armies abroad, let faithful and just Men that will not seek
themselves, be put in trust, for the Army is of great Concernment to thee, to
stand or fall through them, as to Man's account; and the War against Spain, be
faithful to God in it, and let trusty Men have Authority, the Lord may
accomplish something by it to his Honor, and to thine, if thou be meek and
humble, and walk with the Lord, and to say no more about it, there is something
in it known to the Lord, and he may bring it to pass in its Season, p. 64.

London, 18th. 8th. Month, 1658.

These Lines in Black Letter are all left out in his Works, p. 580.

Obs. He says that the Lord in casting out his Fathers Enemies, and giving him
Victory, did not only do great things, but honorable, that he showed him
favor, and gave him a Right Spirit. [Is it not plain the Quakers held that God
commanded a Right Spirit to Fight, and that Oliver was called of God thereto?]

E. Borough to the Protector's Kind ed, his Wife and Children, p, 37, 38.
Friends,
REmember that by the Lord you were raised from a low Estate, -- he gave you
the Palaces of Princes, and threw out the High and Mighty before you, because
of their Wickedness, which was great in the Sight of the Lord. Oh! remember
this every one of you, -- and be of a tender Spirit, -- and exalt not your
selves, -- lest the Lord cast you down, and make your Name and Posterity a
Reproach, as he has done many before you, even for that cause was the
Generation of the Stewarts cast out.


Note, All these Words in Black Letter, are left out in his Works, p. 569.

Obs. That he says, for exalting themselves in Pride, etc. was the Generation
of the Stewarts cast out, and their Palaces bestowed on the Protector and his
Family [And pray G. W. etc. was not White Hall one of those Palaces?]

Now let us hear what Francis Howgil says in Justification of the late War.
See his Advice to the Army, Committee of Safety, etc. 1659. p. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
THE Long-Parliament against the late King, which in Man's account could be
looked upon to be no other than Rebellion; yet God gave a signal Testimony to
the one, while they stood in the Power of God, and against the other.

The ancient Courtiers having found so much Ease and Profit by the late King,
turned all Cavaliers, and cried up the Prerogative of the King above Law and
Equity, etc. Setting that aside wholly which all Good Government was intended
for, as the Safety of the People, and freedom from Oppression, Tyranny and
Usurpation, and that none might be embondaged in the Worship of God; but when
he (to wit the late King) and his Assistants sought to inthral all, and
Imbondage all, both in Civil and Ecclesiastical things, (as they were called,)
the Long-Parliament and People that aided them at that time counted it no
Treason to oppose him, seeing the End was not answered he should have
satisfied; and God decided the Controversy in overthrowing the one, and
establishing the other for a season; yet many are so blind to this day; that
they judge the Nation cannot be established in Freedom without a King, as
though such a Name were essential only to Freedom, and without it could not be
obtained; but the Judicious will see this Ignorance, etc. -- So now many are so
doting on the Name of a Parliament, as though it were Essential, etc. -- and
cry up the Privileges of Parliament, as the former did Prerogative, and would
fight about a Name, -- and lose the Thing intended, though they be the
Representatives of the People to do good to the People, and not hurt, they are
accounted as good Servants to God, but if they would -- set up a particular
Interest to the Imbondaging of the whole, and then cry up their Privileges to
do what they list, Then it is no Rebellion in Gods Account, neither in the
account of Just Men, to call them away when they do not perform the Thing
intended. And as for the Long-Parliament by whom God did Good Things, and Great
Things, in the overthrowing that Power which was deviated from the aforesaid
End (to wit) the late King, -- What they did, they had the Approbation of God
and Good Men; yet they went not through with the Work purposed and intended.
Note, All these Lines in Black Letter are left out in F. H's Works.

When a Company of greedy hireling Priests came from Leichestershire to sound
their Trumpet in the House, and to tell you they had not engaged with the rest
of their Brethren in Cheshire and Lancashire, with George B^oth, they were
immediately called in, and thanks returned, as though they had done some great
Service for the Nation that they joined not in the Rebellion; but them who were
your real Friends, called Quakers, who gave you and the Army intelligence about
the late Insurrection in Cheshire, who were spoiled by the said Rebels of their
Goods, etc -- could never receive any satisfaction or encouragement from you,
etc. Note, All the foregoing Lines in Black Letter are left out in F. H's Works.

Obs. He says God gave a signal Testimony for the Parliament against the late
King: That it is no Rebellion to call them (who were in Power) away, when they
do not perform the Thing they are entrusted for. That God did good and great
things by the Long-Parliament, in overthrowing the late King; wherein they had
the Approbation of God and good Men; that they who joined with Sir George
Booth, joined in Rebellion, that at the same time, the Quakers were the
Parliaments real Friends, and gave them and the Army Intelligence.

See also E. Borough to the new Committee of Safety. 1659. to the same purpose
concerning Deposing Governors. E. B's Works, p. 593.
AND though some of you (present Rulers) be looked upon as great Traitors and
Tyrants in your dealing toward them, [i. e. the Parliament] -- but alas! this
is nothing, for the Lord does not account as Men, -- and if you were faithful
to what the Lord requires of you, in your Proceedings, what you have done unto
them, [i. e. in turning them out,] should not be reckoned on account against
you, neither by God, nor Good Men.

Likewise see the Declaration of their Faith touching Governors, E. B's Works.
p. 442. Printed 1672.
WE believe that all Governors and Rulers ought to be accountable to the People
and to the next succeeding Rulers for all their Actions which may be enquired
into upon occasion; and that the chiefest of the Rulers be subject under the
Law, and punishable by it if they be Transgressors, as well as the poorest of
the People. [ Note, This Article of their Faith they also printed in the year
71. in their Book called, The Principles of Truth, p. 51. But as I was not, so
I am not willing any Observation should be made thereon, and that for their
sakes.]

Now hear E. B's Advice to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc.
against Heriditary Government, 6th. October 1659. [But after K. C. 2. was
restored, then they left all this Paper out in the Reprint of his Works:]
AND while thus it has been, in our Nation, that our Kings have attained to
the Throne of Government Hereditarily, and by the Succession of Birth, -- and
thus it has continued for many Ages -- and our Nation has been under the
Bonds of Slavery in this respect, even because Men Governed that ought not; --
and while Men for Earthly Honor -- in Birth an Breeding have claimed to be
Princes over us successively, and to be chosen our Rulers according to Custom,
-- and because of this the Freeborn People have deeply suffered the cruel
Oppressions of proud and ambitious self-seeking Men, who have long Ruled for
themselves and not for the Lord, and have come into place of Authority
otherwise than by Appointment and right Calling from the Lord, And thus the
Government of our Nation has been out of Course, -- while great Darkness has
remained upon the Hearts of the People, which has so blinded them that they
have not known their own Bondage, nor yet how to be redeemed into perfect
Liberty, while they have subjected themselves (through Ignorance) to be ruled
by such Men as had no right from God to that Place of Rule and Government.

But now the Lord God our Deliverer has begun to appear for the Freedom of the
Nations, and has showed us the Captivity and Bondage that our Forefathers
have lived under, and we our selves been liable and subject to, by reason of
the Government standing in a single Person successively, and we being forced to
live under the Authority of such Men as had no right from God thereunto, as I
have said: And now our Eyes are opened to see better things, and we are in good
Expectations that the Lord will Suddenly so appear as to free us from future
Oppressions in this respect, etc. -- And these things we are waiting for, to be
brought to pass in their Season, and the Hand of the Lord will accomplish it;
if not by you, then even contrary to you. Therefore take this my Council even
as you hope to prosper; for this I know from the Lord, upon the rejecting or
receiving hereof depends your Standing or your Fall, your Renown or perpetual
Reproach; even your Blessing or your Curse; and the time is at hand that many
shall confess the Lord gave good Counsel to you by his Servant.

E. Burr.


Obs. That in his Judgment it was through Ignorance that the People subjected
themselves to Hereditary Governors, or such as had no right to the Place of
Rule, or to the Government, standing in a Single Person successively; and he
reckons it a piece of Slavery the Nation has long been under, that our Kings
have attained to the Throne Hereditarily, and yet G. F. etc. (of late) tells
the King and Parliament that their Hearts and Hands could seal to the Substance
both of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. And G. F. says, If he could
take any Oath at all, upon any occasion, he should take the Oath of Allegiance,
which Oath binds to the King, and his Heirs and Successors. Now if this be not
Contradiction and Temporizing, what is?

See moreover G. F's Paper (taken out of the same Book, that the Abstract
against Kingly Government was taken) p. 42.
To all such as feed the Priests till they turn against them.
THE Black Presbyterians -- and Priests, and Cavaliers, which are stirring; you
being out of the Power which first had Dominion over them; what now are
Priests, Cavaliers, Presbyterians, saying, Curse you Meroz, that will not come
to fight against the Mighty! (meaning the Parliament,) and all the honest
People in the Nation, to destroy them. And what! are they now bawling against
you, as they have against the Quakers? Will nothing satisfy the Priests and
the rest, but Blood? Have they not been the stirrers up for War and Blood
always? What now! are they so fat fed, that they curse them that will not come
to fight against the Parliament? Have you fed them so fat, that they kick
against you like wild Horses, that they snort, that there is such a snorting
among them against their Feeders? Have you sed them like wild Bulls and
Heifers, that now they run against you with their Horns? Surely the Fodderers
of these have not well looked about them; have not these been called Ministers
of the Gospel? But now how comes it that they preach up War? These are bad
Cattle, Horses, Heifers, and Bulls, that kick against their Fodderers. And run
with their Horns against their Fodderers. -- I must tell you the Sun is set
upon all the Priests in this Nation, and such as be like minded, and that is
the Word of the Lord God to this present Age, and many more.

G. F.

Hear now Is. Penington, an Eminent Writer among them, [and one of good
repute,] to the Parliament, the Army, and all the well-affected in the Nation,
who have been faithful to the Good Old Cause, 1659. p. 1.
THat there has been a Backsliding and turning aside from the Good Old Cause,
even by the Army (who formerly were Glorious Instruments in the Hand of God)
has been lately confessed. -- The Name of God has been Blasphemed in the
whole Earth, and that Holy Spirit and Power (which many Hearts can witness, was
the Beginner and Carryer on of this Work) made a Scoff and Derision to the
Enemies of Truth in these Nations, and in the Nations round about, who watched
to see the Issue and Result of these things. The Controversy was very great
and eminent, and drew many Eyes upon it, the Lord was appealed to on both sides
to decide it, and many know that by his Presence and Power in the Army the
Stale was turned (even when they were very very low, and cried out for Prayers,
and made large Promises in the Days of their Distress;) yea, the Lord did not
desert the Army, but heard their Prayers, and the Prayers of his People for
them, carrying on the Deliverance, until he had given a perfect Victory into
their Hands, etc.

Obs. That by the Lord's Presence and Power in the Army, the Controversy was
decided, and the Army made Glorious Instruments for the Good Old Cause, was not
then the Armies Cause once Just [in the Quakers Opinion] and their fighting
lawful and approved of God?

Miles Halhead and T. S. two Eminent Men of their Ministry, follow with their
most plain Testimony, Wounds of an Enemy, etc. 1656. p. 23.
When the Presbyterians saw the Army (who were made the Sword of the Lord --
against Papists and Bishops) would not submit to the Covenant, they drew the
Sword against them, and not prevailing in a first War, many of them joined with
the Papists and Bishops, and the Common Enemy, (meaning the King.) And now an
Oath of Abjuration -- is tendered to them to Swear -- who have been most
faithful to the Commonwealth, and its Army, and have born the Brunt and Heat
of the Day in the late Wars, with the peril of their Lives in the Field, and
the loss of their Estates, against the Popish, Prelatical, and Presbyterian
Party.

Has this Generation witnessed the Word of the Lord to be true above many
Generations? before whose Eyes, and by whose Hands the Righteous God has
executed his Dreadful Judgments on the Enemies of his Elect; -- has he
despised the Image of the King and Princes, and Nobles, and the great Ones, --
and poured forth their Blood as Water on the Earth, and made them a fearful
desolation, in the Cause of his People, and of Justice, and of Equity. -- In
the Iniquities that they have committed, and in the Sins wherewithal they have
Sinned, has He cut them off, and made them the dreadful Examples of his
Vengeance, p. 75, 76.

Obs. The Contents of this is plain to every capacity.

Take also George Roffs Testimony, another of their Ministry.
TO thee Oliver Cromwell, thus says the Lord, I had chosen thee among the
thousands of the Nations, to execute my Wrath upon my Enemies, and gave them to
thy Sword, with which I fought, for the Zeal of my own Name, and gave thee the
Enemies of my own Seed to be a Curse and a Reproach for ever, and made thee an
Instrument against them, -- and many have I cut down by my Sword in thy Hand,
that my Wrath might be executed on them to the utmost. See Righteousness, etc.
p. 11.

Obs. Here the Lord is represented fighting with Oliver's Sword against God's
Enemies. I think here is Justification sufficient of the late Wars, enough to
make George Whitehead (and therest) ashamed.

Hear again E. Borough and F. Howgil pleading the Quakers Faithfulness to the
Commonwealth's Interest, and bringing to Mind the utter Destruction of the
Bishop's and King's Power, as of a stone sunk into the Sea, which rises not
again.
To Henry Cromwell and his Council. The Visuation of Ireland, etc. p. 21, 22.
YOU have endeavored to give sentence of Banishment of us out of your Nation,
who are freeborn Englishmen, and have always been faithful and true to the
Commonwealths Interest from first to last even until now. -- What became of
all the Perseccutors of old? What became of the Bishops? What became of that
Power that held them up, are they not all sunk as a Stone into the Sea, and
become a Reproach.

Again E. B. to the Heads, -- Judges, etc. p. 19.
If such you uphold by a Law -- which act those things the Scripture speaks
against -- God will lay your Honor in the dust, and cast you out of the Seat
of Judgment; as he has done the Power of the King and Bishops before you.
Note, All the Lines in black Leter are left out in his Works, p. 84, 85, 86.

Let us now hear News out of the North, etc. A Book set out by G. F. and
written (as he says) from the Mouth of the Lord. 1655.
DReadful is the Lord and Powerful, who is coming in his Power to execute true
Judgment upon all you Judges, and to change all your Laws ye Kings. -- All you
Rulers must down and cease, -- You must be cut down with the same Power that
cut down the King who reigned over the Nation; in whose Family was a Nurse for
Papists and for Bishops, -- Judges, and Justices, -- Beast and False Prophet;
the Lord God will pour out his Plagues upon you, the Lord of Hosts has spoken
it, and except you repent you shall all likewise perish, and be consumed as the
King was, and perish with the same Power. The Lord God has sent his Prophets
often to tell you so, p. 18, 19

The World knows me not, but I testify the Truth, etc.

G. Fox.


Obs. What Man could have wrote more against a King and King: ly Government,
than this G. Fox has done, and that in the Name and Authority of the Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, (as he says,) and yet no sooner was the King
invested in his Fathers Throne, but the said G. Fox, through Deceit, Fear, and
Flattery, writes a quite contrary Language. See the other Column p. 1, 2, etc.

Again hear also what G. Fox and other Quakers tell us in the West answering to
the North, Writ 1656 the next year after News out of the North, etc.
One Ier. Ives (taking notice of their frequent Abuses to others about the late
War) cites a Paessage of theirs out of E. B's Works in Justification of the
late Wars; and further says, The Book in The West answering to the North, p.
79, 89 94, 95, 96, 97. has much to the same purpose, which (says he) I am
unwilling to write out, because I am not willing to expose you. G. Whitchead
replies thus in his Serious Search, p. 37. I cannot but observe the Man's
Dissimulation and base Insinuation in this implicit kind of accusing us,
hereby to render us more suspicious and obnoxious than if he had dealt plainly;
meaning, than if he had printed those Passages; some of which here follow; by
which the Reader may see somewhat of G. W's Disingenuity and Serpentine Nature.

TO what purpose have been the hangings by the Neck, -- and other exemplary
punishments executed on Judges, Justices, and Ministers of State for Arbitrary
acting; -- Why was Strafford's Head cut off, and Canterbury's, and Charles
Stewart's as Traitors, for endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws, etc.
p. 78.

Charles Stewart and his Lords committed Men, as Canterbury aforesaid, and
early he heard of it in Parliament: -- and for his other Arbitrary Actions, and
what followed thereupon -- and befell him in particular needs not be mentioned,
being recorded every where in the Blood and Misery of the late Wars, and the
Destruction of Him and his Family; the dreadful and sad Examples of His
Righteous Judgments who reuders to every one according to his Deeds, p. 79.

Obs. Because some of their Friends were committed, and in the Warrant no
mention made of the Protector or his Authority, they farther write thus;

Does not here appear from the Grave, the Spirit that was in Christopher Love
and his Fellow Traitors; who being within the Jurisdiction of this
Commonwealth, took upon them to Commissionate diverse Men to treat with Charles
Stewart the proclaimed Traitor of the Government, p. 89. Call to mind the
former days, and let the things that are past come into your Remembrance even
what this Generation would have done, their Synod, and Accomplices to
Conscience, and to whom this Generation joined (in the years 1648. and 50. and
so forwards) even with the Common Enemy, Charles Stewart, etc. p. 94. And
forget not the wonderful Deliverances from them; all which the Right Hand of
the Lord effected, etc. p. 95. Multitudes of People flocked out of the City to
Westminster to complain of their sufferings, -- which Charles Stewart called
Tumults, -- and by the Guard one of them was slain; at the place of the
shedding of whose Blood was Charles Stewart's Head struck off, and his Blood
poured forth on the ground, A remarkable Record of the Righteous Judgments of
God, p. 96, 97.

And this his Law (Judge Nicholas) standing in his own Will, -- is less to be
endured, -- than in any of the Judges and Chief Justices that have gone before
him, whom Justice has cut off for Arbitrariness, or in Strafford, Canterbury,
Charles Stewart, or any of these latter Generations. -- And the Legislative
Authority that made him a Judge, and the Righteous Ends of the Wars for Liberty
and Law, in which he appeared, and these Innocent Servants of the Lord, who
have been all of them always faithful to the honest Interest of the Nation, and
many of them for it have drawn the Sword, and fought in the Field from first to
last, p. 102.

Obs. Here that what they say concerning the King, is said not only as the
Opinion of others, but as what they also approve, saying, That those things
were remarkable Records of the Righteous Judgments of God.

With what strange kind of Confidence did G. W. write, when he said, that if I.
Ives had printed the foregoing Passages, they would not have rendered them so
Suspicious and Obnoxious, as his barely mentioning the Book and Pages did. And
though he may delude and blind their Proselites with such deceitful and Fig
leaf covers; yet certainly he will not dare to do so before Authority, but
rather down upon his Knees and beg Pardon for his Audaciousness and Insolence,
in speaking so slightingly of such strange and prodigious Sayings as are before
cited. And I wish him no more harm for all his Faults and falacious Doings,
than an humble Submission and Acknowledgment for the same.

Now let us hear E. Borough bemoaning Oliver after his Death. A Testimony
against a great Idolatry. This also is owned by G. F. G. W. and their Party,
and is to be read in his Works, 1672.
IN the midst of my Considerations, a Pity struck through me for once Noble
Oliver that is now dead, -- and I was grieved he should be thus abused, being
dead, by such a stir about an Image made of him, -- and I began to recall my
former acquaintance with him, and the former dealings of God toward him, and
what a gallant Instrument for the Lord he once was, and how many Glorious and
Noble Victories God once gave him, and what good Parts, and what a Gallant
Spirit there was once in him, -- and my Spirit run through many such things
with a great deal of seriousness and pity; and then said I, Alas! Alas! is it
ended all in this? All his sormer good Service for God and the Nations, all his
Victories and good Actions, and his beating down Superstition? Is this the end
of it all, the making of an Image, -- Is it all ended here? And is this the End
and final Farewell of once Noble Oliver? p. 460.

Alas for him! who was once a great Instrument in the Hand of the Lord, to
break down many Idolatrous Images, -- and did not once his Children, Officers,
and his Brave Soldiers, and Army, pull down all the Images, and Crosses, and
all such Popish Stuff where ever they met with it? -- And shall we have no
other Representation of once Noble Cromwell? Is his Life and former Glory and
Nobleness shadowed with the sight of a dead Image? etc. p. 461.

Obs. This might serve for a piece of a Funeral Oration for once Noble Oliver;
what a gallant Instrument for the Lord he once was! And how many Glorious and
Noble Victories God once gave him, what good Parts, and what a gallant Spirit
there was once in him! He had brave Soldiers and Army! And I pray was not this
Noble Oliver and his brave Soldiers of that one sort of People that profecuted
War against the King; Upon such, E. B. says, There is Guilt to be charged, See
his Visitation to the King, etc. p. 12. [ And notwithstanding the High Praises
the Quakers gave of D. C. after his Death; yet when K. C. came in, then they
compared him to Ahab, Haman, and Pharaoh Truth's Charactor of Professors, etc.
1660. p. 28, 31, 41.
, was not this done to flatter with the then Government, and that too by
speaking evil of the Dead! Oh most disingenuous and unworthy Men!]

This E. B. was not a greater Friend to Oliver, and an Applauder of him and his
Armies brave Exploits; but he was as great a Decryer and Condemner of the
Cavaliers and that Party. See A Trumpet of the Lord Sounded, etc. 1656. p. 9.

To all you who are and have been always Enemies to the very appearance of
Righteousness who are called Delinquents and Cavaliers.
THus says the Lord, my Controversy is against you, even my Hand in Judgment
is upon you already, and you are become cursed in all your Hatchings and
Endeavors, and from time to time my Hand has been against you in Battle, etc.
-- and though my Hand has been evidently against you; yet to this day you
remain in Rebellion in your Minds, in hatching Murder and Cruelty in your
wicked Hearts, and though your Kings, and Princes, and Nobles, have been cut
off in Wrath, and your cruel desperate Inventions and Plots of Wickedness
(conceived in your cursed Womb) have been broken, and you cut short in your
Desires; yet you repent net, nor will you see how you are given to be a Curse
and a Desolation, and a Prey in Houses, and Lands, and Persons, to them, whom I
raised against you, and gave power over you, yet you are hardened, and your
Cruelty in the persecution of my Servants cannot be measured; where you have
any power you smite with the Fist of Wickedness, and count it your Glory to
despise my Name; in the Valleys of Vain-Hopes you feed, and on the Mountains of
Foolish Expectation; and conceive in your cruel Womb of Tyranny the overthrow
of the Nations, but in the bringing forth your selves are overthrown, and it is
not for well-doing that you suffer; but my Hand is against you, and my
Judgments are upon you, and except you repent, shall continue on Earth with
you, and follow you, and pursue you to the Lake of Destruction, where there is
no Repentance; and you and your Kings, and Lordly Power (by which you have
thought to excrcise Lordship over my Heritage) shall be enslaved by the Devil
in the Pit of Darkness, in everlasting Bondage; where he shall reign your Lord
and King for evermore.

Obs. That the whole Paper out of which the foregoing is extracted, is left out
in the Reprint of E. B's Works, p. 100. Notwithstanding he writ in the Epistle
thus; Given under my Hand, and Sealed by the Spirit of the Eternal God. And in
p. 90. the word King is left out. And also in his Answer to the Apprentices
Petition, 1659. These followinging Lines are all left out, p. 609.

Would you bring in a strange Nation, even Tyrants, and their Adherents to
devour the Land, and even to destroy your selves and your City; would you set
up an oppressing Monarchy, which the Land has once spued forth; these things
are to be doubted, that if your Designs did prevail, the Fruit of your Work
would tend thereunto.

And notwithstanding they in their Declaration given to the King, Jannuary
1660. Testify that the Spirit of Christ which leads them into all Truth will
never move them to Fight and War against any Man with Outward Weapons. Yet E.
B. being moved of the Lord (as he says) by his Spirit thereunto, gives forth
thus, To the present distracted Nation of England, etc. 1659.
WE have chosen the Son of God to be our King, and he has chosen us to be his
People, and He might command thousands and ten thousands of his Servants at
this Day to fight in his Cause; He might lead them forth and bring them in, and
give them Victory over all their Enemies, and turn his Hand upon their
Persecutors; but yet his Kingdom is not of this World, neither is his Warfare
with Carnal Weapons. -- neither has He chosen us for that end, neither can we
YET believe that He will make use of us in that way; though it be his only
Right to Rule in Nations, and our Heirship to Possess the uttermost Parts of
the Earth, but for the present we are given up to bear and suffer all things
for his Names-sake, etc. p. 8.

We are Friends to any appearance of Good that may come forth in Truth and
Sincerity, and as Righteousness does appear in any, we are ready to join with
it in our Prayers and Desires; yea, and otherwise, -- we shall rejoice therein,
and add our help thereunto that it may prosper, for the Establishing of
Righteousness in the Earth; our all is not dear unto us, though hitherto we
have been silent, and not meddling with this Party or the other, etc. p. 14.

Note, 1. This was published in the Name of the Quakers, and subscribed by [J.
P. and] many [others].

Note, 2. All the Lines in Black Letter are left out in E. B's Works, Printed
1672. p. 603. [Their design therein is plain, they having writ contrary thereto
upon the turn of times.] and the words and our help thereunto, are altered, as
may be seen, p. 606. and in p. 662. These words, Tyrants shall not have Power
over you, are left out. And p. 600. Thy Kings. And p. 605. With Kings are left
out.

Obs. He says, He [the Son of God] might command Thousands and ten Thousands of
his Saints at this day to fight, but we cannot yet believe, that He will make
use of us in that way, but for the present we are given up to bear and suffer,
etc. So that they were not then of that Mind, that the Spirit would never move
them to fight.

And having heard of their Preaching up Armies, Victories, Spoils, etc. Let us
hear a little farther of G. F's advising the Parliament to Sequestrations, etc.
G. F. To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
LEt all those Abby-lands, Gleab lands, that is given to the Priests, be given
to the Poor of the Nation, and let all the great Houses, Abbeys, Steeple Houses
and Whitehall, be for Almshouses (or some other use) for all the Blind and
Lame to be there. Again,

Let all those Fines that belong to Lords of Manors be given to poor People,
for Lords have enough. p. 8. 1659.

And in their Papers sent to the Parliament about Tithes, 1659. p. 65, 63.
IF you Query how shall the Impropriators be satisfied who bought the Tithes of
the King? have you not his Parks and his Rents, have you not his Houses to sell
and make up their Money and give them again, etc. -- You should have sold all
the Gleab lands, and sold all the Bells (saving only one in a Town,) and
Colleges and their Lands, and given them all to the Poor of the Nation, etc.

If you Query, How you should do with the Impropriators? sell all the Gleab
lands, and the Bells, except one in a Town, or two in a City (to give notice of
Fire,) and all the late King's Parks and his Rents, that had Tenths, and sold
the Tithes, to make up these to give to the Impropriators that have bought
Tithes, and the Abbeys, and the Monasteries, which much of the Tithes were
given to; if you do intend to satisfy the Nation, and deny your selves of his
Parks, Houses, and Rents; so let them be sold, and the Colleges sold, and all
the Tithes that belong to them thrown down, etc.

P. 59. And you may sell all the Gleab lands, Abbylands, and Monasteries, and
Nunneries, and Kings Rents, and his Houses, and the Bells to pay the
Impropriators, who have bought the Tithes of Kings, let their Rents and Parks
be sold to pay them again, and let the Earth be restored again to its place;
and they that have bought them of Colleges, let the Gleab-lands be sold to pay
them; So let the Earth be Redeemed.

G, Fox HIS JUDGMENT Concerning Kingly Government, since the King was Restored.
Declar. P. 3, 4.
AND now because several of you, who are most concerned in this Government, are
not acquainted with our Principles and Practices, neither have known our
Innocence and Sufferings, -- and that no Prejudice were let into your Minds
from others Words, which proceed from secret Envy, Malice, and Hatred, and not
from any just Ground they have against us. -- We do therefore Declare, to take
off all Jealousies, Fears, and Suspicions of our Truth and Fidelity to the King
and these present Governors, That our Intentions and Endeavors are, and shall
be Good, True, Honest, and Peaceable toward them, and that we do Love, Own,
and Honor the King and the present Governors.

Observe, It is to be noted, That this Declaration of G. For's, etc. was
delivered to the King the very next Month after he came in, so early were they
in their Temporizing, that at the first reading of this among the Quakers, they
had writ, That they were his Loyal Subjects, and they had suffered much, as
himself had done. Which Words were highly opposed by one of the Assembly, who
told them, That if they put it out in the Name of the Quakers, he would Print
against it. Whereupon those Words were left out, and the Book put forth in the
Name of G. F. and Others, that subscribed it, in behalf of themselves and those
in the Same Unity with them. How cunning was this Subscription! For who would
have thought that by those in the Same Unity, was not meant every Quaker? And
yet they meant only those that were of the same Mind with the Subscribers,
which many were not.

II. Observe, Behold here the Man who before the King's Restoration declared
them Traitors against Christ who cried for an Earthly King, and the true
Christians will not have any more Kings among them, but Christ! Are they not in
their own Judgment become Apostates? for now they say, They love, own, and
honor an Earthly King. And in their Visit. to the King, p. 7. say to him,

IF thou take some speedy course for the repealing and making void those Cruel
Laws. -- happily thou may be as Moses to stand in the gap'twixt God and thy
People.

[ Did the Quakers verily think that K. C. was like to be asecond Moses, or did
they say so only to daub and flatter him?]

Again in the Trial of G, Fox in 1664. p. 8. 10. he says, (the Oath of
Allegiance being tendered to him,) That if he could take any Oath at all, upon
any occasion, he should take that Oath: And also said, He honored all Men,
much more the King.

Oh Gross Dissimulation! What temporizing is this? What unheard of Hypocrisy
is here? Will this Fig-leaf Garment cover the deceit of this Guide 's Falseness
and Perfidiousness from thy Discerning and Censure? I suppose not. However,
more of this thou may see in what follows.

G. F. G. W. and their Party's Declaration in the Year 1660. after the King
came in, p. 2.
ALL Bloody Principles and Prastices we (as to our own particular) do utterly
deny, with all Outward Wars, and Strife, and Fightings with Outward Weapons for
any End, or under any pretense whatsoever.

Observe. Notwithstanding this, G. F. and E. Borough undertake to direct and
principle Oliver and Richard, and the Officers and Soldiers what to do, and
how, viz. That they should go forth with a free willing Heart, and not stop
till they come at Rome, and blames them for turning, and charges them not to
turn Sober Men and True Hearts out of the Army, and to require the Blood that
has been shed in the Inquisition of Spain and Rome: and that the Quakers were
some of those True learts, appears by those other words of G. F's
expostulating, Why such as feared God and trembled at his Word should be put
out of the Army, which might have been a Blessing to the Lord in their
Generation.

And in page 3. of the same Declaration, they say thus; So those that use any
Weapon to fight for Christ, or for the Establishing of his Kingdom or
Government, both the Spirit, Principle, and Practice in that we deny.

Yet these same Men ( viz. G. F. and E. B.) would that the Officers and
Soldiers should have set up their Standard a Top of Rome, and have sent for
the Turks Idol, plucked up Idolatry, and cried up Christ the only King. Oh
wonderful!

Again see the Quakers Plea, 1661. How peaceable the Quakers are, and have
always been p 7.
NO better Testimony can be given of us and of our peaceableness (and that we
shall not Plot nor Rebel against the King) than Experience it self; Experience
is the best Witness, that we are peaceable, and free from Plotting and
Rebellion; for we have always been so since we were a People, both before and
since the King came in.

Obs. These peaceable Men not only approve of what the Army did against the
King and his Party, but would have them to continue Quakers in the Army, and to
enterprise the Subduing of Spain, and the Pope, and the Turk in their Spirit,
and to invite all that are against the Pope to take part with them; and they
promise the Protector, that if he would own them, they would own him in the
Face of all his Enemies Counsel and Advice p. 7.

And Francis Howgil says, It was a good thing that the Parliament overthrew the
late King; and that it is no Rebellion to call away [by which he means to
Depose] those in Power that perform not their Trust for the Good of the People.
See more of this hereafter.

Hear farther what G. F. etc. say to the King and Council after the rising of
the Fifth Monarchy Men, p. 2.
AND now that we should be reckoned amongst a People whose Principle is to
Fight, -- and avenge themselves; which astonishes all them which know it. I
believe your own Consciences tell you that we are harmless, and would do you no
harm, -- but wish your Good, etc. It Is known that those you have numbered us
amongst, never denied the bearing of Sword, nor Outward Weapons; but whose
Principle is to avenge themselves.

Obs. Could any People declare themselves more for fighting than they did? How
should Oliver keep his Crown but by fighting? How did he get it, but by
fighting? How should the Army set up their Standard a top of Rome, but by
fighting? How require the Blood that has been shed in the Inquisition, but by
fighting? In short, What should Men do with Swords, but to fight, and yet they
were not only to wear their Swords, but to cut down Idolaters with them, and
their Sword was to be the Sword of the Lord in their Hand. And E. Borough in
express for Avenging the Blood of the Guiltless through all the Dominions of
the Pope, and exhorts the Army to do this going forth in their ( the Quakers)
Spirit.

How dare these Men appeal to the King and Council 's Consciences, that they
are harmless, and would do them no harm; when they not only approve of what was
done in the late War, but offered their Service to Oliver, to own him (if he
would own them) against all his Enemies; and some of them gave Intelligence to
the Army against Sir George Booth, whorose to bring in the King. See p. 13. of
this Book.

And notwithstanding all that E. B. and others have written in Justification of
the Parliament's Cause against the King, yet at the King's coming in, that is
in the middle of May, 1660. then E. B. writes, (In his Book called, A
Visitation, etc. p. 12.)
IN the beginning there were but one sort of People that were in capacity to
raise and prosecute War against the King, and upon such there is Guilt to be
charged in the Sight of God; who have foregone their Principles, and been
deceitful both to God and Men. And as for us who are called Quakers, we are
clear from the Guilt of all his Sufferings, etc.

How often do they blame the Protector and others for putting of honest and
godly Men out of the Army; It may be because they cannot put off their Hats,
etc. and yet tell the King, They have suffered all along because they would not
take up Carnal Weapons to fight withal against any, and are thus made a Prey
upon, because (say they) we are the Innocent Lambs of Christ, and cannot avenge
our selves. Declaration, p 6. given forth under our Names, and in behalf of the
whole Body of the Elect People of God who are called Quakers.

G. For, R. Hubberthorn, I. Stubs, F. Howgil, G. Roberts, L. Fell, S. Fisher,
H. Fell, and others.

Farther in the Postscript thus: And all Wars and Fightings with Carnal Weapons
we do deny, who have the Sword of the Spirit. This the People called Quakers do
witness to all the World.

Again in P. 4. And this is both our Principle and Practice, and has been from
the Beginning, so that if we suffer as suspected to take up Arms, or make War
against any, it is without any ground from us, for it neither is, nor ever was
in our hearts since we owned the Truth of God, neither shall we ever do it,
because it is contrary to the Spirit of Christ, his Doctrine, and the Practice
of his Apostles.

These words of theirs may serve for a Reply to an Answer they make to an
Objection, that many of them have been in the Army against the King, and Kingly
Authority, to which they say (Quakers Plea, p. 4.) Though some that are now
called Quakers were once in the Army under the Powers against the King, when
their Knowledge and Judgments were not otherwise framed, but were of that
Principle and Practice that Fighting and going to War in it self, was lawful,
etc. yet being now altered, and turned in their Judgments to the contrary, and
that it is not lawful (in the Administration of the Gospel) to fight against,
or go to War with Carnal Weapons in any wise; there is now no danger of Us, and
now [We] are all of that Mind and Heart, that -- it is on all Occasions
whatsoever unlawful to go to War and Fight.

This pretended change of Judgment in G. Fox and his Preachers, is not to be
taken for a change of their Judgment, for they say, it neither is, nor ever was
in our Hearts since we owned the Truth of God [to take up Arms] which is a
Contradiction to their giving directions and charges to the Protector,
Officers, and Soldiers concerning Fighting, exhorting them thereunto, and to
go forth as an Army in their Spirit; and blamed them for putting honest sober
Men, and those that trembled at the Word of God out of the Army, and advising
them to take such in again. For G. F. and his Preachers can no more change
their Judgments than the Pope can change his Decrees without forfeiting his
Infallibility.

That they formerly exhorted Men to fight, and would fight themselves, and now
deny all Fighting on any pretense, is to be imputed to their Temporizing and
Deceit. For in the Book, entitled, Counseland Advice, etc. p. 44. G. F. and E.
B. tell Richard Protector, That if he would walk with the Lord, and preserve
his People ( meaning the Quakers,) then (say they) Thy Name shall be greater
than was thy Father's, and the numberless number of this (now) distressed
People will be unto thee a Strength, and stand by thee in the day of trouble,
and defend thee and thy Just Government, and their Hearts snall cleave to thee,
and thou shall prosper for their sakes, and none of thy Enemies shall have
Power over thee to destroy thee. And in p. 4^. they say, Friend, live in God's
Wisdom, if thou will reign in his Power and Strength, then none shall touch
thee, and all them that fear God will be on thy side, and take thy part, and be
one with thee in all thy Sufferings, yea, till death.

But see how the ease was altered in 1662. for then they tell the King and
Parliament thus, And our Allegiance to the King, our Lives have, and shall
manifest to him, and you, and all Men. Subscribed by G. For, E. Borough, F.
Howgil, S. Fisher, R. Hubberthorn, G. Whitehead, S. Thornton, L. Fell, and 20
more.

And notwithstanding that no People declared themselves more fully for the Long
Parliament Protectors, and Army than they, on condition they would own and
protect the Quakers; yet how shamefully do they reflect on others, and proclaim
their own Innocence!

See their Paper to the King and Council 1660. p. 5.
OH King! we would have thee do nothing against thy Prosperity and Nobility,
Oh! has the like ever been done as is done to us, (who are an Innocent People,
and thy Friends, and not thy Enemies) among all the Princes in Christendom to
mingle the Innocent among the Transgressors! Again, p 6. Oh that we should find
such things among you that have been Sufferers by the Same, as we have suffered
before you.

Obs. What Hypocrisy is here, when they pretend that themselves suffered for
Righteousness, and the King and his Party for wickedness and Tyranny? With like
Deceit they say in their Declaration given the King, Jan. 1660. subscribed by
twelve of their Grandees, p. 6. In the days of the Parliament and Committee of
Safety, we were looked upon as Plotters to bring in King Charles.

So G. Fox and I. Stubs in G. Whiteheads Book, The Divinity, etc. tell the
Presbyterians and Independents, that when the People of God called Quakers,
were gathered together in diverse places to Worship God, then (say they) you
said they were Plotting together against Oliver, to bring in King Charles.

Again, Touching Fighting, they have taken care to record what one of their
Ministry says, -- We directed all People to the Spirit of the Lord God in them
-- and if that led them to fight, I had nothing against it, fol. 4. [Recorded
in their Book of Outland Letters, and was spoken before a Court at Barbados,
where he was questioned touching their Principle in that case.]

But in their Declaration to the King, 1660. They say, p. 2. We certainly know,
and so testify to the World, that the Spirit of Christ which leads us into all
Truth, will never move us to sight and war against any Man with Outward
Weapons, neither for the Kingdom of Christ, nor for the Kingdoms of this World.

In the former Passage they suppose the Spirit of the Lord might lead to fight;
here they are positive that it never will. And in their Testimony to the
Magistrates, etc. subscribed by G. For and 11 more. They say all Plots,
Conspiracies, Alders, Assisters, or Conspirers thereunto, against the King, we
always did, and do utterly deny to be any of us. [ And presently after the
Execution of that worthy Patriot, the Lord Russel, they present their fawning
Address (which G. Whitehead, Francis Camfield, and Gilbert Layty carried to
Windsor) to K. Charles 2. Insinuating that the Lord R. and his Companions were
Guilty and they Innocent, and that they did not desire the least hurt either to
the King's Person or Government, or to the Person of his Brother the Duke of
York, and that they were clear from all Hellish Plots and Traiterous
Conspiracies, etc. being Works of the Devil and Darkness, etc.

But what is the reason the Quakers do not now declare against the late Hellish
Conspiracy etc. seeing one of the chief of them is accused of it by open
Proclamation?]

And in their Paper to King and Council, p. 7. they say, We are against
Violence and Plots, and Wars, and Fightings, they are below in the Fall from
God. And this we say, which is more to us than an Oath.

See now what Credit is to be given to G. F. and his Ministers in their most
solemn Professions, such as Oaths are amongst conscientious honest Men! For it
is well known that many Officers and Soldiers turning Quakers whilst in Arms,
continued so till they were thrust out; and they that put them out are much
blamed by G. F. and E. Borough, etc. for so doing, and are advised to take
such in again. These are the Men that advise the Protector (as we have noted)
to push down and tread under the High Places of Idolatry in all the Apostatized
Churches, not only Papists, but others. And in another place, To cry up Christ
the only King and Lord. Yet in their Remonstrance p. 14. 665. They say, We our
selves know that Sion must not be builded with Blood, nor the Church of God by
Weapons of War, nor Religion propagated by Violence, therefore we cannot strive
with these Weapons nor with any Carnal Weapons of War, either fight to defend
or offend.

Let the Reader judge now whether G. F. G. W. and their Party, their
reproaching, and railing on the Presbyterians and Independents, and other
Parties for their joining and abetting the late War, and approving the
Execution done upon the late King and his Party, crying up Oliver and Richard,
and the Old Parliament, and the Army, etc. and then when the King came in,
changing their Language, crying up this King, etc, Whether, I say, G. F G. W.
and their Party, are not far more guilty, and more abominable in these Matters
than any other Party whatsoever, whilst they so contumeliously upbraid others,
and have done the same things; and yet now under all these Contradictions,
Dissimulation, and Temporizing, do like the Whore in the Proverbs, wipe their
Mouth, and proclaim themselves an Innocent and harmless People, and others
alone guilty.

See their Book, entitled, The Guide Mistaken, 1668. p. 50, 51, 52. They write
thus,
AT the beginning of the Wars [Ionathan Clapham] a most precise Stickler for a
Reformation. -- But when the Independents were possessed of the Authority, --
'twas then the Beheaded King was by this Guide both Preached and Printed as a
Toe of the Image, the little Stone, cut out of the Mountain without hands, was
to smite; and therefore says, The Fall of the ten Kingdoms was begun; the Lord
is risen out of his Habitation, gainsay not; for who sees not the Alteration
is of the Lord. In another place says he, There can be no clearer Evidence that
God is about this work of breaking own this great Image, and smiting the very
Feet and Toes thereof, than this present Victory over the Scottish Forces at
Dunbar, (which we are now to render Thanksgiving to God for,) the Cause of this
War being whether this Image shall be upheld, or the Feet, and the Toes broken.
In short, O ye honored Worthies whom the Lord has raised up to effect these
great Changes, carry on the Lord's Work, that your People may not have cause to
say, we have changed our Tyrants, not our Tyranny. -- 'Twas also then in a
Dedicatory Epistle to O. Cromwell, allowed by him of England, Scotland, Ireland,
etc. Protector, to whom amongst other extraordinary Complements, I cannot let
pass these Expressions, where he invites him, as God's Delegate in Honor to
Jesus Christ, and out of the love to the Churches of Christ, for whose welfare,
you have this Power committed to you; -- concluding thus, The Lord of Heaven
and Earth bless your Highness with the continuance of his Gracious presence
with you, that as you have done valiantly in the High Places of the Field,
(that is fought against the King and Bishops) so you Govern as righteously and
happily in the Gates of the City.

Oh gross Dissimulation! Now it is he turns Eugagement Man, and is employed by
the several Churches in Norfolk to Richard Cromwell on the Death of Oliver, as
their Representative about the Petition or Address made by the Priests in
general, which term the Father, Moses, and the Son, the Joshua, that should
Conduct them to the Holy Land: -- After the King came in, This Guide -- changes
Oliver, Richard, or Parliment, for Charles (once a TOE of the Image that the
little Stone was to smite) of England, Scotland, Ireland, etc. -- The Beheaded
King (once the first broken Toe of the Image) now he Commemorates with an
Anniversary Sermon, etc. -- What temporizing is this? Oh what unheard of
Hypocrisy is here! But Reader, What is thy Opinion of the Matter? Can Oliver
be Moses, Richard be Joshua, and Charles Defender of the Faith all together, p
53. Reader, Will this Fig-leaf-Garment cover the Shame of this Guide's
Nackedness from thy Discerning and Censure, I hope not, etc.

[Obs. If the Episcopal Party had done this, would not the Quakers have called
it a breach of the Act of Indemnity, and disingenuous? But for themselves to do
it who had as much need of an Act of Pardon as others, What was it?

Again in their Answer to John Faldo, Quakerism a new Nickname, p. 109.

And why, poor Nonconformists, after all their Preached up Batels, spoils,
Plunders, Sacriledges, Derimations, etc.

Again p 119. These are true Gospel Ministers whose Gospel is Peace on Earth
and good will toward Men, and not Garments rolled in the Blood of Kings and
Princes and Rulers and People, no worldly Armies, Battles, Victories, Trophies,
Spoils, Sequestrations, Decimations, and the like Blood-thirsty and Tyrannical
Projects in which John Faldo and his poor Nonconforming Ministers have had
their Hands almost over Head and Ears, till they had well nigh lost their Ears
and their Heads too.

[Obs. Was not this to expose and render obnoxious to the Government, and that
in a time when the Nonconformist Ministers were under Persecution? Should any
have exposed the Quakers at such a season, What would they not have said
couching the treacherousness and baseness of it? And it seems this Mr. Faldo
whom they thus villifie, was too young to be concerned (...) those Projects.
But what might he now say of some Quakers in relation to the present
Government?]

See also their Book, entitled, A Just Rebuke to xxi Divines. p. 25.
HOw did the Presbyterians excite the Parliament in these very. Terms! Eliah
opposed Idolatry and Oppression, so do ye; down with Baal's Priests: which is
as much as to say, Away with your Archbishops and Bishops, the whole Ministry
and Worship of the Church of England. Again, The Mouths of your Adversaries are
opened against you, that so many Delinquents (that is to say Royalists) are in
Prison, and yet but very few of them brought to their Trial, (did he mean to
release them.) And says another of your Eminent Brethren before the Commons,
Aug 28. 1644. Ye cannot Preach nor Pray them down immediately -- well, that
which the Word cannot do, the Sword shall.

[Obs. Again, Is not here exposing and rendering of Persons as obnoxious to the
then Government as they could?]

This following is a Copy of a Letter I writ to G. W. 22. February 1678. being
above a Year after the foregoing was sent them.

G. Whitehead, I have lately seen your Book, entitled, The Way cast up etc. and
therein these following Passages, viz.
ANd how many Garments were rolled in Blood by Instigation of the Presbyterian
Teachers, the whole Nation was a Witness; so that many thousands were made
Widows and Fatherless by that War they stirred up the People unto, etc. p 23.

[Obs. Was not this that War, in which the Quakers said the Army were Glorious
Instruments in the Hand of God, and that God by his Spirit and Power was not
only the Beginner but the Carryer on of that work, and that it was his presence
and power in the Army that gave them perfect Victory? And abundance more to the
same purpose. Observe the other Column.]

P. 52. Some of the Presbyterian Nonconformist Preachers are fled beyond Sea,
others lurk in Corners here and there, and keep private Conventicles; where
many times they preach Sedition against their Lawful Prince; by instigation of
whom, that Insurrection happened in 1666.

[Obs. Could any thing more be said by the Common Informers, or by the most
inveterate Enemies of separate. Meetings, than these Men here say and publish
against the Presbyterians? Is not this a high degree of Malice against them,
and Flattery of their Persecutors?]

P. 53. And some of them have Printen Books in defense of the Lawfulness of
making War against the Supreme Magistrate, etc.

[Obs. And have not the Quakers Printed Books to the same purpose, particularly
F. H. and E. B. To the Committees of Safety. See the other Column, p. 12, 13].

P. 54. And in very Truth, the Presbyterian Church will never be able to purge
her self of the Iniquity of killing many thousands in the three Nations, by the
occasion of a most bloody War raised up through the Instigation of the
Presbyterian, Teachers.

[Obs. If the Presbyterians be thus guilty of sheding of the Blood that was
shed in that War, who disserted the CAUSE before the King's Head was cut off,
then what are the Quakers; who not only approved of what was then done, but
incited the Army not to leave Root nor Branch of Idolatry, Oppression, and
Tyranny, till they had set up their Standard at the Gates of Rome, and to
avenge the Blood of the Guiltless, throughout all the Dominions of the Pope;
which had the Army obeyed, would there not have been many more Garments rolled
in the Blood of Kings, and People, than ever was in England? Let the Impartial
Judge.]

A Paragraph is omitted here for want of room.

Understanding this Book was Printing, and the two Letters of my Name
transposed, [which are now placedright,] I writ the following Paper, and
ordered it to be inserted here. J. P.
OH Earth, Earth, Earth, hearken and consider! Was there ever such a People as
G. F. [G. W.] and their Party that had such Foreheads and Faces of Brass? who
for about 20 Years have been reviling and recriminating others, for those very
things they have most highly been guilty of themselves; yea, and were greatly
offended with those that would not go on further with the Work and Cause they
were then engaged in, and did not only instigate and press Dliver, Richard, and
the Army, to Crumble Nations to dust, and to Trample Deceit and Tyrants under,
etc. but also exhorted them not to leave off till they set their Standard on
Top of Rome Gates, as is before mentioned; and yet upon the King's coming in,
how did they seek to clear themselves by accusing others, as in the little
Colum; and in another Book of theirs (lately come to my hands) entitled,
Truth's Character of Professors, they laid open the Addresses and Applications
which others had made to D. C. and R. C. making long Animadversions thereupon,
not only to defame, but also to stir up the Powers against them, as in p. 15.
viz. Must the Weapons that they have been forming against others be turned into
their own Bowels! -- even by such as will have no more pity in their Hearts
toward them, than they have had toward the Innocent. And what! must not
Jealousy be stirred up in the Powers of the Earth against them, as they have
stirred up Jealousy in the Powers of the Earth against others, etc. And as
they have sought to make others ridiculous, even so shall they become
contemptible in the Eyes of those which they by their Flatteries fawned upon,
who may for a season suffer them for their own Ends, etc.

But this was not all that was designed by G. F. [and his Ministers] so early
defaming, crying out, and stirring up the Powers against other Professors, but
also to blind those then in Power, as if themselves had been altogether
Innocent and clear touching those Matters.

And is it not strange that they should call the Presbyterians in the late
times, Rebels and Traitors for but endeavoring the King's Restoration; and
yet after he was come in, most bitterly and invectively writ against them for
being once Opposers of him. Are not these the Persons that say, Their giving
forth Papers or printed Books, it is from the immediate Eternal Spirit of God?
and that if ever we own the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, we must own
their Writings, which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power: [And that
they have thousands at their Meetings, that none of them dare speak a Word, but
by eternal Motion: A True Account, p. 18.
] And their so speaking [i.e. Speaking by the Spirit] G. W. says, is of as
great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and Greater. Ser. Apol. p.
49.

What shall we say to these Men! I am even struck with Amazement, Astonishment,
and Silence, that a People pretending so high, should bring forth such wicked
and ungodly Fruits: and though some may be troubled that these are now come to
light; yet others will not a little wonder that they have been hid and kept
secret so long: And doubtless, had they not still gone on insinuating by
Flatteries with the Government, and writing so reflectingly upon Dissenters,
with their Reproaching and Scandalizing other Sober Persons more [Chast] and
Innocent than themselves; These things had never come thus public, and so they
reap the Fruit of their own Doings, and that very way they thought to secure
and strengthen themselves, has helped forward their own Destruction.

And seeing there is no hopes of their Repentance or Forbearance, [ as to these
things] (all other ways and means (which have not been a few that have been
used to prevent them) proving ineffectual,) it is now thought meet thus to
expose them [ this year 91.] (as they for many Years have exposed others,) that
so if possible their Mouths and Pens may be stopped from any such Procedure
hereafter; and it may be, when too late, they will remember, 'Twas the Foolish
and Clamorous Woman that pulled down her House [which is falling a pace] with
her own Hands.

Here follows one of the Forms of their Oaths, which Stephen Crisy, one of
their great Preachers, imposed upon one called a Quaker, who had Mortgaged his
Land to him and others for a Sum of Money; but before he would let him have the
said Money (notwithstanding he had Signed and Sealed and Delivered according to
their Agreement) he forced him (though with much dissatisfaction) to Sign and
Seal this following; (which by their own Definition of an Oath, is an absolute
Oath. Their Definition of an Oath is set down hereafter.)
THE -- day -- month --: I -- do testify in the truth of my Heart by these
presents; that whereas I have Mortgaged an Estate of mine, lying in -- in the
County -- unto Stephen Crisp Junior, etc. as by Deeds and Writings this day
bearing date does appear; I say, I do hereby testify in the truth of my Heart,
and in the Presence of HIM that knows all things, and in the presence of
these faithful Witnesses, that I have not before this Contract aforesaid,
contracted, bargained, sold, or engaged the said Estate to, or with any Person
or Persons whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, etc. but that it was
freely and absolutely, both before, and at the Sealing and Delivery of the said
Mortgage abovementioned, in my power to sell, etc. --

Witness at Signing and Sealing, Samuel Newton, John Bolton, (two of their
Preachers.)

Now see their Definition of an Oath in their Answer to one J. S. who asserted
that to say, God is my Witness. I say the Truth in Christ, I lie not, my
Conscience bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost. I call God to Record on my
Soul. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows that I lie not. And
that Jacob and Laban are said to Swear in these Form of Words, So God is
Witness between me and thee, were Oaths.
[Obs. Any of which, without laying the Hand on the Book, or other Ceremony, or
more saying, is not only an Oath; but if Authorized by Act of Parliament, is as
much a Legal Dath, as any now in use amongst us.]

THE Quakers Answer to J.S. These Forms of Speeches used by the Apostle, and by
Jacob and Laban, So God is Wituess between me and thee. God is my Witness, etc.
are of themselves (without the Addition of somewhat more as an outward Sign or
Pledge) neither Oath or Swearing; which somewhat more, as an outward Sign or
Pledge, was that which gave the Denomination of an Oath or Swearing, etc.
Again, That the Forms of Speech used by Jacob and Laban, and by the Apostles
and others -- of themselves, without adding of somewhat more as an outward Sign
or Pledge, are neither Oaths or Swearing. It is worthy Observation, that where
mention is made of an Oath or Swearing in the Scriptures of Truth, there is
also mention made of some outward Sign or Pledge which was added to the Forms
of Speech by them used; which somewhat more being added, was that which gave
the Denomination of an Oath or Swearing to the Forms of Speech; without which
addition of somewhat more than Yea or Nay, as a Sign or Pledge, the Forms of
Speech of themselves, was neither Legal Oath or Swearing.

A second Testimony concerning Oaths, p. 3, 4, 5.

A Copy of a Letter and Paper (mentioned in the Title Page) sent to G. F. March
17. 1674/5.
I Being engaged (as well as some others) to manifest and lay open Deceitful
Workers and Hypocrites; I am farther to appear and manifest thee to be one of
the greatest Hypocrites and Deceivers in this Nation, and until thou own thy
Condemnation, and leave off deceiving the People; assuredly, the Sword that is
now drawn is not to be, nor must not be sheathed till thou and such Deceivers
as thou art be cut down. This following I am to send thee; concerning which I
shall wait some time for thy Answer before it go farther; and what thou writest
to or concerning me; set thy own hand to it, and get not others to set their
Names to thy words and works of Wickedness as thou have done.

Something of G. F's Deceit and Hypocrisy discovered.
IT IS not unknown what great Desires and Longings there was in the generality
of the People of this Nation (in the Year 1659.) to have a King, by whom they
expected to be freed from those Impositions they were under; but some others
fearing if it were so, it would be for the worse, caused a zeal in some
particular Persons to write against Kingly-Government; amongst the rest we find
G. Fox, who (did not only write his own judgment barely as a Man (as others
did,) but as a Man of GOD, taking upon him to instruct all others,) put forth a
Book the same year 59. entitled, Several Papers given forth by G. But is this
to render him Obnoxious to the Government; no I abhor that Practice, but base
and self-ended Spirits are to be humbled, and not think themselves fit to cry
down other Peoples Religion that have by Treachery Persecution and Falseness
too much reproached all Religion, as says Judas and the Jews; i.e. G. F. etc.
F. wherein he writes about ten pages against a King, and therein tells the
Presbyterians, etc. There was no King owned among the true Christians, but only
amongst the Apostates, since Christ's time; -- That they were Traitors to
Christ that desired a King; -- and farther tells them what a King would be to
them, (if they had one,) repeating those words Samuel spoke to the Israelites:
-- Then he bids them look what work Joshua made with the Kings that were in the
Cave (a fit place for them) says G. Fox, p. 13.

But no sooner the Scene of Affairs changed, but he changes his Dialect, and
the very next Month after the King came in, he (with some others) put forth a
Declaration, and therein they writ, That they owned and honored the King and
the present Government; -- yea, they had flatteringly writ therein, That they
were his Loyal Subjects, and that they had suffered much, as himself had done,
etc. And being called before a Court (in Lancashire) where the Oath of
Allegiance was tendered him, he told them, that if he could take any Oath in any
case, he could take that Oath; and farther said, he honored all Men, much more
the King, etc. What! Is this the Man that said They were Traitors to Christ
that desired a King? etc. and now himself says, he honors all Men much more
the King, etc. Oh Strange! Is this he that is so highly esteemed and exalted by
his Proselites, and even adored by some of his Josi. Cole. Sol. Eccles, etc.
Preachers, who style him, The Father of many Nations. That Generations to come
shall call him Blessed. Whose Being and Habitation is in the Power of the
Highest. At whose Name the Heathen tremble, (or were pricked at the Heart A
True Account, etc. p. 42.
.) The Blessed Man that came out of the North. Who has been faithful in the
Lord's Business from the Beginning. That true Prophet, whom John said he was
not. And many more such like Appellations, as, Innocent, Good, Holy, Upright
Man of God. Prophet indeed, etc. Well, but what does he say of himself? viz.
That he is beyond the State of the First Adam that fell; in the State of the
Second Adam that never fell; yea, that his very Marriage was above the State of
the First Adam in his Innocence, in the State of the Second Adam that never
fell; -- and that he never fell nor changed. And yet how has he turned about
with the Wind? which he says they that are in the Fall do, and are in the
changing changeable ways, etc. And by his thus turning, and changing, does it
not manifest him to be in the Fall, Fallen, and changeable State, according to
his own Words? And yet how far is he from the least acknowledment thereof, that
he goes on and says, He has power to bind and to loose whom he pleases? And
takes upon him to make Laws and Orders for People, and appoints them Time and
Place when and where to Worship; yea, this is he that presumed to alter (or
caused to be altered) [ unto which G. Whitehead was Privy] the very substance
of a Paper that was declared to be writ from the Spirit of GOD; and so
adulterated, sends it beyond Sea, which John Osgood, William Penington and my
self complained of to some of the Chief Preachers, but not one of them would
(or through fear durst) say that he had done amiss therein, notwithstanding the
Forgery was so manifest; and the Author said (when he came to see it) that he
was abused in it, etc. and this coming lately to public view, is still so far
from being disowned or condemned; that Judas, etc. endeavors to cover and
justify it with this Saying, The Spirit of the Prophets must be subject to the
Prophets. Oh horrid Impudence and Wickedness! not only to commit so great an
Iniquity, but to bring the Holy Man's words to Patronize and Justify such an
Enormous Fact. Certainly none that truly fears GOD, who shall come to the
knowledge of these things, will either own him to be a Servant or Prophet of
the LORD, until he come to Repentance for these and other his Wickednesses;
among the rest, that of getting Persons to set their Names to his abusive
Papers and Writings, and also that of his villifying, reproaching, and belying
those that oppose him, (how virtuous and innocent soever they be:) Can any
parallel him herein?) with his (and his Adherents) late fawning, flattering
Address to the King and Parliament; wherein are these words; And the Oaths
provided to testify Allegiance to the King, and denial of the Pope's Supremacy
in Causes Civil and Ecclesiastical, the Refusal whereof incurs a Praemunire; has
been executed upon such whose Hearts and Hands could seal to the Substance
thereof. -- And yet their Consciences not allowing them to Swear at all
(because of the Command of Christ;) for that Only they have been the sole
Sufferers thereby. -- And (toward the Close) they say, That if they be called
to bear witness, or any Office, to or for she King, or their Country, and
testify their Truth or Faithfulness, to one or both, in which Cases Oaths are
usually required and imposed. They desire and request that an Act or Provision
might be made, That their Yea, and Nay, may be accepted and taken instead
thereof, etc. Concerning which I shall say little more at present, but conclude
with a few words formerly writ by another [ concerning them] viz.

What will you do? You Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, you that have been long
making clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, but inwardly are as Ravening
Wolves, your Fruits will make you manifest; you Hypocrites, your Name will be a
stink among the Heathen for the LORD will find you out, whose Glory He will not
give to any other, nor His Honor to any of your Graven Images: My Soul loathes
all your false Covers; ye Hypocrites, I cannot but declare against all your
false ways.

J. P.
The Days of Visitation are come, the Days of Recompense are come, Israel shall
know it, I will recompense them according to the Works of their own Hands: They
have sown the Wind, and they shall reap the WHIRLWIND.



FINIS.
For the Preachers and Leaders of the People, called, QUAKERS.
YOUR Day into Darkness is turned; the Sun is gone down over you: You have had
a large Day and Power given you, to have done the Will of GOD; but you have
abused the Power, and slighted your Day, and have refused to do the LORD's
Work, and have sought your Selves, and not the LORD; therefore in Justice and
Righteousness is the Day, wherein you might have wrought for GOD, taken from
you, and the thick Dark Night of Confusion is come upon you, wherein you are
groping, and stumbling, and cannot work: The DECREE is gone out, and it cannot
be recalled. You are not the Men (as ye stand) in whom GOD will appear to work
Deliverance for His People, (and yet Deliverance shall come;) but as for You,
ye have rejected the Counsel of the LORD, and grieved His Spirit, and He has
long born you; yea, You are departed from the LORD, and His Presence is
departed from You: Indeed He has hewed with You, (and if you had been faithful
to the End, He would have honored and prospered You, and have been your
sufficient Reward:) Ye were His AX, but you have boasted your selves against
Him: Therefore as you have hewed and broken others, even so must You be hewed
and broken.

O ye Treacherous, Wilful, Proud, Self-seeking People! who have despised the
Counsel of the LORD, and would not take warning, though He has sent His
Servants among you, some of whom you have despitefully used; What will ye do
now? Whom will you now flee unto for help? Seeing you are departed from the
LORD. Remember your End, which hastens greatly; Breach upon Breach, Division
upon Division shall there be, until HE come to Reign whose Right it is.

They that trust in, or lean upon You for help, it is as if they leaned upon a
broken Reed, which is not able to help it self nor others. You have been made
to do many good things, but you would not go through with the Work which GOD
will have accomplished, and therefore are these things come upon you. Therefore
tremble and dread before the LORD, Ye who have been as strong Oaks, and tall
Cedars; for now shall your Strength fail you, and you shall be weak, even as
the weakest of Men: But if you would yet submit to GOD's righteous Judgments,
you might come to witness your Souls saved in the DAY of the LORD; though many
are to be thrown by (because of grievous Backslidings) as not counted worthy to
be the LORD's Workmen.

There is a small Remnant yet among you (for whom my Soul breaths) who may be
Winnowed out; and if they will own the Judgments of the LORD, and truly and
thoroughly deny themselves, and sollow His Leadings, He will heal their
Backslidings; but they that will continue with you in your Sins, shall partake
with you of your Judgments.

The foregoing Words (excepting the Title) were writ (by another) 1659. to the
then Rulers, upon whom they were fulfilled; and so as certainly shall they be
fulfilled upon you.

J. P.
[ This was Printed, and given them in April 1673. much of which being already
fulfilled, and believing the remainder will, in its appointed season; causes
me to have it reprinted and placed here, that whoever reads and considers it
(as also what W. R. F. B. T. C. W. M. and others have written concerning them)
may plainly see they have been warned of their great Apostasy and Downfall many
years ago.]



SOME REMARKS Upon a Book, entitled, Christ's Lambs defended against Satan's
rage, etc. Being the Quakers Answer to The Quakers Unmasked, etc.
In a Letter to E. S. Esquire
SIR,
HAving had the curiosity and opportunity of reading, The Quakers Unmasked,
Their Double dealing and False-heartedness discovered, etc. I thought it
impossible for the Quakers to vindicate themselves from that Authors Charge;
which made me desirous to read their Answer; and having perused it, I can
scarce forbear to Remark some few Passages, which are clear Confutations of
their boasted Innocence, Plainness, and Christian Charity.

In the Advertisement to the Reader, G. Whitehead takes notice that The Quakers
Unmasked, etc. was sent them in Manuscript in the year 1677. and that Liberty
of Conscience being established by Law, and placed upon the Book in writing, is
the cause of its now publication. Which (says G. W.) looks as if he envyed our
present Liberty. Behold the Spirit of this Answerer! Mr. Pennyman kept his
Books unpublished for 13 years together, lest it might be any occasion of the
Quakers Persecution; but when Liberty of Conscience is established by Law, he
publishes 10 or 11 of them, presuming there is now no danger of their being
persecuted. Does this look as if he envyed their present Liberty, and not
rather that he was glad of it, as no doubt he is.

In p. 6. to the Reader. Our Adversary, again p 14. (says he) deals very
unfairly and unjustly by G. W. about some of our Friends, saying, They give
forth Writings from the immediate Eternal Spirit of God, and by the same Spirit
and Power that was in the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles; unto which he
falsely adds, And their so speaking (G. W. says) is of as great Authority as
the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater; his words (and their so speaking)
are J. P's own Abuse and Perversion. Now I beseech you, Sir, read the Passage
in p. 14. and see wherein J. P's Abuse and Perversion lies. It lies in this,
that he added these words [ and their so speaking] and did not put them in a
different Character, to distinguish them from G. W's words, though they did not
alter the sense at all; if you leave them out, the Passage is as much to the
same purpose, as if they were in. Did ever any Writer charge his Adversary with
Abuse and Perversion upon so slender an account? What an affront is it to the
simple-hearted Reader to write at this rate? This is the Man that in his Letter
to J. O. threatens Mr. P. farther to detect and unmask him if he will not be
reduced to Christianity. Does he mean by Christianity, Quakerism, which it
seems teaches him to use the basest Equivocations and Slights that can be found
in any Writer?

Of his Book, p. 3. He utterly denies it as a Slander, that the Quakers
formerly exhorted Men to fight and would fight themselves. I must refer you to
The Quakers Unmasked, etc. to judge whether that is a Slander, or not? It will
abundantly satisfy you, whilst you understand their Writings in the plain
honest sense of the Words without their after Equivocations. J. P cites one of
the, Quakers Ministers, saying, We directed all People to the Spirit of God in
them, and if that led them to fight, I had nothing against it; for this, says
G. W. he quotes, fol. 4. but tells us not what Book. But why did he not tell J.
P so 13 years ago when he desired to know what Errors they sound in the
Quotations, (if there were any; however to satisfy him that it was a true
citation, he took it out of the Quakers Book, where Foreign Letters were
recorded, which was first in J. O's custody and afterward in J. P's.

P. 4. The Quakers tell Rich. Protector, 'That he would walk with the Lord, and
preserve his People, then thy Name shall be greater than was the Fathers, and
the numberless number of this [Now] distressed People will be unto thee a
strength, and stand by thee, and Defend thee and thy just Government. Sir, If
you had been Protector, I persuade my self, you would have thought these People
would have fought to defend you and your Government: But whatever they or you
thought then, the meaning now is, according to G. W. etc. they would defend him
and his Government, By Righteousness, Prayers, and Faith, and by Contributions,
Taxes, etc. or the fear of the Lord, as in the days of Jehosaphat. Would you
not judge that Man perjured, that should swear Allegiance in such terms, with
such a meaning? And must we not take the Quakers words for as binding as an
Oath?

Next, p. 5. you will please to note what G.W. Answers to the Charge of
upbraiding others with that which themselves, for many years, were as deeply
concerned and engaged in, etc. To all which, says G. W. I do conscientiously
Answer, He has most grossly and palpably belyed the People called Quakers in
these Passages diverse ways. First, in rendering them, without exception of
Persons, not only Justifiers of the late Wars, and what had been done therein,
without exception of things done, but also equally concerned with the
Presbyterians, Independents, and others therein. But do the Quakers when they
charge these things upon the Presbyterians, etc. make any exception of Persons
or Things? And yet it is well known, and it is proved out of their own writings
in The Quakers Unmasked, etc. that their Chief Leaders approved of the greatest
things done in the late Wars against the King, and to his Person; whereas the
Presbyterians generally dis-approved of them. Besides they say, their giving
forth Papers or Printed Books, is from the immediate eternal Spirit of God, and
that their Preachers are guided by an Infallible Spirit, and that they are of
one Mind and Judgment, and the like; and therefore an indefinite, and general
charge will affect them more generally than other Parties.

G. W. says, p. 6. The War began in 41. and in 48 the King was Beheaded, and
all this while no Quakers heard of, till about 50.51, 52. when there was no
Wars in England for them to be concerned in, how false then is J P. to say, The
Quakers were as much, or more, concerned in the War against the King as any
others. But G. W. confesses, that diverse who have been since, and now of us,
[Quakers,] have formerly been concerned in the late Wars. And J. P. has made
evident their approbation of what was then done, and that many that turned
Quakers in the Armies, continued there till they were turned out, that the
Protector is blamed for putting them out by G. Fox and others, that they are
called, Sober Men and true Hearts that feared God and trembled at His Word,
valiant Captains, Soldiers, and Officers, it may be for saying thou to a single
Person, or for wearing their Hats, etc. the distinguishing Characters of
Quakers from others. Whereas, he says, there was no Wars in England in
50.51.52. it is a piece of his cunning, and is false; for Worcester Fight was
in the year 51. and Sir George Booth's Insurrection in 1659. when the Quakers
gave intelligence, calling them Rebels, for but endeavoring to bring in the
King; and for some years there were Wars both in Scotland and Ireland, and upon
the Sea, and in Flanders. See E. Burrough's Alarm Sounded, etc. 1659. The
Quakers Unmasked, etc. p. 6. 9. You see then how G. W's Answer is both false
and deceitful

P. 7. 8. G. VV. charges J. P. with an apparent lie, in saying, the Quakers had
been engaged in the same Cause, so as to Preach up Battles, etc. But I pray
Sir, what difference is there between Preaching up Battles, etc. and exhorting
Generals, Officers, and Soldiers, to go forth against mighty Enemies till they
had subdued them, and set up their Standard a top of Rome, and done many other
things which were to be done by Fighting? And that in the Quakers Spirit. See
E. B's Alarm Sounded, etc. p 28.

P 9, 10. G.W. Commends the Quakers for their forbearance toward J. P. and is
confident that had J. P. looked upon them as Fighters, etc he durst not have
adventured to have given them such frequent and public occasions of
provocations and frequent disturbances and interruptions. To this, J. P. says,
he has always been careful never to interrupt them, nor to give them any
disturbance otherwise than by speaking a few words, either before they began to
Preach, or when any one of them had done Preaching; and though the words which
he spoke they could not gainsay, but were true; yet because they looked upon t,
that in what he spoke he meant them therefore (notwithstanding his peaceable
behavior) he has sometimes found himself in much danger from the Quakers, who
have frequently done violence to him them selves, and that in the place where
he has a Propriety.

P. 10. They would excuse G. Fox in what he says against an Earthly King, etc.
by turning it into an Earthly oppressing King, and setting an Earthly King over
them, p. 11. But did not King Charles the Second (to whom they addressed so
early, professing their Innocence formerly, and their present Truth and
Fidelity to him) challenge the Supreme Power over the Church? Are not all these
Elders Christians, that will dote so much of an Earthly King Traitors against
Christ? says G. Fox; And whom did they dote upon but Charles 2 (and afterward
upon King James) whom the Quakers do now love, own, and honor? Neither do you
read, says G. F. that there ever was an Earthly King since the days of the
Apostles, but amongst the Apostate Christians. So then according to their own
Principle, when King Charles 2. was among the Quakers he was among Apostate
Christians; or else they temporiz'd and changed their Principles, holding that
there might be an Earthly King among true Christians. And how could they
profess their Innocence to the King, and that none had any just cause against
them, since they had maintained such Principles as aforesaid? The case of the
Prophet Samuel was far different from that of the Quakers, he was chief
Magistrate himself, and they a little part of a People that had put to Death
their King, and kept out the Heir by Arms, (of both which the Quakers
sufficiently approved.) Now, suppose, Samuel had been the Representative of the
Quakers, and the Heir made King contrary to his mind and endeavor, would he
have addressed him, and said. You are not acquainted, O King, with my Principle
and Practice, neither have known my Innocence and Sufferings, they that speak
against me as a Person that was an Opposer of your Kingship, and did vehemently
exhort the People from subjecting themselves to your Arbitrary and Oppressive
Power, had no just ground for that Charge. I love, own, and honor you and your
Government. Might not the King have answered him, Are not you ashamed, Samuel,
to play the Hypocrite in this gross manner? Do you brag of your Principle, and
Practice, and Innocence before me in this matter, since if the People had acted
according to your Principle, and done as you would have had them, I should
never have recovered my Kingdoms? If you are innocent, who is guilty? Is this
your Innocent Plainness? Who then is Equivocating and Deceitful? Your Pride
will not suffer you to acknowledge any Error in Principle or Practice, because
ye have professed to speak and write from the immediate Eternal Spirit of GOD,
though you are found fallible and foolish as other Men.

P. 15. The Quakers Unmasked, is cited, saying, Are not they in their own
Judgments become Apostates, for now they say we love, own, and honor an
Earthly King. G. W. answers, p. 16. And where do we use these very words
Earthly King on this occasion, but that we love, own, and honor the King,
(whom here this Mau has judged an Earthly King,) does this show us to be
Apostates. Remark Did you ever read a more frivolous Answer? Was it any other
King but that very King Charles 2. whom they had writ so bitterly against,
under the Name of an Earthly King? he was an Earthly King before, when they
said, They were Traitors against Christ that will dote so much on an Earthly
King; but now the Quakers love, own, and honor him, he shall not be called an
Earthly King. He was an Earthly King before when the Episcopals and
Presbyterians doted on him; but now he is become the Quakers King he must be
somewhat else; I presume not a Heavenly King; but this is somewhat of the
Quakers plainness.

P. 19. G.W. says, I am persuaded that reproving him [ O. C. Protector] for
putting such [as feared GOD, sober Men and true Hearts, because of their
faithfulness to the LORD,] out of the Army for their Consciences, was MORE upon
his breach of Promise, than with an intent to have them always continue in it,
in order to War and Fight. Here G. W. or whoever writ this passage, would seem
to have some sense of Conscience; for his saying MORE is a comparative with
what follows; and argues that it was written with an intent to have had them
always to continue in the Army in order to War and Fight, though MORE upon his
breach of Promise. I doubt we shall not find G. W. etc. guilty of so much
openness again throughout the whole Book. Do not the Quakers hold that none
fear GOD truly and rightly but themselves? That they are in the Truth, and none
but they; and only among them is GOD known?

Christ was not contradictory to himself in bidding his Disciples to sell their
Garments, and buy Swords, and consequently to wear Swords (as Peter did,)
because He says my Kingdom is not of this World, or from hence; but Christ was
contradictory to the Quakers sense of that saying, because if it was not lawful
to Fight, in any case, Christ would never have bid them buy Swords: But I did
not intend to argue the lawfulness of Fighting, only G. W. brings it in
needlessy.

P. 21. One of their chiefest Preachers had said, It is no Rebellion to call
away those in Power; by which J. P. understands to Depose those in Power that
perform not their Trust: G. W. calls this a perverse addition of a meaning, as
if to call away and to Depose were both one in common acceptance. But G. W. is
not pleased to tell us what other thing was meant by it, and I am persuaded
that no Man but a fore-warned Quaker will take them for other than both one.

But I must hasten; read his 23 page, and you will find it amount to this, Had
you [the Army] been faithful to the Power of the LORD GOD, you had gone into
Spain to require the Blood of the Innocent, -- and knocked at Rome Gates, etc.
[And done wonderful great things by wicked and unchristian Fighting, or
otherwise by the fear and terror of your Power, Arms, and Conquests without
Fighting,] or as the Host of the Midianites fled and were overcome. and yet not
by Fighting on Gideon 's part, but by a mean Stratagem. Quere, Whether they
that kill by Stratagem do not Fight? And when the Ephraimites slew Oreb and
Zeeb, and brought their Heads to Gideon, and pursued Midian, they did not
Fight? Judges. 7.25. And whether Barack, Jepthah, Samson, David, Samuel, and
the Prophets, who by Faith subdued Kingdoms, and turned to flight the Armies of
the Aliens did not Fight? G.W. has found out all these ways of an Army's
Conquering without Fighting. Sir, I know you are an impartial Man, can you
think seriously (not that any Man to whom the Quakers wrote, or any Man that
should read what they wrote, would understand them in any such sense, without
Fighting; for I take it for manifest no Man did; but) whether they that wrote,
or even the Quakers themselves, (till now they are pressed with these
passages,) ever thought of such Senses? And if not, where is the Quakers
plainness, whereof they so nauscously boast?

P. 24. G. W. says, It cannot consist with our Christian Principle, so much as
to avenge our selves. Who are more ready to avenge themselves in Word and Print
than Quakers? How have they railed and reviled their Opposers? Witness those
Names G. W. calls Will. Rogers, F. Bugg, Tho. Crisp and others, in the Preface
to his Book, Judgment fixed, viz. Apostate-Informers, Treacherous Hypocrites,
False Brethren, and Deceitful Workers, Betraying Indas's, Devils Incarnate, who
having tossed their first love to Truth, and gone out from us, are become
degenerate, without Natural Affections, Dogs that are without, Wolves, and
raging waves of the Sea, that foam out their own shame. And a multitude of
other such like Names do they call those that oppose, and cannot conform to
their outward Prescriptions and Impositions, besides their frequent violence
with their own Hands, See the complaint of one of their own People, touching
this matter,

It has been their lot to be haled, (with violence) out of the Assemblies, --
Did I think to see the same violence offered in our Assemblies! Nay, but with
Sorrow, mine Eyes have seen pulling down, haling out, and thrusting forth of
our Meetings, and they went to the utmost, as far as their Power; and doubtless
they wanted not Will but Power to punish.

And although they exercise the Oppressions beforementioned, (and much more as
may be seen in the said Book;) yet by their deceitful flatterits, they make
People believe, That they are harmless, innocent, and peaceable People,
suffering and bearing wrong but not doing any. And if any Person write, or
speak their Grief, they will represent them under such terms as may render them
odious; and the more effectually to weaken their Testimonies they will fix upon
them scurrilous and contemptible Appellations, as Scotch-Men, Welsh men,
Tinker, Tailor, etc. Some of them utterly untrue; and to prevent an Inquisition
into the matter, they would make People believe, that they are envious,
malicious, and discomposed Spirits, bad, dirty, factions, and ranting Spirits,
who are gone from Truth, and are out of Truth. Such is the Portion of those
that appear in the least against their imperious, tyrannical, and lascivious
Actions: And whatever Man detected the Fallacies, and destructive Cheats of
imperious, disdainful Men, but was thus reproached?

Must it be Justice in them to complain of their Oppressions; and Envy, and
Malice, etc. in us to complain of ours? Their years are but few; yet verily
they have been exceeding expert to learn of the Papists, Subtilties. Spirit of
the Hat, p. 29, 36, 37.


and what is a great part of this Book of G W. etc. but avenging themselves of
J. P.? They might have said all they had to say in their own vindication,
without those manifold reproaches, and even Curses, which they belch out
against him, such as that in p. 30 God will smite thee, thou malicious
Hypocrite. Our Innocence shall rise up in Judgment against thee. Read to the
end of that Paragraph. Of this nature is G. W. glorying, that Jer. Ives not
long after his malicious Works against us [Quakers] was soon cut off by Death,
p. 33.

I must desire you, Sir, to read p. 34, 35, 36, 37. of their Vindication of
that Declaration to which Mr. P -- 's Name was amongst the rest subscribed, and
then judge what disingenuity and deceit there was in him, to insert the
substance of that Declaration, without telling that his own Name was to it,
since his Name was not to those after Declarations, which are inconsistent with
this. 2. Whether it is possible to give a more Equivocating Answer to any
charge, than G. W. etc. has given of this? They say, God might command
Thousands and Ten Thousands of His Saints, at this Day, to Fight in His own
Cause This passage, and the like, the Quakers left out in the reprint of E. B
's works, knowing (it seems) they would expose them in their clear sense; but
being brought to light, they then study to put an equivocal sense on them.
. But it must not be taken for granted (says G. W.) that therefore he would do
it. But that which GOD may do, and which we cannot yet believe that He will
make use of us in that way, and therefore for the present we are given up to
bear and suffer, etc We must needs conclude that this is one of those things
that GOD has made no DECREE to the contrary, but that He may Will it to be
done, even by us in the future, though He has not done it at present. And all
that G. W. etc. has Criticiz'd upon the Equivocalness of the term YET, does but
bewray his and their Equivocation; for though YET may be taken for
Nevertheless, when they say, but YET His Kingdom is not of this World;
notwithstanding it cannot be so taken, when they say, neither can we YET
believe, etc. but it must be taken to denote the time to this present [adhuc,
as yet] in exception to the time to come; especially when it is farther
explained by the clause, for the present; which is necessarily opposed to the
time to come, and imports clearly that Fighting may be commanded as in the
Future, as now bearing and suffering is commanded. I am very confident that G.
W. etc. cannot produce any one instance out of any Man's Writings, that
understood well the English Tongue, of the use of the term Yet, in such a
Phrase and Construction, in any other sense than of Time. But if all
unconcerned Readers must and will understand it in this sense, then G. W's
Answer is full of gross Equivocation.

These are the People that exalt themselves above all other Professors
whatsoever, that they reckon all them to be of the World, out of the Truth; and
themselves the Only People of GOD, and that they are in the Truth, and none but
they, Christ's Lambs, and the like. And for distinguishing themselves from
others, they took up some Observances, or Ceremonies, which did it effectually;
such as saying Thou not You to a single Person; calling no Man Master, but John
or Thomas, etc. not I thank you, but I receive thy love; not carrying the Feet
but the Head foremost of their Dead, and the like. They condemn utterly the
courtesy of putting off the Hat to any. In short, they affected singularity in
most things that were customary in England, how innocent soever: And under the
notion of not Swearing, they only refuse the Ceremony of an Oath, as the laying
the Hand upon, and Kissing the Book. Now, I pray Sir, what of true Religion, or
real Goodness, is there in these things? Suppose the whole World did observe
them, would they be at all the better for it? However, by these things they
have cut off all others, how religious and sincere soever. And if any Man
oppose what they say or do, instead of meekly answering, they are ready with
the most virulent, opprobrious, and threatening Language and Writings that can
be found in any sort whatever. They will diligently seek out, and take up any
thing may reproach one; and will insinuate Crimes that Men are most free from:
Thus have they changed the Meekness and Gentleness of Christianity, into
Fierceness and Churlishness; Humility and Modesty, into Arrogance and
Self-conceit; Peaceableness into Contentiousness; Mildness into Clamor; and
Blessing into evil speaking and reviling; Plainness and Simplicity,
into-Equivocation and Craft; and all this under the Profession of the most
unspotted Innocence and Sincerity. Truth, Righteousness, and Holiness.

But I would not be understood to impute these Immoralities to the Quakers in
general, nor to all their Teachers and Leading Men, but to the Foxonian Party
that love to Govern and have the Pre-eminence, who have endeavored to suppress
those who have at any time proposed any thing contrary to their Sentiments.
Thus in a few years, instead of being led and guided, and being obedient every
one to the Light in himself, they were obliged to submit to the sense of the
greater number of the Governing BODY, though never so contrary to their own
sense. Nay, this Imposing Spirit proceeded so far, at a Quarterly Meeting in
Barbados, where they did not act with that Caution and Cunning as here at
London, that they made and subscribed this following Order, viz.

I desire to give up my whole Concern, if required, both Spiritual and Temporal
unto the Spirit of God in Men and Women's Meetings, as believing it to be more
according to the Universal Wisdom of God, than any particular measure in my
self, or any particulars with whom the Men and Women's Meetings have not Unity.

The Actings, Writings, and Speakings of that kind I have spoken of, being
observed by some W. Rogers, T. Crisp, F. Bugg, W. Macklow, J. Story, J.
Wilkinson, Charles Harris, J. Rance, Tho. Curtis, J. Ansloe, and many more.
among them, who were either too wise, or too honest to be persuaded, that
those corrupt Fruits could proceed either from the Spirit of God, or from the
Light within, that they grieved and mourned to see that excellent Principle of
Reformation, The Light in every Man, so grossly perverted and undermined, that
they were made to oppose and testify against them.

Sir, I might go on throughout G. W.'s etc. whole Book, and show many more
gross Equivocations, Palliations, and Deceits; but I will not proceed farther,
lest I may seem to question your Judgment, in not observing those things that
are so evident. But I think we that read Books have just cause of indignation
against those Quakers, who have the face to impose upon the World such
abominable Stuff, under the Notion of the Teachings of the Light, of the
unspotted Innocence and Christian sincerity. But it may reasonably be thought
they write not for vindication of themselves to those that are of the World,
(as they call all that are not in their Form;) but for their own Party, that
are so blindly addicted to their Leaders, that they swallow every thing they
say without consideration: Unhappy Men! that have given up their Minds to the
Glory of a singular Party, in contempt of all others, and can find no other way
of vindicating themselves. I may need your excuse for writing so much, and
therefore will now subscribe

Sir, Yours A. C.
May 23. 1691.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
AND besides what I said about Fighting, I am credibly informed, that some
Quakers have not only fought, but that with great Courage and Magnanimity. The
first I shall mention is Mr. William Mead an eminent Person, who being set upon
by three High-way-men, and having only a Cudgel, or Staff, in his Hand, did not
only bravely defend himself therewith, but knocked down one of the Robbers so
wounded, that the other were forced to carry him away, whilst Mr. Mead escaped
their Hands. The next shall be one Matthew Renshaw (Master of a Ship,) who
fought both with great and small Guns, till he was overpowered by the Turks.
Another, one John Thompson, who fought exceeding stoutly, and killed a great
many Men before he was taken by the Enemy. These two Masters were not only
Quakers themselves, but their Owners generally, if not every one, such. More
might be named, but these suffice to show that the Quakers will fight in a just
Cause, and that stoutly too; which puts me in mind again of G. Fox To the
Council of Officers, etc. p. 5. who says (of those that had been put out of the
Army for being Quakers,) Of whom it has been said among you, that they had
rather have had one of them than 7 Men, and could have turned one of them to
seven Men.

And since my writing the above, I have spoken with Mr. Pennyman touching the
Accusation against Stephen Crisp, mentioned in The Quakers Unmasked, folio p.
14. and which in their Answer, p. 14. they say, Steph. Crisp absolutely denies,
that he either forced him, or that the Party did show any dissatisfaction
before he Signed and Sealed the said Paper. Oh! what shall we say to these Men,
who not only use Equivocatious in their Writings, but do absolutely deny matter
of Fact? to which Mr. Pennyman was an Eye and Ear-Witness, and is ready to
attest it, if called thereto; but would not then subscribe as a Witness, being
greatly dissatisfied with the unworthiness of the demand.

I will add here something concerning the Nature of an Oath, whereby it may
appear that the Quakers are mistaken about it.

Of the Nature of an Oath.
WHen the Author to the Hebrews says ( Chapter 6.16.) Men verily Swear by the
greater; and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an end of all strife; he
plainly shows us, that an Oath is the greatest and utmost Evidence of Truth and
Sincerity that can be given; for if a Man openly appeals to GOD, who searches
the Heart, and therefore knows not only what is outward in Men's Words and
Actions, but their most inward thoughts, that Man gives the utmost assurance he
can possibly give; for he that falsifies in the prefence of Men, calling them
for Witnesses, who know the matter, and whose office it is to ludge and punish,
incurs all that reproach, infamy and other punishments, which so great an
offense and abuse deserves: So he that falsifies in the presence of God,
calling Him for Witness, incurs the greatest punishments of Divine Vengeance,
as one that makes God Almighty a Partner and Confederate to a Lie,
presumptuously and to his very face. So that however God perhaps is not
expressly invocated to do vengeance upon him, yet in appealing to God as a
Witness, that is employed, because He is such a Witness as is also the Supreme
Judge, whose Justice and Truth is herein appealed to. Therefore calling God to
Witness is as much an Oath as any other form of Words, as having as much
evidence and assurance as any other Form whatever, and as great Penalties
attending it. Now to assert any thing in the presence of Men expressly, is all
one as to call them for Witnesses: So also to assert any thing in the presence
of God expressly, is all one as to call God for Witness.

Farther see several Forms of an Oath. viz.
I Do hereby testify in the Truth of my Heart, and in the Presence of HIM that
knows all things, and in the Presence of these Faithful Witnesses, The
Quakers Form. p. 25.
etc. Or, GOD is my Witness. I call GOD to record on my Soul. The GOD and
Father of our LORD Jesus Christ knows that I lie not. GOD is Witness between me
and thee. Any of which (or the like) without laying the Hand on the Book, or
other Ceremony, or more Words, is not only an Oath, but, [as says a knowing,
judicious, and worthy Person,] if Authorized by Act of Parliament, is as much a
Legal Oath as any now in use amongst us.

And as the Quakers have been mistaken about an Oath, so they have been about
their paying of Taxes, in that they allowed and paid the Royal Aid Tax, and
that of carrying on the Waragainst the Dutch, and the like; yet they would not
pay toward the Trained Bands, notwithstanding they are chiefly intended for a
Defense; and the other, not only to Defend but to offend our Neighbors, as the
Government sees cause. So that it is plain, the Tax they then refused was more
justifiable than that they allowed and paid, inasmuch as to Defend is more
allowable and justifiable than to Offend.

FINIS.

