To the KING, The Humble Address of John Pennyman.
The BLESSING and PEACE of GOD, Which passes all Understanding, Be with the
KING for evermore.
THE Way for the KING to obtain it, is, not only to watch against the Evil of
His own Heart, but to be a Dread and Terror to all Evildoers with whom He is
concerned, both at Home and Abroad; and let the KING be so known to be a hater
of all Wickedness, that no Debauched or Vile Person shall dare to ask any Place
or Favor at his Hands; assuring themselves, that none but Lovers of Sobriety,
Virtue, and Goodness, shall be well accepted of Him: So shall the KING render
to the most High GOD, according to the great Benefits He has received, and the
Nation shall have cause to Bless and Praise the LORD that ever He came to be
KING over them.

The Prayers of the Honest-hearted are truly for the KING, that a Good and
Right Spirit may guide Him in all His Ways, that He may have Victory over all
His Enemies both within and without, and that the Wisdom of Solomon may be
given to Him; So shall Truth and Righteousness flourish in his Days. And
inasmuch as the KING has showed Mercy to the worst of his Enemies, (and not
followed the Exmple of those before Him, who with such horrible Cruelty took
away the Lives of so many Men, and also Women) therefore shall Mercy be showed
to Him for evermore.

And as there was a Heart set to pray for His safe Return from Ireland hither
again; even so there is this Thanksgiving-Day, a rendering Praises to the LORD,
for the KING'S great and wonderful Deliverance from thence; believing that his
outward Life, inward Virtue, and Zeal for Righteousness, shall be the Means of
these Nations Preservation, if they turn from the Evil of their Ways.

Oh! that the KING and QUEEN would set their Hearts, both by Words and Example,
to bring down the Pride of this People; it abounds to the Grief of the
Sober-minded, and will bring Destruction, if not prevented by Repentance and
Amendment: Therefore in all humility, my humble Request to the KING and QUEEN,
is, That Virtue, wherever it is seen, may be encouraged; and all Vice
disliked and detected: So shall They be truly Honorable, and prosper in all
Their Undertakings. Which is earnestly desired by one that is a true Lover of
Them, and of all that seek the Advancement of that Kingdom which never fades
away.

October. 19. 1690.

