This following is a Copy of a Letter I sent to George Fox, the 3d day of the
Month called August 1671. only the words in the margent, and at the lower end I
have added, who am required thus to publsh it.
GEORGE, Last second day was a week, I being required by the LORD to be at
Devonshire-house, I acquainted the Mens-Meeting that I had something to lay
before them, which was, That about a year and a half ago the LORD required me
to deliver a Message to them, which then George being then present.
you owned to be the WORD of the LORD, which I was now to repeat again, Viz.
THAT I WAS TO PROCLAIM THE DAY OF THE LORD, WHICH IS COME TO GATHER THE
OUTCASTS, AND TO CLEANSE THE CAMP OF EVILDOERS. Which WORD I did and do
believe must be fulfilled: In order unto which I told them, I had something to
lay before them, viz. That some years ago I heard of a Difference betwixt my
Father Bond, and (one of your Ministers) John Rous, and his Father, who before
he went last to Barbados (Thomas Yoakly being present) desired me that I
would have a hearing of the Business, not without great reflections there given
against my Father Bond; which if true, I being so related to him, having lately
married his Daughter, I looked upon it not convenient for me to appear against
him: and if on the contrary he was clear, and the other blameworthy, if I
should so judge, I did believe it might be thought by some, that it was through
partialness I so judged; so that I forbore to have a hearing of both Parties
together, till about two weeks ago J.O. S.N. T.Y. and T. P. had had several
meetings to hear the said Difference, but never made a final Agreement, neither
indeed is it possible they should ever make a righteous one, ti^ first they
cause him that stole (at least) to restore, for I am sure that Truth and
Righteousness requires no less.
John Osgood (and the rest, viz. my Father Bond, Samuel Newton, John Rous,
Thomas Yoakly, and I think Thomas Padle) being upon the Exchange, told me they
were going about that business. I told him, that seeing Thomas Rous had desired
me to have a hearing of that Business, a willingness was in me to be there;
where accordingly I was, but did not in the least meddle in it; only I observed
by what I heard discoursed, that my Father Bond was clear of those Calumnies
which both John and his Father Thomas Rous had cast upon him; and that on the
contrary, the said John Rous was not only guilty of Calumnious Reproaches
against my Father Bond, but also had stolen a Which Paper was an Obligation to
my Father Bond from the said John Rous, to make good a sum of money which his
Father Tho. Rous, who had given him (as he then said) power and authority to
make an end, and to satisfy what was due to my Father Bond upon account, which
said Account J. Rous (after several months time had few perusal) owned and
subscribed with his hand, though at this meeting when my Father produced it,
and asked him if he would deny his own hand? He said, he would not say whether
he would own it or no.
Paper of Concern from Thomas Heart, which was left in his custody by my Father
Bond, (concerning which John Osgood did move at that Meeting, that the business
of his stealing that Paper might be spoken to; but Thomas Yoakly being in
haste, the Meeting broke up) so that it was with me to acquaint them with the
said Difference, and to desire they would appoint some of their Number to have
a hearing on it: but it was a long time before I could get any Answer from them,
they telling me that I was out of Truth, and that they were not concerned to
give me any Answer; and very much to this purpose they spoke. I told them, it
was the weighty matters of the Law that I came about, viz. JUDGMENT and
JUSTICE; and whatever they reputed me, it concerned them to do Justice. But
seeing they would give me no Answer (I think it was in some hours after I had
been there) but much reflected upon me, and that I should busy my self with
that I was not concerned. I told them I was deeply concerned; first, for the
clearing of my Father Bond from those Aspersions cast upon him by (one of their
Ministers) viz. John Rous, whom I did there before them accuse of Theft, and
therefore I said it concerned them to appoint a Meeting about it: But instead
of giving me any Answer, several of them bid me go out of the Room: And as I
stood up to speak, one of them took my Seat, who I think would have given it
me again, had not one (I think 'twas One of their Teachers.
Gilbert Laty) bid him he should not; Others of them pushed me with their
hands, bidding me Go out: I told them, if they used violence I should not
resist; all that I desired was but an Answer, which if they would give me, I
told them I would willingly depart, (having also laid before them a business
concerning the Widow Evans (her Husband being lately dead) whom I looked upon
was Yea I said, both in Law and Equity, which I would be bound (and still am
willing) to make it good.
wronged) But seeing in all this while I could get no Answer whether they would
hear it or no, I directed my speech particularly to John Bolton, to whom I
said, That if these their doings were spoken of to people abroad, they could
hardly be credited. Then he replied, That if my Father Bond was agrieved, and
made his complaint to them, and desired them to have a hearing of it, they
would appoint some accordingly. I told him I should rest satisfied with that
Answer at present. Now what Answer shall I have to the Widow She lives at the
Barbados.
Evans business? As to that they said, That unless she writ to me to appear
in it for her, they would not meddle in it. These being their Answers, I
departed.

Now, understanding that thy self, He Married one of George his wives
daughters, formerly called Margaret Fell
John Rous, with several others, are intended shortly to take Ship for the
Barbados, and that your departure probably may be before my Father Bond can
(if he would) make any such Complaint to the said Meeting, or to have any just
end put to the said Difference, it being a Business that will require some
time; It is with me also to acquaint thee with it, to see if it be in any of
your hearts to do what is just and right in this matter, without respect of
persons: For the LORD, whom I serve, owns none to be his People but they that
shall so do. Thy Answer hereunto I expect, it being with me first to lay it
before you, that that which is just and right may be done; which if so, I am
satisfied: but if you refuse so, as not to do the thing that is just and right,
I know not but it will be required of me to make this Business much more
public.

Who am known to thee by the name of John Pennyman.
The next day, after I had been at the abovesaid Meeting, it was with me to
look into the Bible, where I read these following words, (which being suitable
to the present occasion, I am willing should be inserted)

And the Word of the LORD came into Zechariah, saying, Thus speaks the LORD
of Hosts, saying, Execute true Judgment, and show Mercy and Compassion every
man to his Brother. Zech. Chapter 7. V. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
And oppress not the Widow, nor the Fatherless, the Stranger nor the Poor, and
let none of you imagine evil against his Brother in your heart. But they
refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that
they should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest
they should hear the Law, and the Words which the LORD of Hosts had sent by his
Spirit in the former Prophets: therefore came a great Wrath from the LORD of
Hosts.

And having received no Answer from the abovesaid George Fox, it was with me
to go again to Devonshire-house (this being their Meeting-Day The 7th instant.
) with intention to have spoke about the said Business: But they refused to let
me in (for it seems George One of their chief Priests.
Whitehead this day two weeks, after I was gone out of the Room, did blame them
for letting me be there, who had suggested to them (through his subtle and
dark Imaginations) that I was in a kind of a Distracted-state, and so no heed
to be given to what I said. So that not having admittance, it is with me thus
to publish it; the day being come, that as they have laid open the Deceit,
Wickedness, and Hypocrisy of other Professors that went before them, so must
their Deceit, Wickedness, and Hypocrisy be also laid open: for the LORD whom I
serve is no respecter of persons.

Glory be to his Name for ever and ever, says his Servant. John Pennyman.



POSTSCRIPT.
THe Indignation, the Wrath of the LAMB is come, let all flesh tremble before
Him, yea, let all faces gather paleness who are joined to Iniquity, either of
flesh or spirit; for the Day of their Torment, yea, I say, the Day of their
Misery, Vexation, and Torment is come and coming yet more to be revealed and
made manifest: Wherefore I say again, and it is the WORD of the LORD, That all
flesh is but as grass before Him, who is the MIGHTY, DREADFUL, TERRIBLE ONE;
Yea, who is, and will be more manifested to be a Consuming-Fire to all the
Workers of Iniquity. My Charge is to Warn you, yea, to Alarm you, that whilst
it is called to day, you harden not your hearts; but, that you would repent,
and turn unto the LORD, if by any means you may find a place of Repentance,
before the Night come (which is hastening on apace) wherein none can work. THE
MOUTH OF THE LORD HAS SPOKEN IT.

But as for you whose hearts are chaste, and entirely given up to serve the
LORD, I am to proclaim, That the Year of Jubilee is come; yea the time of your
Deliverance, yea, I say, the set-time of your Deliverance is come and coming
yet more to be revealed and made manifest; GLORY AND PRAISE, HALLELUJAH AND
THANKS be given to our GOD, who lives and reigns in all His Saints and
Sanctified Ones, both as KING, PRIEST, and PROPHET. GLORY and PRAISE in the
HIGHEST be given to HIM from this time forth and for evermore. Amen, Hallelujah.

Subscribed and published by one of the least of the Thousands of Israel, yet
one of that number whom the LORD has (of his infinite Mercy) chosen to follow
Him fully, and has accounted me worthy to stand in the Gap, and to be a
living Witness against all Unrighteousness; yea, I say, against all manner of
Unrighteousness. O let my Soul for ever Praise and Magnify His Name, who alone
is worthy, says His Servant John Pennyman.
Written the 3d and 4th, only four Marginal Notes, with these lines I added
this 5th instant, being to have it this day printed, foreseeing that neither
George Fox ( though in Town) would return me any Answer, nor that they would
suffer me to come into their Meeting; so it is with me to have them ready to
be given them, thus printed, the 7th of the month called August, 1671.
Yesterday the LORD ordered me to go to Devonshire-house, and to sit in
William Crowch his Shop, where they might see me as they went up to their
Meeting; two of whose number (viz. Thomas Padle and Arthur Cook) came to me,
and said, they came to give me the sense of the Meeting, lest I should come up
to make a Brable (as T. P. called it); That they would not let me come in, and
therefore advised me to go away; for, in plain terms T. P. said, they were
resolved I should not come in, (though before this time they never refused my
coming in) So I departed, and fetched some of the abovesaid Papers to give them
as they came out.

J. P.

London, Printed the 8th instant, 1671.


