A perfect true Copy OF THE ARTICLES Agreed on by the Commissioners on both
sides, for the surrender of Oxford to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Signed, Sealed, Ratified, and Confirmed by his Excellency, and the Lords and
Commissioners for Oxford,

Commanded to be forthwith printed and published by Order of Parliament for
general satisfaction of the Kingdom, and for the confutation of those
imperfect and impertinent Copies, before published to abuse the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for F. Coals in the Old Bailey. 1646.

Agreed at Marston, Satturday June 20. 1646. Articles of agreement concluded
and agreed by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces
raised by the Parliament, on the one party: And the Right Honorable Sir
Richard Lane Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, Francis Lord
Cottington, Lord high Treasurer of England, William Marquess of Hertford,
Edward Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Honorable Household,
Thomas Earl of Southampton, Francis Earl of Chichester, Francis Lord Seymour,
Sir Edward Nicholas, one of His Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, all
of them of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Sir Thomas Glemham
Knight and Governor of Oxford, of the other party: for and concerning the
rendering the Garrison of Oxford, as follows:
1.THat the Garrison of Oxford, with the Castle Forts, Mounts, and places of
defense whatsoever, with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions of
war, with all Magazines and Stores thereunto belonging; excepting what is
allowed in the ensuing Articles, shall be delivered unto his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint, without wilful spoil or
imbezlement, upon Wednesday the 34 of this instant June 1646. at ten of the
clock in the morning.

2. That his Highness the Duke of York shall have an Honorable Convoy to
London, where other of his Majesty's children are, attended by his Officers and
Servants, and fitting Accommodation for removal of his household and goods
thither, and shall have an honorable provision befitting his Dignity appointed
for him by the Parliament, and to remain there until His Majesty's pleasure
be known touching his settling there or elsewhere, and then to be disposed
accordingly, to any place within 80 miles of London, and shall have Officers
and Servants to continue about him as the Parliament shall approve.

3. That their Highnesses Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice shall have liberty
and Passes for themselves with their Servants, Horses, Arms, and Goods (the
number of their Horses for them and their train not exceeding 70) to repair
to any place within 50 miles of London (so it be not within 20 miles of London,
without leave from the Parliament, nor in any Garrison) and there to abide for
the space of six months after the rendering, free from any molestation by
imposition of Oaths, or otherwise, and shall have Passes to go beyond the
Seas at any time within the said six months, with their said Servants, Horses,
Arms, and Goods, they engaging themselves upon their Honors, not to use the
liberty hereby granted in the mean time to any Hostility against the
Parliament of England sitting at Westminster, or any way wilfully to the
prejudice of their affairs. And they are to have the benefit of such the
ensuing Articles as may concern them.

4 That the Seals called, The Great Seal, Privy Seal, and the Signet, and the
Seals of the Kings Bench, Exchequer, Court of Wards, Duchy, Seals of the
Admiralty and prerogative as also the Sword of State, shall at such time and in
the presence of two such persons as the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall
appoint be locked up in a Chest, and left in the public Library; And if any of
the aforenamed particulers shall not be then accordingly produced the default
thereof shall not be charged upon any other person, then such as have the
Custody thereof, and shall wilfully detain or imbeazle the same.

5 That Sir Tho. Glemham Knight, etc. Governor of Oxford with his Servants and
all that to him belongs, and all Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot, and
of the Train of Artillery, (as well Reformed Officers and Soldiers as other)
with their, Servants, and all that pertaines unto them, shall march out of the
City of Oxon with their horses and complete Arms, that properly belong unto
them proportionable to their present or past commands; flying Colors, Trumpets
sounding, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both ends, Bullet in their mouths,
and every Soldier to have 12. charges of Powder, Match and Bullet
proportionable, and with bag and baggage to any place within 15. miles of
Oxford which the Governor shall choose, where such of the Common Soldiers as
desire to go to their own homes or friends, shall lay down their Arms, which
shall be delivered up to such as the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint
to receive them; And all Officers and Soldiers, as well reformed as others,
that shall desire to go to their own homes or friends, shall have the Generals
pass and protection for their peaceable repair to and abode at the several
place, they shall so desire to go unto, and shall have free quarter allowed
them in all their march from Oxford to these several places; The Officers as
well reformed as other to pass with Equipage of Horses, and Complete Arms
answerable to their present, or past commands, and common Troopers with their
Horses and Swords only, and all to pass with bag, and baggage as aforesaid;
and that all other Officers and Soldiers (in case there be any such) that
shall desire to take entertainment from any Foreign Kingdom or State, shall
have free quarter allowed them for 28. days from their march out of Oxford:
And shall have passes for their Officers not exceeding ten, with their Horses
and two servants a piece to go to Land n to Treat with any Foreign
Ambassador or Agent for entertainment, and all of them shall have liberty and
passes to march; The Officer wi^h their complete Arms and Horses
proportionable to their present or past Commands, and the Common Soldiers
witth their Arms, and all with Bag and Baggage, to the quarters near to
Harwich and Portesmouth, or to any Port between them, to be transported which
Arms, (except Officers Complete Arms, and Horses and Swords for the Common
Soldiers which they may transport) they shall there lay down, and deliver to
such as the General shall appoint, or unto the Governor of the next Garrison
belonging to the Parliament who shall take care for their safety, during their
abode there, and until shipping can be provided, and weather seasonable, they
paying for their Quarters after the 28. days be expired, and shall assist them
for procuring vessels and shipping for their transportation at the usual Rates
accustomed for Fraught; the Officers and Soldiers and others, before
transportation engaging themselves by promise not to return into this Kingdom
in Hostility against the Parliament in bodies as they go, or in conjunction
with other forces, or in command of any forces invading this Kingdom. And no
Oath nor any other engagement or this or the like nature, to be during their
said stay, or at their transportation imposed upon them, saving an engagement
by promise not to do any Act of Hostility, or of wilful prejudice against
the Parliament during their said stay in England. And it is Declared that those
of the Three Auxiliary Regiments consisting of Gentlemen and their Servants,
Scholllers, Citizens, and Inhabitants who are got properly of the Garrison in
pay; And such reformed Officers, and Soldiers who shall not be willing to
march forth, shall not be forced to march out upon this Ariticle but shall
have the benefit of the following Articles to remove or remain in Oxford, and
in all things else which may concern them: And those also who shall march
forth shall have the benefit of the ensuing Articles in all things, except for
remaining in Oxford.

6. That the Governor shall be allowed and assisted in procuring of a
sufficient number of Carts, Teames and Boats, and other necessaries for the
carrying a way of all goods allowed in these Articles belonging to any Officers
or persons of quality now residing in this Garrison, they paying the accustomed
Rates, and that such persons as cannot presently through want of Carriages, or
otherwise convoy them away, shall be assisted with Carriages at any time within
three months for the disposing thereof.

7. That no Officer or Soldier nor any person whatsoever comprised in this
capitulation shall be reproached, or have any disgraceful speeches, or
affronts offered to them, or be stopped, plundered or injured in their March,
Randezvouz, or Quarters, Journies, or places of abode, And if any such thing
shall fall out, satisfaction shall be given at the judgment of any two or
more, of the Commissioners, they being equal in number of each party, nor
shall the persons aforesaid nor any of them be enticed, or compelled to take up
Arms against the King, nor be imprisoned, restrained, sued, or molested for
any matter, or cause whatsoever before the rendering of the Garrison, during six
months after the rendering thereof: And if any Officer, Soldier, or person be
sick or wounded, That they cannot presently enjoy the benefit of these
Articles; That such persons shall have liberty to stay until they be
recovered, and fit accommodation, and subsistence shall be provided for them
during their stay, and then to enjoy the benefit of these Articles.

8. That all Horses, Arms, Money, and others Goods whatsoever taken as lawful
prize of War before or during the siege, and now remaining in the City, be
continued in the possession of the present possessors.

9. That these Articles shall extend to the use and benefit of all strangers of
any foragine Kingdom or State residing within this Garrison, together with
their Wives, Children, Servants, Horses, Arms, Goods, Money or Debts.

10. That all persons included in these Articles, without exception, or any,
other then the Soldiers that are to march out upon the fifth Article, shall
have liberty, (during the space of three Months after the rendering of the
Garrison) either to remain in Oxford, or to remove themselves with their
Families, Goods, Horses, and all things that properly belong unto them, or to
their disposal; And all Noblemen, Gentlemen, persons of quality, with their
Arms and other Equipage to their houses or friends, without any prejudice to
their friends for receiving them.

11. That all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Officers, Soldiers, and all other
persons comprised in this Capitulation, who have Estates real or personal,
under or liable to sequestrations, according to Ordinance of Parliament, and
shall desire to compound for them, (except persons by name excepted by
Ordinance of Parliament from Pardon) shall at any time within six Months after
the surrender of the Garrison of Oxford, be admitted to compound for their said
Estates, which said Composition shall not exceed two years Revenue for Estates
of inheritance: And for Estates for lives, years, and other real and personal
Estates, shall not exceed the proportion aforesaid for inheritances, according
to the value of them: And that all persons aforesaid, whose dwelling Houses are
sequestered, (except before excepted) may after the rendering of the Garrison,
repair to them, and there abide, convenient time being allowed to such as are
placed there under the Sequestrations, (if any be) for their removal; And it
is agreed, That all the Profits and Revenues arising out of their Estates,
(after the day of entering their names as Compounds) shall remain in the hands
of the Tenants or Occupiers, to be answered to the Compounders when they have
perfected their Agreements for their Compositions, and that they shall have
liberty, and the Generals Pass and Protection for their peaceable repair to
their abode at their several houses or friends, and to go to London to attend
their Compositions, or elsewhere upon their necessary occasions, with freedom
of their persons, from Oaths, Engagements, or molestations, during the said
space of six Months, and after so long as they prosecute their Compositions
without wilful default or neglect on their party, except an engagement by
promise not to bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act
prejudicial to their affairs, so long as they remain in their Quarters: And
it is further agreed, That from and after their compositions made, they shall
be forthwith restored to, and enjoy their Estates, and all other immunities, as
other Subjects, together with the Rents and Profits from the time of entering
their names as aforesaid:, discharged of their Sequestrations, and from fifth
and twentieth parts, and other payments and impositions, except such as shall
be general and common to them with others.

12. That no Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Scollers, Officers, Soldiers,
Citizens, nor any other persons included in this Capitulation, (except the
persons mentioned before to be excepted from pardon) shall be molested or
questioned for anything said or done, in or concerning this War, or relating
to the unhappy difference between his Majesty and the Parliament, they
submitting to Compositions in the precedent Article; And that the persons
aforementioned to be excepted from pardon, shall have the Benefit of this
Article during the space of six Months from the rendering of the Garrison, and
after, if they be admitted to and agree for their Compositions.

13. That the persons mentioned before to be excepted from pardon, shall have
liberty and the Generals Pass and Protection for themselves, families, horses,
goods, and all things that properly belong unto them now in Oxford, to go unto,
and abide at their own houses, or their friends, for the space of six Months
after the rendering of the Garrison, and within that time to repair to London
to endeavor Compositions for their Estates, and indemnity of their persons,
and to make their peace; and if they cannot obtain it, shall have Passes to go
beyond the Seas at any time, within the said six Months; and that no other
engagement shall be put upon them, save by promise not to bear Arms against
the Parliament, nor wilfully do any ad prejudicial to their affairs, so long
as they remain in their Quarters.

14 That the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars, of the University of Oxon, and
the Governors and Students of christs-Church, of King Hen. 8. his foundation,
and all other Heads and Governors, Masters, Fellows and Scholars of the
Colleges, Halls, and Bodies Corporate, and societies of the same University,
and the public like Professors and Readers, and the Orator thereof, and all
other persons belonging to the said University, or to any Colleges or Hals
therein, shall and may, according to their Statutes, Charters and Customs,
enjoy their ancient form of Government, subordinate to the immediate Authority
and Power of Parliament; And that all the Rights, Privileges, Franchises,
Lands, Tenements, Houles, Possessions, Rents, Revenues, Hereditaments,
Libraries, Debts, Goods and Chattels, belonging to the said University, or to
Christ's Church, or to any Colleges or Hals in the said University, (except
such Rents and Revenues as have been already taken and received by Ordinance of
Parliament) shall be enjoyed by them respectively, as aforesaid, free from
Sequestrations, Fines, Taxes, and all other molestations whatsoever, for or
under color of any thing whatsoever, relating to this present war, or to the
unhappy differences between his Majesty and the Parliament; and that all
Churches, Chapels, Colleges, Hals, Libraries, Schools, and public Buildings
within or belonging to the City or University, or to Christ-Church, or the
several Colleges or Hals thereof, shall be preserved from defacing and
spoil, and if any removal shall be made by the Parliament of any other
Members of the University, Colleges, or Hals, that those so removed shall
enjoy the profits during the space of six Months after the rendering of Oxford,
and shall have convenient time allowed them for removal of themselves and
their goods from their lodgings; provided that this shall not extend to retard
any Reformation there intended by the Parliament, nor give them liberty to
intercede any in the Government.

15. That the Mayor, Bayliffe, and Commonalty and all Corporations within the
City shall enjoy their ancient. Government, and their Charters, Customs,
Franchises, Liberties, Lands, Goods, and Debts, and all things else whatsoever
which belong to them as Corporations, subordinate to the immediate authority
and power of Parliament, and shall not be molested by color of any thing
(before the rendering of this Garrison) done or ordered by them in the capacity
of Corporations, relating to the differences between his Majesty and the
Parliament.

16. That the Citizens and Inhabitants of the City shall not be charged with
free quarter, nor billet of Soldiers other then for lodging (except in urgent
time of necessity) and that to be ordered and disposed by the advice of the
Mayor, or his Deputy, and that in all public Taxes they shall be taxed
proportionably with the County; and that no Scholar, Citizen, or other
Inhabitant in the University and City of Oxon shall be troubled, or questioned
for taking; up Arms in the Garrison, by express command during the time it
was a Garrison for the defense thereof; and that the Scholars, Citizens, and
Inhabitants shall have the benefit of this capitulation in all things that may
concern them.

17. That no Officer, Soldier, or other person, who by the Articles are to
march out of the City or Suburbs, or to march in, shall plunder, spoil, or
injure any Scholar, Citizen, or Inhabitant, or other person in Oxford in their
person?, goods, or estates, or carry away any thing that is properly belonging
to any of them.

18. That all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and other women now in Oxon, whose Husbands
or friends are absent from thence may have Passes, and Protections for
themselves, servants, and goods, to go to and remain at the houses of their
Husbands, or at their friends as they shall desire; and to go or send to
London or elsewhere, to obtain the allowances out of their Husbands or Parents
estates allotted them by Ordinance of Parliament.

19 That such of his Majesty's Household Servants, who shall desire to go to
his Majesty, may, have free liberty, and Passes to go accordingly at any time
within one month after the rendering of the Garrison; and that his Majesty's
Household Stuff, and other his peculiar goods which are now in Oxford may be
carried to his Majesty's House at Hampton Court, and his servants under whose
charge and custody any of them are, shall be allowed and assisted in the
procuring of Carts, Boats and Carriages for the removal of them thither, and
there to remain till his Majesty shall otherwise dispose of them, and then to
be sent or disposed accordingly; and that such of his Majesty's Servants who
are not able for the present to go to him shall have liberty, Passes, and
Protections to go to, and remain at his Majesty's said House at Hampton
Court, and have liberty to attend the Committee for his Majesty's Revenues, to
procure a competent allowance out of his Majesty's Revenues for their
subsistence, until his Majesty shall otherwise provide for, or dispose of them.

20 That all Clergymen now in Oxford, who shall not upon compositions or
otherwise be restored to their Church Livings, shall have liberty to go to
London, to obtain some fitting allowance for the livelihood of themselves and
their families.

21 That it is intended, declared, and agreed, that all persons comprised
within these Articles shall peaceably and quietly enjoy all their goods, debts,
and movables allowed by these Articles, during the space of six months after
rendering the Garrison, and that they shall be free from all Oathe, engagements
and molestations except an engagement by premise not to bear Arme^ against the
Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their affairs so long as
they remain in their Quarters; and that they shall have liberty within the
space of six months (in case they shall be resolved to go beyond Seas) to
dispose of their said goods, debts, and movables allowed by these Articles,
and depart the Kingdom if they shall think fit, and to have Pass for their
transportation, or otherwise to stay in the Kingdom.

22 That if any of these Articles shall in any point be broken, or violated by
any person or persons in Oxford, or comprised within this capitulation, the
fault and punishment shall be upon him or them only who made the breach or
violation, and shall not be imputed or charged upon any other not assenting
thereunto, or not an actor in it.

23 That the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Lindsey, and their servants that
come forth with them shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles in whatsoever
may concern them.

24 That the Garrison of Farringdon shall be rendered unto his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and the Governor, Gentlemen, Soldiers and all other of what
quality soever within those Garrisons shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles
in every particular that may concern them, they rendering the said Garrisons
accordingly as Oxford.

25 That all persons comprised within these Articles shall have upon request a
Certificate under the hand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or the future
Governor of the City, that such persons were in the City at the time of the
surrender thereof, and are to have the benefit of these Articles.

26 That the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall give a Pass to one or two
Messengers with their servants to go unto the King, to give him an account of
the proceedings upon this Treaty and conclusion thereof, and to return and
receive the benefit of these Articles.

Signed at Water-Eaten June 20. by his Excellency Sir. Thomas Fairfax. Signed
the same day at Oxford, by Richard Lane C. S. Cottington. Hertford Dorset.
Chichester. Southamton. Seymor. Edw. Nicholas. Thomas Glemham.


FINIS.

