To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of James Percy, Esquire Right Heir-Male unto, and lawfully
claiming the Earldom of Northumberland.
SHOWS,
THAT your Majesty's Petitioner is Lawfully, and Lineally descended of, and
from the Body of Henry Percy, fifth Earl of Northumberland, and has very fully
and clearly proved the same, and by such his Descent and Pedigree, He your said
Petitioner is really the next Cousin, and immediate right Heir-Male of, and to
Josceline Percy, the late, and eleventh Earl of Northumberland Deceased; And
thereby lawfully, and rightfully entitled unto, and as such Heir ought to have
and enjoy the said Earldom of Northumberland, and the Honors, Manors, and
Dignities thereunto belonging; And also to have, and take the Place and Seat of
his Ancestors, former Earls of Northumberland, in the Honorable House of
Lords, or Peers in Parliament.

And therefore He your said Petitoner humbly Pray's, that Your Majesty will be
Graciously Pleased by Your Royal Writ of Summons, to call Him, Your Petitioner,
and Loyal Subject, to come, and have, and take the aforesaid Place, and Seat of
his said Ancestors, former Earls of Northumberland, in the said Honorable
House of Lords or Peers in Parliament.

And your Majesty's said Petitioner, and Loyal Subject, as in duty bound, shall
ever Pray, etc. James Percy.

This Petition was Presented the eighth Instant, another of the same was
presented upon the sixteenth Instant. And the Answer to both, was, That the
Petitioner must make his further Application; for the King referred all to the
Parliament.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons
Assembled in Parliament. James Percy, Esquire Right Heir unto, and lawfully
claiming the Earldom of Northumberland.
SHOWS,
THAT Your Honors Petitioner is Lawfully and Lineally descended of, and from
the Body of Henry Percy, fifth Earl of Northumberland, and has Lawfully, and
very fully and clearly proved the same; And by such his Descent and Pedigree,
he Your said Petitioner is really the next Cousin, and immediate right
Heir-Male of, and to Josceline Percy, the late and eleventh Earl of
Northumberland, Deceased; And thereby lawfully and rightfully entitled unto,
and as such Heir-Male ought to have and enjoy the said Earldom of
Northumberland, and the Honors, Manors, and Dignities thereunto belonging;
And also to have and take the Place and Seat of his Ancestors, former Earls of
Northumberland in this Honorable House of Lords or Peers in Parliament.

Your Petitioner therefore (having so proved his said Descent and Pedigree as
aforesaid) Most humbly Prays Your Honors to admit him Your said Petitioner to
have and take the aforesaid Place and Seat of his said Ancestors, former Earls
of Northumberland, in this Honorable House of Lords or Peers, or else to
appoint a Hearing of your Petitioner's Cause concerning his said Descent and
Pedigree before your Honors, and to allow his said Pedigree, And thereupon to
admit him Your said Petitioner to have and take the said Place and Seat of his
said Ancestors, in this Honorable House of Lords or Peers, as aforesaid.

And he Your Honors said Petioner, as in Duty bound, shall ever Pray, etc.
James Percy.

Henry Percy fifth Earl of Northumberland had Issue, three Sons, (viz.) Henry,
Thomas, and Ingelram.

2. Sir Thomas, the second Son was attainted in King Henry the Eighth's Days,
who had Issue-Male, Thomas and Henry.
1. Henry the first Son surviving his Father became, and was the sixth Earl of
Northumberland, but died without Issue.
3. Sir Ingelram Percy third Son, had Issue, two Sons, viz. Henry, and Robert.
Restitution by King Edward the sixth to Thomas, and restored by Queen Mary,
and confirmed by Queen Elizabeth to Sir Henry, which Brothers were both Earls
of Northumberland, But Thomas the seventh Earl died, and left no Issue-Male.
Henry the eighth Earl had Issue-Male, viz. eight Sons.
blazon of the Percy family
Henry Percy, eldest Son, had Issue, three Sons, viz. James, Wiliam, and Henry,
but the two Elder Brothers died without Issue-Male.
Henry, Eldest Son was the ninth Earl of Northumberland, who had Issue-Males,
viz. Four Sons, and three of them were Henrys.
Henry Percy, third Son, had issue three Sons, viz. Henry, James, and Henry,
but the two Henrys died young.
Algernoon, the eldest Son, was the tenth Earl of Northumberland, who had
Issue-Male, one Son, viz. Josceline Percy.
James Percy, second Son, the now Claimant, has Issue three Sons, viz.
Anthony, Henry, and John.
Josceline was the eleventh Earl of Northumberland who had Issue Henry, and he
died in the Lifetime of his Father, who died beyond Sea, in May 1670. Heirs
Males extinct.
Anthony Percy, eldest Son, has Issue, viz. Henry Percy, who is Grandson to
the Claimant.


James Percy.
This short Pedigree has been often proved at the law, as his printed Case
makes appear; therefore he humbly presents twelve Books to the Right Honorable
House of Peers, and twelve to the Honorable House of Commons, praying for
speedy Justice, and the Petitioner shall ever Pray.

Printed the the 23d. of March, 1688/9. James Percy.




