A Perfect LIST of the Lords of the Other House, and of the Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque Ports, n^w assembled in this present
Parliament holden at Westminster, for the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, Jan. 27. 1658.
NAthaniel Lord Ficaues, Lord Commissoners of the Great Seal. Joh. Lord Lisle
Lord Commissoners of the Great Seal. Lulstrode Lord Lord Commissoners of the
Great Seal. Whitelock, Lord Commissoners of the Great Seal. Henry Lord
Lawrence, President of the Privy Council. Charles Lord Fleetwood, Lieutenant
General of the Army. Edward Earl of Manchester. David Earl of Catfills. William
Lord Viscount Say and Seal. Thomas Lord Viscount Faueonberge. Charles Lord
Viscount Howard. Philip Lord Viscount Lisle. Gilbert Lord Pickering Chamberlain
of his Highness Household. George Lord Evres. George Lord Wharton. Roger Lord
Broughill. William Lord Pierrepont. John Lord Cleypole, Master of the Horse.
John Lord Desborow, one of the Generals of the Fleet. ^dward Lord Montague, one
of the Generals of the Fleet, and one of the Lords Commissioners of the
Treasury. George Lord Monck, Commander in chief of the Forces in Scotland. John
Lord Glynn, Chief Justice, assigned to hold Pleas in the Upper Bench. William
Lord Lenthal, Master of the Rolls in Chancery. Oliver Lord St. John, Chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas. William Lord Steel, Chancellor of the
Ireland. Charles Lord Wolsley. Willam Lord Sidenham, one of the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury. Philip Lord Skippon. Walter Lord Strickland.
Philip Lord Jones, Comptroller of His Highness Household. John Lord Fiennes.
John Lord Hobart. Gilbert Lord Gerrard. Arthur Lord Hasilrigg. Francis Lord
Russel. William Lord Strickland. Richard Lord Onslow Edward Lord Whalley,
Lieutenant General of the Horse. Alexander Lord Popham. John Lord Crew. William
Lord Lockhart. Richard Lord Hampden. Thomas Lord Honywood. Archibald Lord
Johnston of Warreston. Richard Lord Ingoldsby. William Lord Roberts.
Christopher Lord Pack. Robert Lord Tichburne. John Lord Jones. John Lord
Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower of London. George Lord Fleetwood. Matthew
Lord Tomlinson. John Lord Hewson. Edward Lord Thomas. James Lord Berry. William
Lord Goffe, Major General of the Foot. Thomas Lord Cooper.
County of Middlesex.
CHallenor Chute the elder, Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons. Francis
Gerrard Esquire Westminster.
Richard Sherwyn Esquire Edward Grosvenor Esquire

London.
WIlliam Thompson Esquire Alderman. Theophilus Biddolph Esquire John Jones Esquire Richard
Brown Esquire
County of Bedford.
JOhn Okey Esquire. Richard Wagstaffe Esquire Bedford.
Samuel Brown Sergeant at Law. Thomas Margets Esquire

County of Bucks.
WIlliam Bowyer Esquire Richard Greenvill Esquire Buckingham.
Francis Ingoldesby Esquire Sir Richard Temple Baronet.
Cheping-Wiccombe.
Thomas Scot Esquire Tobias Bridge Esquire
Aylsbury.
Sir James Whitelock Knight. Thomas Terrill Esquire
Agmondesham.
Francis Drake Esquire John Biscoe Esquire
Wendover
William Hampden Esquire John Baldwin Esquire
Merlowe
Peregrine Hoby Esquire William Borlase Esquire

County of Berks.
JOhn Dunch Esquire Sir Robert Pie Knight. New-Windsor.
George Starkey Esquire Christopher Whitchcot Esquire
Reading
Henry Nevil Esquire Daniel Blagrave Esquire
Wallingford
William Cook of the Wallingford, Esquire Walter Big of the same, Esquire
Abingdon.
Sir John Lenthall Knight and Baronet.

County of Cornwall.
HUgh Boscawen of Tregothnan Esquire Francis Buller the Younger, Esquire Dunhivid alias
Launceston.
Thomas Gewen Esquire Robert Bennet Esquire
Leskard.
Thomas Noell Esquire (...) Greenwood Gentleman.
Loswithell.
Walter Moyle of St. Jermines Esquire John Clayton of the Inner Temple, London Esquire
Truro.
Charles Boscawen Esquire Walter Vincent Esquire
Bodmin.
Anthony Nicolls of Penvose, Esquire John Silly of St. Wen, Esquire William Turner,
Doctor of Law, Esquire
Helston.
Robert Rouse Esquire Thomas Juxon Esquire
Saltash.
John Buller of the Middle Temple, London, Esquire Edmund Prideaux of Padstow, Esquire
Da^nelford.
John Maynard Esquire Sergeant at Law. William Braddon Esquire
Portpigam alias VVestlowe.
Willam Whitelock of the Middle-Teample, London, Esquire Doctor William Pettey of
London, Esquire
Grampound.
Thomas Herle Esquire Robert Scawen Esquire
Eastlow.
John Buller Esquire John Kendall Esquire
Penryn.
John Fox Esquire Thomas Ceely Esquire
T^egony.
John Thomas Esquire Edward Boscawen Merchant.
Bossiny
Anthony Nicolls of Penvose Esquire Samuel Trelawny of Ham, in the County of Devon,
Esquire
St.Ives.
John Seyntaubyne of Clowance, Esquire Peter Ceely Esquire
Fowey.
Edward Herle of Prideaux, Esquire John Barton Esquire of the Middle Temple, London.
St. Jermines.
Sir John Glanvill Knight. John St. Awbyn Esquire
Michell.
James Lance Esquire Richard Lobb Esquire
New Port.
William Morice of Werington in the County of Devon, Esquire John Glanvil, of the
City of London, Esquire
St. Mawes.
John Lampen, the younger, Esquire William Tredinham, Esquire
Callington.
James Carew, Barister of the Inner Temple, London, Esquire Col. Anthony Buller of
Shillingham.

County of Cumberland.
SIr Wilfrid Lawson Knight. William Briscoe Esquire Carlisle.
George Downing Esquire Thomas Craister Esquire
Cockermouth.
John Stapleton Esquire Wilfrid Lawson Esquire

County of Cambridge.
THomas Willis Baronet. Sir Henry Pykering Knight. University of Cambridge.
The Right Honorable John Thurloe Principal Secretary of State. Thomas Slater,
Doctor of Physic.
Cambridge.
John Lowry Esquire Richard Timbs Esquire
VVisbech.
The Right Honorable John Thurloe, Principal Seceretary Of State.

County of Chester.
JOhn Bradshaw, Sergeant at Law, Chief Justice of Chester. Richard Leigh of
Lyme Esquire Chester.
Jonathan Ridge Alderman. John Griffith Alderman.

County of Derby.
JOhn Gell Esquire Thomas Sanders Esquire Derby.
Gervase Bennet Alderman. John Dalton Gent. Alderman.

County of Devon.
SIr John Northcot Baronet. Robert Roll of Heauton Esquire Exeter.
Tho. Bampfield Esquire Major Gibbon.
Honiton.
Walter Young Esquire Samuel Searle Esquire
Totness.
Captain John Pley. Gilbert Eveliegh Gent.
Ashburton.
Thomas Regnell Esquire John Fowell Esquire
Plymouth.
Christopher Ceely Esquire Timothy Allsop Esquire
Okehampton.
Robert Edward Esquire Edward Wise Esquire
Barnestaple.
John Copleston Knight. George Walters Esquire
Plymton.
Henry Hatsell Esquire Christopher Martin Esquire
Tavistocke.
Edmund Powell Esquire Henry Hatsell Esquire
Clifton, Dartmouth and Hardness.
Robert Thompson Esquire John Clarke Esquire Thomas Boon, of Mount Boon Esquire Col. John
Clarke of Westminster. Esquire
Berealston.
John Maynard, Sergeant at Law. Eli. Crimes Esquire
Tiverton.
Sir Coplestone Bampsield, of Poultmore Baronet. Francis Warner Alderm. of
London. Robert Shapcot Esquire

County of Dorset.
SIr Walter Earl Knight. John Bingham Esquire Poole.
Col John Fitz-James. Samuel Bond Esquire
Dorchester
James Gould Esquire John Burshrod Alderman.
Lyme Regis.
Sir Edm. Prideaux Baronet At. Genesis Henry Henley Esquire
VVaymouth.
John Trenchard Esquire Col. Waldine Lagoe.
Melcombe Regis.
Col. John Clarke. Peter Middleton Merchant.
Bridport. Edward Cheek of Gabriels Esquire John Lea the elder one of the
Burgesses.
Shaftsbury.
Henry Whitaker Esquire James Baker Esquire
VVareham.
Elias Bond Esquire James Dewy Esquire
Corfecastle
Ralph Banks Esquire John Tregunwell Esquire

County of Essex.
THe Honorable Charles Rich Esquire Edward Turner Esquire Colchester.
John Maideston Esquire Abraham Harrington Esquire John Shaw of Colchester Esquire Abraham
John on of the City of London Merchant.
Malden.
Col. Henry Mildmay of Graces. Col. Joachim Mathewes.
Herwich.
John Sicklemore Esquire Thomas King Gent.

County of York.
THomas L. Fairfax Baron of Cameron Thomas Harrison Esquire York.
Sir Thomas Dickenson Knight Christopher Topham Esquire
Kingston upon Hull.
John Ramsden Esquire Andrew Marvel Esquire
Knaresborough.
Slingsby Bethel Esquire Robert Walters Esquire
Scardeborough.
Thomas Challoner Esquire Edward Salmon Esquire
Rippon.
Edmund Jennings Esquire Jonathan Jennings Esquire
Richmond.
Sir Christopher Wivel Baronet. John Bathurst Doctor of Physic.
Hedon.
Thomas Strickland Esquire Matthew Alured Esquire
Barrowbrigg.
Robert Stapleton Esquire Lawrence Persons Esquire
Malton.
Philip Howard Esquire George Marwood Esquire Luke Robinson Esquire Robert Lilburn Esquire
Thirsk.
Col. Thomas Talbot Esquire Major General Goodricke Esquire
Aldeborough.
John Lambert Esquire Francis Goodricke Esquire
Allerton. George Smithson Esquire James Danby Esquire
Beverly.
Thomas Strickland Esquire John Anlaby Esquire
Pomsret.
John Lambert of Wimbleton Esquire John Hewly Esquire

County of Gloucester.
JOhn Grubham How Esquire John Stephens Esquire Gloucester.
James Stephens Esquire Alderman. Lawrence Singleton, Esquire Alderman.
Cirencester.
John Stone of the City of Westminster. Esquire Richard Southby Esquire
Tweksbury.
Edward Cook Esquire Robert Long Esquire

County of Huntingdon.
HEnry Cromwell Esquire Nicholas Pedley Esquire Huntingdon.
John Thurloe principal Secret of State. John Bernard of Brampton Esquire

County of Hertford.
ROwland Litton of Knebworth Esquire Richard Gulston of Wydiall Esquire St. Albans.
Richard Jenyns Esquire Alban Cox Esquire
Hertford.
Isaac Puller Esquire William Packer Esquire

County of Hereford.
WRoth Rogers Esquire Benner Horkins Esquire Hereford
Nathan Rogers Esquire Roger Bosworth Doct. of Physic.
Leompster.
John Birch Esquire Edward Freeman Esquire
Weobley.
Herbert Perrot Esquire Robert Andrews Esquire

County of Kent.
WIlliam James Esquire Sir. Thomas Style Baronet. Canterbury.
Thomas St. Nicholas Esquire Robert Gibbon Esquire
Rochester.
Richard Hutchinsion Esquire Peter Pet Esquire
Maidston.
Andrew Broughton Esquire John Banks Esquire
Queenborough.
James Herbert Esquire Thomas Bayles Esquire

County of Lincoln.
EDward Rosseter Esquire Thomas Hatcher of Carleby Esquire Lincoln.
Robert Marshall Alderman. Thomas Meres Esquire
Boston.
Sir Anthony Irby Knight. Francis Mussenden Esquire
Great Grimsby.
William Wray Esquire Edward Ayscoghe Esquire
Stamford.
Christopher Clapham Esquire John Weaver Esquire
Grantham.
Sir William Else of Grantham Baronet. Tho. Skipwith of Gantham Esquire

County of Leicester.
THo. Beaumont of Staughton Baronet. Francis Hicker Esquire Leicester.
Sir Arthur Hesilrige Baronet. William Stanley Gent. one of the Ald.

County of Lancaster.
Lancaster.
Col. West Esquire Por^r junior Esquire
Preston in Aundernes.
Col. Shuttleworth Esquire Col. Standish Esquire
Wigan.
Mr. Forth Merchant of London. Mr. Markland Inhabitant of the Town.
^everpoole.
Col. Gilbert Ireland Esquire Alderman Bladmore.

County of Monmouth.
WIlliam Morgan of Machen Esquire John Nicholas of Llanmellyn Esquire Monmouth.
Nathaniel Waterhouse of the City of Westminster Esquire

County of Northampton.
RIchard Knightley Esquire Philip Hol^on the elder Esquire Peterborough.
Francis St. John Esquire Col. Alexander Beak Esquire
Northampton.
Francis Harvey of Weston-Favel Esquire. James Langham of Cottesbrook Esquire
Backley.
Thomas Crew of Steane Esquire William Lisle of the middle Temple London Esquire
Hignam Ferrers.
Ralph Suckley Esquire James Nutly Esquire

County of Nottingham.
EDward Nevill Esquire Thomas Brislow Esquire Nottingham.
John Whalley Esquire John Parker Alderman.
Estretford.
Clifford Clifton Esquire William Cartwrght Esquire

County of Norfolk.
SIr Horatio Townshead Baronet. Sir William Loyly Knight Norwich.
William Branhan Esquire John Hobart Esquire
Lyme Regis.
Tho. Tall, one of the Aldermen. Capt. Griffith Lloyd.
Great Yarmouth.
Charles George-Cick Esquire William Burton Esquire
T^tford.
William Stane, Doctor in Physic. Robert Steward Esquire
Castl^-Rising.
John Fielder of London, Esquire Guibon Goddard of Kings Lynne, Esquire Robert Jermy of
Laifield, Esquire

County of Northumberland.
SIr William Ferwick Baronet. Ralph Delavall Esquire Newcaste upon Tine.
Mark Shaftoe of Newcastle, Esquire Thomas Lilburne Esquire
Mo^peth.
Robert Delavall Esquire Robert Mitford Esquire
Barwick won Tweede.
John Rushworth of Lincolns Inn, Esquire George ^ayler Esquire One of the Commissioners
of the Navy.

County of Oxford.
RObert Jenkinson Esquire Sir Francis Noris Knight. Henry Carry Esquire Vscount
Faulkland in Ireland. University of Oxford.
Matthew Hale, Sergeant at Law. John Mills, Doctors of the Civil Law.
Oxford.
Richard Croke Esquire Unton Croke Esquire
VVodstocke.
Sir Jeremy Sankey Knight. Miles Fleetwood Esquire
Banbury.
Nathaniel Fiennes Esquire

County of Rutland.
WIlliam Sheil^ Esquire Edward Horsman Esquire
County of Surrey.
ARthur Onslow Esquire Francis Drake Esquire Southwark.
George Thompson Esquire Andrew Brewer Esquire
Blechingley.
John Goodwine Esquire Edmund Hoskins Esquire
Ryegate.
John Hele of Ryegate Esquire Edward Thurland of Ryegate Esquire
Guildford.
Carew Rawleigh Esquire Robert Parkhurst Esquire
Gatton.
Thomas Turgis Esquire Edward Bishe Esquire
Haslemere.
John Hook of Bramshor in the County of Southampton, Esquire Henry Fitz-James of
Westminster, Esquire

County of Stafford.
SIr Thomas Whitgreave Knight. Thomas Crompton Esquire Lichfield.
Daniel Watson Esquire Thomas Mynors Esquire
Stafford.
Martin Nowel Esquire William Jessop Esquire
Newcastle under Line.
Major General Tobias Bridge. Edward Keeling Esquire

County of Salop.
THomas Mackworth of Betton-Strange, Esquire Philip Young of Kemton, Esquire Salop.
William Jones Esquire Recorder. Humfrey Mackworth Esquire Governor and Town Clerk of
the said Town.
Bruges alias Bridgnorth.
Edmond Warynge Esquire John Humfrey Esquire
Ludlow.
Job Charlton Esquire Samuel Baldwyn Esquire
Great Wenlock.
Thomas Whitmore of Ludston, Esquire Sir Francis Lawley of (...) Esquire
Bishops Cas^le.
Samuel More Esquire William Oakely Esquire

County of Southampton.
RIchard Norton of Southwick Esquire Robert Wallop of Fair-Wallop Esquire Winchester.
Jonn Hildesly of Hinton Esquire Nicholas Love of Wolvesey on the Soake, Esquire
Southampton.
Thomas Knollys Esquire Roger Gallop Esquire
Portsmouth.
Francis Willoughby Esquire John Child Esquire
Yarmouth.
John Salder Esquire
Peterfield.
Henry Norton Baronot. Josias Child Esquire
Newport alias Medena.
Thomas Bowreman of Broake Esquire Robert Dillington of Motteston, Esquire
Stockbridge.
Francis Rivett of Kingsomborne, Esquire Richard Whithead the younger, Esquire
New-Town.
William Lawrence Esquire John Maynard Esquire
Christ-Church.
John Bulkely of Burgat Esquire Henry Tulse of Hinton-Admiral Esquire
Whitchurch.
Sir Henry Vane Knight. Robert Reynolds Esquire
Lymington.
John Button the younger, Esquire Richard Whitehead the younger, Esquire
Andover.
Gabriel Beek of Westminster, Esquire Robert Gough of Vernams-Deane, Esquire

County of Suffolk.
HEnry Felton Baronet. Thomas Barnardiston Esquire Ipswich.
Nathaniel Bacon, Francis Bacon, Esquires His Highness Masters of Request.
Dunwich.
Robert Brewster of Wrentham, Esquire John Barrington of Westminster, Esquire
Oxford.
Thomas Edgar Esquire Jeremy Copping Gent.
Aleborough.
Laurence Oxburgh Esquire John Bence Merchant.
Sudbury.
Samuel Hasel Esquire John Fothergill, Esquire
Eye.
Edward Dendy Esquire Joseph Blisset Esquire
St. Edmonds Bury.
John Clarke Esquire Thomas Chaplin Esquire

County of Somerset.
JOhn Buckland Esquire Robert Hunt Esquire Bristol.
Robert Aldworth Esquire Joseph Jackson Esquire
Bath.
James Ash Esquire Recorder of the City, John Harrington Esquire
Wells.
Sir Lislebone Long Knight. Thomas White Esquire
Taunton.
Sir William Windham Baronet. Thomas Gorges Esquire
Bridgwater.
Sir Thomas Wroth Knight. John Wroth Esquire
Minhead.
Alexander Popham Esquire Richard Hutchinson Esquire
Ilchester.
Richard Jones Esquire John Barker Esquire
Milborne Port.
William Carent of Tomer Esquire Rob. Hunt of Compton-Paunsfoot, Esquire

County of Sussex.
HErbert Morley Esquire John Fagge Esquire Chichester.
Henry Peckham Esquire William Cawley the younger, Esquire
Horsham.
William Freeman Esquire Henry Chowne Esquire John Fagge Esquire
Midhurst.
John Humfrey Esquire William Yalden the younger Esquire Benjamine Weston Esquire
Jews.
Herbert Morley Esquire Richard Boughton Esquire
Shorham.
Edward Blaker Esquire John Whalley Esquire
Bramber
John Fagg of Weston Esquire John Byne of Washington Esquire
Steyning.
Sir John Trevor Knight. Anthony Shirley Esquire
Estgrimsted.
Sir Robert Goodwin Knight. Goerge Courthoppe Esquire
Arundle
Henry Onflowe of Slinfold Esquire Richard Marryot of London Esquire

County of Westmerland.
THomas Burton Esquire Thomas Wharton Esquire Apulby.
Adam Baines Esquire Nathaniel Ridding Esquire

County of Wiltes.
SIr Walter St. John Baronet. Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper Baronet. New Sarum.
Henry Air Esquire, Recorder. Humfrey Ditton the elder Gent. Alderm.
Wilton.
John Herbert Esquire Richard Grobham How Esquire
Downton.
Thomas Fitzjams of Nusland in the County of Southampton Esquire William Coals of
Woodfalls Esquire
Hyndon.
Edmud Ludlowe of London Esquire Edward Tooker of New Sarum Esquire
Heytesbury.
John Ash Esquire Samuel Ash Esquire
VVestbury.
Robert Danvers of Bassetshury in the County of Beckingham Esquire William Air of
Nestone Esquire
Calne.
Edward Baynton esquire William Ducker esquire
Devizes.
Chaloner Chute the younger esquire Edward Scotton esquire
Chippenham.
Edward Hungerford of Farleigh Castle in the County of Somerset esquire James
Stedman of Lincolns-Inne esquire
Malmesbury.
Sir Henry Lee of Ditchlee in the County of Oxford Baronet. Thomas Higgons of
Gruel in the County of Southampton esquire
Cricklade.
Edward Poole of Kemble esquire John Hawkins of Aishton Keynes esquire
Great Bedwyn.
Henry Hungerford esquire Thomas Manly esquire
Ludgersall.
James Dewy of the Middle Temple London esquire Richard Sherwyn of the City of
Westminster. esquire
Old Sarum.
Richard Hill of Stratford esquire William Ludlow esquire of Carrington Park
Wotton Basset.
Henry St. John of Lyddeort Tregoze. Robert Steevens of the Middle Temple
London esquire
Marleborough.
Thomas Grove esquire James Hayes esquire Recorder.

County of Worcester.
NIcholas Lechmere Esquire Thomas Foley Esquire Worcester.
William Collins Esquire Thomas Street Esquire
Droitwich.
The Right honorable John Wild, late Lord Baron of the Public Exchequer.
Edward Soloway of Stamsord, Esquire
Evesham.
Theophilus Andrews Esquire Alderman. Robert Aokins Esquire Recorder.
Bewdley.
Edward Pits of Kier, Esquire

County of Warwick.
RIchard Lucy Esquire Joseph Hawkesworth Esquire Coventry.
Robert Beak Esquire William Puresoy Esquire
Warwick.
Foulke Lucy Esquire Thomas Archer Esquire
Tamworth.
John Swinsen Esquire Thomas Fox Esquire

Barons of the Cinque Ports.
Hastings.
SAmuel Got Esquire Nicholas Delves Esquire
Winchelsey.
John Busbridge Esquire Robert Foul Esquire
Rye.
William Hay Esquire Mark Thomas Esquire
Rumney.
Sir Robert Honnywood Knight. Samuel Godfrey Esquire
Hyeth.
Sir Robert Males Knight and Baronet. William Kenwricke Esquire
Dover.
Thomas Kelsey Esquire John Dixwell Esquire
Sandwich.
Richard Meridith Esquire James Thurbarne Esquire
WALES.
County of Anglesey.
COl. George Twisleton. Bewmaris.
Griffith Bodwrda Esquire

County of Brecon.
EDmond Jones Esquire His Highness Attorney General for Southwales. Brecon.
Samuel Wightwicke Esquire

County of Cardigan.
Cardigan.
County of Carmerthen.
THomas Huges Esquire Carmerthen.
Rowland Dawkins Esquire

County of Carnervon.
WIlliam Glynn Esquire Carnervon.
Robert Williams of Conwey, Esquire

County of Denbigh.
SIr John Carter of Kinmeil, Knight. Denby.
John Manley of Rryny Fynnon, Esquire

County of Flint.
John Trever Esquire Flint.
John Hanmer Esquire

County of Glamorgan.
EVan Seys of Boverton in the aforesaid County, Sergeant at Law. Cardiffe.
John Price Esquire
Swansey.
William Foxwist Esquire

County of Merioneth.
Lewis Owen Esquire
County of Pembroke.
SIr Erasmus Philips, Baronet. Pembroke. Sampson Lort Esquire Arthur Owen Esquire
Haverford-West.
John Upton Esquire

County of Mountgomery.
EDward Vaughan of Lloydiarth, Esquire Mountgomery.
Charles Lloyd Esquire

County of Radnor.
HEnry Williams Esquire Radnor.
Robert Weaver Esquire

SCOTLAND.
Sheriffdome of Aberdene.
Archbold Marquess of Argile.
Sheriffdome of Fife and Kinrosse.
Sir Alexander Gibsone.
Sheriffdome of Perth.
Sir Edward Rodds one of his Highness Council in Scotland.
Sheriffdome of Linlithgowe, Sterling, and Clackmannan.
Col. Adrian Scroop one of his Highness Council
Sheriffdome of Dunbarton, Argile, and Bule.
William Stune Esquire
Sheriffdome of Lannerick.
George Lockhart Esquire his Highness Advocate.
Sheriffdome of Midlothian.
Samuel Desbrow Chancellor and Keeper of the great Seal of Scotland.
Sheriffdome of Merce.
John Swinton of Swintone one of his Highness Council.
Sheriffdome of Rexbrough.
Sir Andrew Rer of Gremheid Knight.
Sheriffdome of Wigton.
Sir James Mac Dowall of Garchland.
Sheriffdome of Eastlothian.
John Earl of Twidall.
Boroughs of Bamph, Cullen, and Aberdene
Doctor Thomas Claerges
Boroughs of Lithquo, Queenferry, Pearth, Culrosse and Sterling.
Thomas Waller of Grayes-Inne.
Borough of St. Andrews, Dyeart, Kirkaldy, Cooper, Amstruther East, etc.
Colonel Nathaniel Wetham one of his Highness Council in Scotland.
City of Edinbrough.
Col. Nathaniel Whetham Esquire one of his Highness Council. John Thompson esquire
Auditor General for Scotland.
Boroughs of Lannerick, Glasee, Ruthergler, Rothsay, Rensrew, Air Irwyn, and
Dumbarton.
John Lockhart esquire
Boroughs of Dumfreze, Sanclar, Lochmaben, Annand, Wigton, Kirkoobright,
Withorn and Galloway.
Jeremy Tolhurst esquire
Boroughs of Peebles, Selkirk, Jedhert, Lander, North Berwick, Dunbar, and
Haddington.
Doctor Thomas Clearges of Wesum.
Buroughs of Forfar, etc.
Laurence Oxhorow Esquire

IRELAND.
The Lord Angier. Major General Sir Hardres Waller. Sir Charles Coot, Lord
President of Connaught. Col. Thomas Coot. Major Sir Anthony Morgan. Col.
Redman. Col. Sadler. Lieut. Colonel Bret. Col. Markham. Major Aston. Major
Rawden. Col. Sir Henry Ingoldsby. Col. Sir Jeremy Sanchy. Cap. Halsey. Major
Staples. Sir Theophilus Jone; Knight. Ansey esquire Sir John Skeving on Baronet.
John Duckenseild esquire Ralph King esquire Sir Henry Pierce. Doctor Lostus. Sir
Maurice Fenton. Vincent Gookin, Surveyor General, esquire
London, Printed by T.N for Thomas Gould (...)


