THE HISTORY OF HENRY IV.

SURNAMED The Great, King of France and Navarre.

Written Originally in French, By the Bishop of Rodez, once Tutor to his now
most Christian Majesty; And made English by J. D*

LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel, for Samuel Speed, at the sign of the
Rainbow near the Inner Templegate in Fleet Street. 1663.

To his Sacred Majesty, CHARLES THE SECOND, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland.
Dread SIR,
WIth all that humble Reverence that becomes a Low but Loyal Subject and
Servant to his Sovereign Lord and Master, cast I at Your feet this present
Address. Those Stars that move in the Lowest Orb, receive their light and
luster from the Sun, as well as those that wander in a more exalted heaven; and
therefore, may possibly be capable to return some grateful Influences, though
not in so great a quantity, yet in a quality as pure and candid.

However, all my courage could not have inspired me with a presumption to
present any thing of mine to so glorious a Majesty, had it not born in its
Frontispice the name of HENRY THE GREAT, Your Royal and Renowned Grandfather; a
Prince of so Sublime a Virtue, of so Heroic a Courage, of such Activity in
War, and such Prudence in Peace, that he justly became both the love and terror
of the age he lived in.

And, Great Sir, give me leave to tell you, that never did the Life of any
Prince since the Creation, bear so equal a Parallel with Your Maiestie's, as
that of this Renowned King. If your miseries and misfortunes have exceeded his,
God has made it by evident Demonstrances appear that he intends to make your
Glories and Happiness as far surpass those of your Royal Grandfather. You both
had Leaguers armed with Rebellion, Obstinacy and Ambition, under a Cloak of
zeal to Religion, to oppose you; and you both, assisted by a Miraculous
Providence of Heaven, overcame them. You both by Arms long strugled for your
Rights: but as if God had intended you both for true Fathers of your Countries,
and the Foundations whereon he would settle an absolute happiness in your
Kingdoms, so long afflicted with Civil Wars, and those terrors which attend
them; he brought you both to spotless Thrones, unbesmeared with blood.

How soon was France redeemed from those plagues it so long had endured, at the
entrance of the Great Henry into the Chair of Royalty, who as a Rising Sun,
darted forth those Salutiferous rays which shone upon, and enriched the
remotest parts of his Territories! How soon were all Factions dissipated! and
how soon did he by his Prudent Conduct reconcile the most obstinate Spirits! In
fine, in how short time was France, from a Den of Atheists, Thieves, and
Robbers, become the Nursery of Piety, Arts and Industry!

England (Dread Sovereign) suffered under the same Fate her neighboring Sister
had long since been Subject to, when Heaven was graciously pleased to restore
you to your Crown: And you have already made us not only hope, but see, that
you have designed to restore to us such happinesses, that we cannot justly envy
those which France enjoyed under her beloved HENRY. How well have you settled
both our Church and State? How well have you reconciled our Dissentions? with
how much too great a mercy (give me Sir leave to fear so) have you pardoned the
most obstinate of your enemies? and how may we hope (if the malice of those
obstinate Spirits yet disturb not our Tranquillity) to enjoy under your
Government the most happy and flourishing days that ever Great Britain beheld!

But Sir, that I may conclude, and not seem tedious to your Majesty; may the
God of heaven inspire into the hearts of your people a true sense of your
goodness and paternal love to them; may he correct the improbous malice of
those who yet dare to be your enemies; may he incline you still to prosecute
such Maxims of good Government, both in Church and State, as may make both
equally Flourish; may he Augment your Glories, and raise them above those of
your Grandfather, HENRY the Fourth; may he bless us all, by giving you a long
and happy Reign; and when that misery (though late) arrives us of losing you,
may we yet be made blessed in that Succession from your Loins that may endure
for ever. Thus Prays,

SIR, The humblest and faithfullest, though the meanest of your Majesty's
Subjects and Servants, J. D.

The Translator to the Reader.
BEhold here a History compiled by one of the most able, and (let me testify
thus much) one of the most moderate and impartial Pens of Europe. It was fitted
for the hand of a King; and is the Life of one whom his own Actions will
declare to have better deserved the name of Great, then that proud Macedonian,
who wept that he had no more Worlds to conquer. For though he gained not such
signal Victories, nor overran so many Countries; yet he was possessed of more
Virtues, then the other of Cities; and Virtue is the fairest Mother of true
Greatness. But, Reader, I forestal thy delight in its Reading: go on,
therefore; but with Deliberation.

J. D.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
READER,
THis History of Henry the Great, is only a small part of the Summary or
Epitomy of the general History of France, which I have composed by the command
of the King, and for the instruction of his Majesty. It having been my
intention only to gather together all that might serve to form a great Prince,
and render him capable of Reigning well; I have not thought it convenient to
enter into a particular Recital of things, or to recount at length all Wars and
Affairs, as Historians do, who are to write for all sorts of persons. I have
only took the Sum, and recounted those Circumstances I have judged the
fairest, and the most instructive; leaving apart all the rest, to shorten
matter, and to give in epitomy an account of all that passed, which might
inform the spirit of the King, without surcharging his memory. This has been
my design: if it has not succeeded so well as could be wished, I hope,
READER, that my Endeavor will appear praiseworthy. I doubt not but there are
in this Work some Mistakes which I may not have perceived, but which cannot
escape Eyes more clear-sighted. The History is accompanied with so many
Circumstances, that it is almost impossible not to be deceived in some: Yet I
believe I have written nothing for which I have not my Warrant. And if you
find in any Author the contrary of what I have said, I entreat you to consider
that our Historians do in many things so differ among themselves, that who
takes the judgment of one, must necessarily contradict the other. In this
diversity I have followed those whom I believed the best and most assured. I
acknowledge likewise that I could not refrain borrowing from them whole
Paragraphs where they have pleased me, and that I have thought I could better
explain my self by their Expressions, then my own. However, if this be a fault,
it is but a light one, and ought to be pardoned, since ingenuously confessed. For
other more remarkable ones I may have committed, I presume on your goodness,
that, Reader, you will not treat me with the utmost rigor; but that you will
have as much indulgence for me, as I have in this Work had Zeal for the Service
of my King, and Affection for the good of France.

THE HISTORY OF HENRY the Great, King of France and Navarre.
To the King.
SIR,
THat Respect and Love which all good French-^^n have still conserved for (...)
happy Memory of King Henry the Great your Grandfather, represents it self as
fresh to their remembrance, as if he still reigned; and Renown conserves the
Splendor of his fair Actions in the Hearts and Mouths of Men, as lively and
entirely as in the time of his Triumphs. But we may say moreover, when we
consider your Majesty, That he has regained a new Life in your Person, and
that he makes himself daily be seen under a Visage yet more August, and by
Virtues which appear as redoubtable to the Enemies of France, as they are sweet
and charming to its People.

In truth, Sir, that praiseworthy Impatience which your Majesty has testified
(when I presented our History to your reading) to come to this glorious Reign,
and for it to leave behind seven or eight others of Kings that preceded him, is
a most certain proof that you desire him for your Model, and that you have
resolved to study his Conduct, and conserve it in the Government of your
Estates. Your happy Birth* and your Inclinations wholly Royal, lead you to it:
The Hopes and Votes of your Subjects agree to it: The Necessities of your
Kingdom, afflicted with the Miseries of the longest War it ever sustained,
oblige you to it; and Heaven has disposed you to it by so many Graces and
eminent Qualities, that it would be difficult for you not to follow the ^air
P^^^^^ples of this great Monarch. I dare likew^^^ say (and I may speak it with
truth) that it will not be impossible for you to surpass him, if you enforce
your self to improve well all those Advantages wherewith Heaven has endowed
you above other Princes of your Age.

Yes, Sir, he has to you, as well as to the King your Grandfather, given a
generous Soul, good and beneficent; a Spirit elevated, and capable of the
greatest things; a Memory happy and facile; a Courage Heroic and Martial; a
Judgment neat and solid; astrong and vigorous Health: but he has moreover
given you one Advantage this great Prince never had; that is, A Majestic
Presence; an Air and Port almost Divine; a Person and Beauty worthy the Empire
of the Universe, which attracts the Eyes and Respects of all the World, and
which without the force of Arms, without the authority of Commands, will gain
you all those by whom your Majesty shall make your Self be seen.

I will not speak of the Prosperities of your Estates since your happy
Advancement to the Crown; how you have been proclaimed Conqueror as soon as
King; how by the assisting Counsels of your great Ministers, your Frontiers
have been extended on all sides, and your Enemies everywhere defeated: but I
ought not to forget that singular Grace which Heaven has conferred on you, by
instructing you in the Catholic Religion, and in true Piety, by the continual
Diligences and Examples of the Queen your Mother; t^^^ which was without doubt
wanting to the Youth of our Henry.

You cannot, Sir, with so fair Dispositions, with so many super-excelling
Favors of Heaven, be confined beneath the Glory and Reputation of this great
Prince. Remember, if you please, that you have done me the honor to tell me
more then once, that you ardently aspire to a like Perfection, and that you
have no greater Ambition. All France, who at present have their Eyes upon you,
rejoice to see the Effects already second your Desires, and that you strive as
puissantly to imitate, as you have passionaaely desired to hear the Recital of
so fair a Life.

Your Majesty knows that Wills pass but for Weaknesses, when they render not
themselves efficacious; and are so far from being worthy praise, that they
condemn those who have them so much the more, because they see well what they
ought to do, and have not the heart to attempt or enterprise it. The way of
Virtue at first glance seems rude, but it conducts to the Temple of Glory;
where it is certain we arrive not by simple Thoughts, and idle Discourses, but
by Labor, Application and Perseverance.

I have often taken the Liberty to represent to your Majesty, That Royalty is
no Infant-Mystery; That it consists almost altogether in Action; That a King
ought to make his Duty his Delights; and, That he ought to know how to Reign;
that is, how to hold himself the Helm of his Estate, the better to Conduct them
with Vigor, Wisdom and Justice.

Who knows not that there is no Honor in bearing a Title, without executing
the Functions of it? That it is in vain to have acquisted the best Knowledge,
without laboring to reduce it into practice? That it is ridiculous to propose
to our selves a great Model, unless it be effectually imitated? And in fine,
that it is nothing to understand by heart all the Maxims of Policy, if we
apply them not to their right Use? Without lying, he that has Eyes, and will
not open them; who has Arms, and will not take the pains to move them, is in a
worse estate then the Blind or the Cripple.

I cannot dissemble, Sir, that unspeakable Joy I have sometimes conceived, when
I have understood from the Mouth of your Majesty, that you would choose rather
never to have wore a Crown, then not your Self to govern it, but resemble those
Infant-Kings of the first Race, who, as all our Historians say, served only as
Idols to the Majors of their Palace; and who had had no Name, but only to mark
the year in the Chronology.

But it will be enough to make France know how much your Majesty condemns that
sleepy Lethargy, to tell them that you are at present resolved to imitate your
Grandfather Henry the Great, who has been the most active and most laborious
of all our Kings; who has dedicated himself with most Diligence to the
Management of his Affairs, and who has cherished his Estates and People with
most Affection and most Tenderness. This is to declare that your Majesty has
taken a firm Resolution to put your hand to the Work; to know both the inside
and outside of your Realm; to preside in your Counsels; to give feet and motion
to all Resolutions; to have a continual Eye over your Revenues; to cause a
true, faithful and exact Account to be given; to distribute Graces and
Recompenses to those of your Creatures shall prove worthy: in fine, fully and
amply to enjoy your Authority. It is thus the incomparable Henry acted, whom we
are about to see reign, not only in France by right of Blood, but over all
Europe by the esteem of his Virtue.

In effect, since the first foundation of the French Monarchy, the History
furnishes us not with any Reign more memorable, by reason of the great Events,
more repleat with the wonders of Divine Assistance, more glorious for the
Prince, and more happy for the People, then his: and it is without Flattery or
Envy that all the Universe has given him the surname of Great; not so much for
the greatness of his Victories, however comparable to those of Alexander or
Pompey, as for the greatness of his Soul and of his Courage: for he never bowed
either under the Insults of Fortune, or under the Traverses of his Enemies, or
under the Resentments of Revenge, or under the Artifices of Favorites or
Ministers: he remained always in the same temper, always Master of himself. In
a word, he remained always King and Sovereign, without acknowledging other
Superior then God, Justice and Reason.

Let us then proceed to write the History of The Life of Hen. the Great,
divided into three parts.
his Life; which we shall divide into three principal Parts.

The first shall contain what happened from The first.
his Birth till his coming to the Crown of France.

The second shall speak what he did after he The second
came to it, until the Peace of Vervin.

And the third shall recount his Actions after The third.
the Peace of Vervin, until the unhappy day of his death.

But before all, it is necessary we speak something briefly of his Genealogy.

He was Son to Anthony de Bourbon, Duke of His Genealogy.
Vendosme and King of Navarre, and of Jane of Albret, Heiress of that Kingdom.

Anthony descended in a direct and Masculine Who Antho. de Bourbon his father
was.
Line from Robert Count of Clermont, fifth Son to King St. Lewis.

This Robert espoused Beatrix, Daughter and Heiress to John of Burgoyne, Baron
of Bourbon, by his Wife Agnes; for which cause Robert took the Name of Bourbon,
but not the Arms, still keeping those of France.

This sage Pre-caution served well to his Descendants, to maintain themselves
in the Degree of Princes of the Blood, which those of Courtnay Peter, sixth Son
to Lewis le gross, espoused Isabella Heiress of Courtnay, and took both Name
and Arms: a fault very prejudicial to his posterity.
lost, for not having acted in the same manner. And besides the Virtue which
gave a splendor to their Actions, the good management and economy which they
exercised to conserve and augment their Revenues, the great Alliances in which
they were very diligent to match themselves, ever refusing to mingle their
Noble among Vulgar Blood; and above all, their rare Piety toward God, and that
singular goodness wherewith they acted toward their Inferiors, conserved them,
and elevated them above Princes of elder Branches: for the People seeing them
always rich, puissant, wise, and in a word, worthy to command, had imprinted in
their spirits as it were a prophetic persuasion that this House would one day
come to the Crown; and they on their side seemed to have conceived this hope,
though it were at great distance, having taken for their Word or Device,
Espoir, or Hope.

Among the younger Branches which issued from this Branch of Bourbon The branch
of Bourbon produced many; among others that of Vendosme.
, the most considerable and most illustrious was that of Vendosm. It carried
this Name, because they possessed that great Country, which came to them in the
year 1364. by the marriage of Katharine Vendosme, (Sister and Heiress to
Bouchard last Count of Vendosme) with John of Bourbon Count of the Marches. At
present it was but a County, but was after made a Duchy by King Francis the
first, in the year 1514. in favou^ of Charles, who was great grandchild to
John, and father of Anthony. This Charles had seven Male-Children; Lewis,
Charles Duke of Vendosme had Anthony, and six other sons.
Anthony, Francis, another Lewis, Charles, John, and a third Lewis: the first
Lewis and the second died in their infancy; Anthony remained the eldest;
Francis, who was Count of Anguien, and gained the Battle of Cerisoles, died
without being married. Charles was a Cardinal of the title of Chrysogone, and
Archbishop of Rouen: this is he who was named The old Cardinal of Bourbon. John
lost his life at the Battle of St. Quintin. The third Lewis was called The
Prince of Conde, and by two Marriages had several Male-Children; from the first
descended Henry Prince of Conde, Francis Prince of Conty, and Charles, who was
Cardinal and Archbishop of Rouen after the Death of the old Cardinal of Bourbon.

There were eight Generations from Male in Male, from St. Lewis to Anthony, who
was Duke of Vendosme, King of Navarre, and father to our Henry.

As for Jane d' Albret his Wife, she was Who Jane d' Albret his Mother was.
Daughter and Heiress to Henry of Albret, King of Navarre, and of Margaret du
Valois, Sister to King Francis the first, and Widow to the Duke of Alenzon.
Henry d' Albret was son to John d' Albret, who became King of Navarre by his
Wife Katherine du Foix, Sister to King Phoebus deceased without Children; for
that Realm had entered into the House of Foix by marriage, as it (...)
afterward into that of Albret, and since into that of Bourbon.

Ferdinand King of Arragon, had invaded and taken the Higher Navarre, that is,
that part which is beyond the Pyraenean Hills, and the most considerable of
that Realm, from King John d' Albret; so that by consequence there rested to
him only the Lower, that is, that beneath the Mountains toward France: but
with it he had the Countries of Bearn, of Albrett, of Foix, of Armagnac, of
Bigorra, and many other great Signories coming as well by the House of Foix, as
that of Albret.

Henry his Son had only one Daughter, Jane, who was called The Minion of
Kings: for King Henry her Father, and the great King Francis the first her
Uncle, with Envy to each other, strove most to cherish her.

The Emperor Charles the fifth had cast his Eyes on her, and caused her to be
demanded of her Father for his Son Philip the second; proposing this as a means
to pacify their Differences touching the Kingdom of Navarre: but King Francis
the first, not thinking it fit to introduce so puissant an Enemy into France,
(...). of Bourbon, Duke of Vendosme, and Jane d' Albret, married at Moulins
1547.
causing her to come to Chastellerault, affianced her to the Duke of Cleves;
and after releasing her of that Contract, married her to Anthony of Bourbon,
Duke of Vendosme: and the Marriage was solemnized at Moulins, in the year 1547.
the same year that Francis the first died.

The two young Spouses had in their first three or four years, two Sons; both
which died at Berceau by accidents very extraordinary: the first, because its
Governess being her self cold of nature, kept it so hot, that she stifled it
with heat; and the second by the carelessness of the Nurse, who playing with a
Gentleman, as they danced the Child from one to another, let it fall to the
ground, so that it died in torment. Thus Heaven deprived them of these two
little Princes, to make way for our Henry; who merited well both the
Birthright, and to be an only Son.

Let us now come to the History of his Life.
The First PART OF THE LIFE OF HENRY the Great:
Containing his History from his Birth, until he came to the Crown of FRANCE.

IT has not been precisely 1552.
known in what place Henry Henry the Great conceived at la Fleche.
the Great was conceived. The common opinion holds that it was at la Fleche in
Anjou; there where Anthony of Bourbon his father, and the Princess of Navarre
his mother, sojourned from the end of February, anno 1552, until the middle of
May, in the year 1553. But it 1553.
is certain that she first perceived her conception, and felt it move, at the
Camp in Picardy, where she was with her husband, who was Governor of that
Province, and who was gone from la Fleche to command an Army against Charles
the fifth. It was most just, that he who was destined to be an extraordinary
Prince, should begin the first motions of his life in a Camp, at the noise of
Trumpets and Cannon, as a true child of Mars.

His grandfather Henry d' Albret, who yet lived, having understood that his
daughter was with child, recalled her home to him; desiring himself to take
care for the conservation of this new fruit, which, by a secret pre-sentiment,
he was wont to say ought to revenge him of those injuries the Spaniards had
done him.

This courageous Princess taking then leave of her husband, parted from
Compeigne the fifteenth of November; traversed all France to the Pyrenaean
mountains, and arrived at Pau in Bearne, where the King her father was, the
fourth day of December, not having stayed above eighteen or nineteen days on
her journey: and the thirtieth of the same month, she was happily brought to
bed of a son.

Before this, King Henry d' Albret had made his Will; which the Princess his
daughter had a great desire to see, because it was reported that it was made to
her disadvantage, in favor of a Lady that good man had loved. She durst not
speak to him of it; but he being advertised of her desire, he promised to show
it her, and put it in her hands, when she should show him what she carried in
her womb; but on condition, that at her delivery she should sing a Song; to the
end (said he) that thou bringst not into the world a weak and weeping infant.
The Princess promised him; and had so much courage, that maugre the great pains
she suffered, she kept her word, and sung one in the Bearnois language, so soon
as His mother sings at her delivery of him. He cries not at his birth.
she understood he was entered into the chamber. It was observed that the
infant, contrary to the common order of Nature, came into the world without
weeping or crying. Nor was it fit, that a Prince who ought to be the joy of all
France, should be born among tears and groans.

So soon as he was born, his grandfather carried So soon as born, his
grandfather carries him into his chamber: he rubs his lips with Garlic, and
makes him taste wine.
him in the skirt of his Robe into his own chamber; giving his Will, which was
in a box of gold, to his daughter; telling her, My daughter, see there what is
for you; but this is for me. Whilst he held the infant, he rubbed his little
lips with a clove of Garlic, and made him suck a draught of Wine out of a
golden cup; that he might render his temperament more masculine and vigorous.

The Spaniards had formerly said in Raillery The Spaniards Raillery concerning
the birth of his mother
concerning the birth of the mother of our Henry; O wonder! the Cow has
brought forth an Ewe: meaning by that word Cow, Queen Margaret her mother, whom
they called so; and her husband, Cow-keeper, alluding to the Arms of Bearn,
which are two Cows. And King Henry resting assured of the future greatness of
his little grandchilde, taking him often in his arms, kissing him; and
remembering the foolish Raillery of the Spaniards, spoke with joy to all those
who came to visit him, and congratulate this happy birth: See (said he) how my
Ewe has now brought forth a Lion! Her fathers Reply to it


He was baptized the year following, on 1554.
Twelfth-day* being the sixth of January, 1554. Baptism of Hen. 4.
For this Baptism, were expressly made Fonts of silver richly gilded; in which
he was baptized, in the Chapel of the Castle of Pau. His Godfathers were Henry
the second King His godfathers and godmother.
of France, and Henry d' Albret King of Navarre; who gave him their Name: and
the Godmother was Madam Claudia of France, after Duchess of Lorain. Jaques de
Foix then Bishop of Lescar, and after Cardinal, held him over the Font, in the
name of the Most Christian King; and Madam d' Andovins in the name of Madam
Claudia of France. He was baptized by the Cardinal of Armagnac Bishop of Rhodez
and Vice-Legat of Avignon.

He was however difficult to be brought up, He was hard to bring up.
having seven or eight Nurses, of which the last had all the honor. At his
being weaned, the King gave him for Governess Susan de He had for Governess
Madam de Miossens.
Bourbon wife of John d' Albret Baron of Miossens, who elevated him in the
Castle of Coarasse in Bearn, situated amongst the rocks and mountains.

His grandfather would not permit him to His grandfather permits him not to be
nourished delicately.
be nourished with that delicateness ordinarily used to persons of his quality;
knowing well, that there seldom lodged other then a mean and feeble soul in a
soft and tender body. He likewise denied him rich habiliments, and childrens
usual babies; or that he should be flattered or treated like a Prince; because
all those things were only the causers of vanity, and rather raised pride in
the hearts of infants, then any sentiments of generositie: but he commanded
that he should be habited and nourished It has been said that he was
ordinarily nourished with coarse bread, beef, cheese and garlic; and that
oftentimes he was made to march with naked feet, and brre headed
like the other infants of the Country, and likewise that they should accustom
him to run and mount up the rocks; that by such means he might use himself to
labor, and, if we may speak so, give a temperature to that young body, to
render it the more strong and vigorous: which was without doubt most necessary
for a Prince who was to suffer so much to reconquer his Estate.

King Henry d' Albret died at Hagetmau in The death of Henry d' Albret.
Bearn, on the five and twentieth of May, 1555. being aged about fifty three
years, or thereabouts. 1555.
He ordained by his Will, that his body should be carried to Pampelona, to be
interred with his predecessors; and that in the mean time it should be laid in
State in the Cathedral of Lescar in Bearn. This Prince was courageous, of a
great spirit, sweet and courteous to all the world, and so nobly liberal* that
Charles the fifth once passing through Navarre, was in such manner received,
that he protested he had never seen a more magnificent Prince.

After his death, Jane his daughter, and Anthony His daughter and sonin-law
succeed him, and retire from the Court.
Duke of Vendosme his son-in-law, succeeded him. They were at present at the
Court of France; and with much difficulty obtained their leave to retire to
Bearn: for King Henry the second, pressed to it by ill Counsel, would have
deprived them of the Lower Navarre, which yet remained to them; pretending,
that all that was below the Pyrenaean Mountains, belonged to the Realm of
France. They knew how justly to oppose against him the Estates of the Country;
and the King durst not too much pursue this subject, for fear lest despair
should force them to call the Spaniards to their assistance: but he still
remained troublesome to them; and giving to Anthony the Government of Guyenne,
which had been likewise held by Henry d' Albret his Father-in-law, he
retrenched him of Languedoc, which he had a long time enjoyed.

About two years after, they returned to 1557.
the Court of France, whither they brought 1558.
their Son, aged about four or five years; who was the most jolly and
best-composed Lad in the world: but they stayed but few months, and returned
again to Bearn.

A little after, King Henry the second was 1559.
slain with a blow of a Lance by Montgomery. Death of King Henry the second
Francis 2. succee^s.
Francis the second, his eldest Son, succeeded him; and Messieurs de Guise,
Uncles to Mary Stuart his Queen, seized themselves of the Government. The
Princes of the Blood could not suffer it; and therefore Lewis, Prince of Conde,
younger Brother to Anthony, called that King into the Court to oppose it.

During these Divisions, the Hugonots contrived the Conspiration d' Amboyse
against the Divisions at Court.
present Government: and the two Brothers, 1560.
Anthony and Lewis, being accused for the Chiefs of it, were arrested Prisoners
in the State of Orleance; and processes made so hotly against the second, that
it was believed he would have been beheaded, if the Death of King Francis the
second had not happened. Death of Francis 2.


Charles the ninth who succeeded him, being Charles 9. succeeds. Queen
Katherine declared Regent, and the King of Navarre Lieutenant General of the
Realm.
under age, Queen Katherine his Mother caused her self to be declared Regent of
the Estates; and the King of Navarre, first Prince of the Blood, was declared
Lieutenant General of the Realm, to govern the Estate with her: so that by this
means he was stayed in France, whither he caused his Queen Jane, and his young
Son Prince Henry, to come. But he enjoyed not long this new Dignity; for the
Troubles daily continuing, by reason of the Surprises which the new Reformers
made 1562.
of the best Cities of the Kingdom, after having re-taken Bourges from them,
he came to He is killed before Rouen.
besiege Rouen; where visiting one day the Trenches, as he was making water, he
received a Musket Shot in his left shoulder; of which he in few days died at
Andely on the Siene. Had he lived longer, the Hugonots had without doubt been
but ill treated in France; for he mortally hated them, though his Brother* 1562.
the Prince of Conde, were the principal Chief of their party.

The Queen his wife, and the little Prince his son, were at present in the
Court of France. The Queen his wife returns to Bearn, and embraces Calvinism
The mother returned to Bearn, where she publicly embraced Calvinism: but she
left her son with the King, under the conduct of a wise Tutor, named la
Gaucherie, who endeavored to give him some tincture of Learning, not by the
Rules of Grammar, but by Discourses and Entertainments. To this effect he
taught him by heart many fair Sentences like to these:

Ou vaincre avec Justice,
Ou Mourir avec Gloire.
Or justly gain the Victory,
Or learn with Glory how to die.
And that other;

Les Princes sur leur Peuple ont autorit^ grande,
Mais Dieu plus fortement dessus les Rois command.
Kings rule their Subjects with a mighty hand;
But God with greater power does Kings command.
In the year 1566. his mother took him 1566.
from the Court of France, and led him to She ta^ her son from the Court, and
gives him a Master instructs him in ill Doctrine.
Pau; and in the place of la Gaucherie, who was deceased, she gave him
Florentius Christian, an ancient servant of the house of Vendosme; a man of a
very agreeable conversation, and well versed in Learning; but however a
Hugonot, and who, according to the orders of the Queen, instructed the Prince
in that false Doctrine.

In the first troubles of the Religion, Francis Duke of Guise had been
assassinated by Poltrot at the Siege of Orleance, leaving his children in
minority: this was in the year 1563. In the second, the Constable of
Montmorency received 1567.
a wound at the battle of St. Dennis; of Henry Prince of Navarre, declared
chief of the Religion.
which he died at Paris, three days after the Eve of St. Martin, in the year
1567. In the third, and in the year 1569, Queen Jane rendered her self
Protectoress of the Hugonot party; being for this effect come to Rochel with
her son, whom she now devoted to the Defense of that new Religion.

In this quality he was declared Chief, and 1569.
his Uncle the Prince of Conde his Lieutenant in Louys Prince of Conde his
Uncle, his Lieutenant with Admiral Coligny. A judicious action, when yet an
infant. b This Duke of Anjou, was King after Hen. 3
colleague with the Admiral of Coligny. These were two great Chieftains, but
they committed notable errors; and this young Prince, though not exceeding
thirteen years of age, had the spirit to observe them. For he judged well at
the great skirmish of Loudun, that if the Duke of Anjou (b) had had troops
ready to assault them, he had done it; and that not doing it, he was without
doubt in an ill estate, and therefore should the rather have been assaulted by
them: but they, by not doing it, gave time to all his troops to arrive.

At the battle of Jarnac, he represented to Another action very judicious at
the battle of Jarnac.
them yet more judiciously, that there was no means to fight, because the
forces of the Princes were dispersed, and those of the Duke of Anjou firmly
imbodied: but they were engaged too far to be able to retreat. The Prince of
Conde was killed in this battle, or rather Lewis Prince of Conde slain
assassinated in cold blood after the Combat, in which he had had his Leg
broken.

After that, all the authority and belief of After his death, the Admiral
commands all.
the Party remained in the Admiral Coligny; who, to speak truth, was the
greatest man of that time of the Religion he took part with, but the most
unfortunate.

This Admiral having gathered together new He hazards the battle of Montcontour.
forces, hazarded a second battle at Montcontour in Poictou: he had caused to
come to the Army our little Prince of Navarre, and the young Prince of Conde,
who was likewise named Henry; and gave them in charge to Prince Lodowick of
Nassaw, who guarded them on a Hill little distant with four thousand horse.

The young Prince burned with desire to Our Prince impat^ent to engage, but
hindered.
engage in person, but they permitted him not to run so great a hazard:
nevertheless when the Avant-Guard of the Duke of Alenzon was disordered by that
of the Admiral, there had been no danger to let him fall upon the Enemies, who
were much astonished. However they hindered him, and he now cried out, We shall
loose our advantage, and by consequence the battle. It arrived as he had
foreseen; and Gives marks of his judgment.
it was at that hour judged by some, that a young man of sixteen years of age,
had more understanding then the old Soldiers. Thus 1570.
he applied himself entirely to what he did; nor had he only a Body, but a
Spirit and Judgment apt.

Being saved with the remnants of his Army, he made almost a turn round the
Kingdom, fighting in retreat, and rallying together the Hugonots troops here
and there for five or six months; during which, he suffered so much travel,
that had he not been elevated in that manner he was, he could not have been
able to resist it.

This young Prince always accompanied with the Admiral, led his troops into
Guyenne, and from thence through Languedoc, where he took Nismes by stratagem,
forced several small places, and burned the suburbs of Toulouse in such manner,
that the sparkles of that fire flew into that great City. The War being He with
the Admiral continues the War.
thus kindled in the heart of France, he showed himself on the other bank of
the Rhone with his troops, gained by storms the City of St. Julien and St.
Just, and obliged St. Estienne en Forez to capitulate. From thence he descended
to the banks of the Saone, and afterward into the middle of Burgongne. Paris
trembled the second time at the approach of an Army so much the more
formidable, because it seemed to be reinforced by the loss of two-battles, and
to have now gained some advantage over that of the Catholics which the Marshal
de Cosse commanded.

The Counsel of the King fearing to hazard all by a fourth Encounter, judged it
more to the purpose to plaster up a peace with that The peace of Arnayle-Duc.
party: it was therefore treated of, the two Armies being near each other, and
concluded in the little City of Arnay-le-Duc, on the eleventh of August.

This Peace made every one retire home; the Prince of Navarre went to Bearn.
King Charles the ninth married with Elizabeth, Daughter to the Emperor
Maximilian the second; and nothing else seemed thought of, but Feasts and
Rejoycings. In the mean time, the King having found that he could never compass
his Desires on the Hugonots by force, resolved to make use of means more easy,
but 1571.
A Resolution to entrap the Hugonots, and exterminate them.
much more wicked: he began to caress them, to feign that he would treat them
favorably, to accord them the greatest part of those things they desired, and
to lull them asleep with hopes of his making War against the King of Spain in
the Low Countries; a thing they passionately desired: and the better to allure
them, he promised as a gage of his faith, to marry his Sister Margaret to our
Henry; and by these means drew the principal Chiefs of their party to Paris.

His mother Jane, who was come before to Death of Jane d' Albret.
make preparations for the marriage, died a few days after her arrival: a
Princess of a Spirit and Courage above her Sex, and whose Soul wholly virile,
was not subject to the weaknesses and defaults of other women; but in truth, a
passionate Enemy of the Catholic Religion. Some Historians say that she was
poisoned with a pair of perfumed Gloves, because they feared that she having a
great spirit, would discover the design they had to massacre all the Hugonots:
but if I be not deceived, this is a falsity; it being more likely which others
say, that she died of a Tissick; since those that were about her, and served
her, have so testified.

Henry her Son, who came after her, being in Her son takes the quality of King
of Navarre. He marries the King of France his sister.
Poictou, received news of her death, and presently took the Quality of King:
for hitherto he had only born that of Prince of Navarre. So soon as he came to
Paris, the unhappy Nuptials were celebrated; the two parties being espoused by
the Cardinal of Bourbon, on a scaffold erected for that purpose before the
Church of Nostre-Dame.

Six days after, which was the day of St. Bartholomew, Massacre of St.
Bartholomew.
all the Hugonots which were come to the solemnity, had their throats cut;
amongst others, the Admiral, and twenty other Lords of remark; twelve hundred
Gentlemen; three or four thousand Soldiers and Burgesses; and through all the
Cities of the Kingdom, after the example of Paris, near an hundred thousand
men. Execrable action! which never had, nor ever shall again, if it please God,
find its parallel.

What grief must it needs be to our young King, to see in stead of Wine and
Perfumes, The grief and fear of our young King.
so much Blood shed at his Nuptials, his best friends murdered; and hear their
pitiful cries, which pierced his ears into the Louvre where he was lodged? And
moreover, what trances and fears must needs surprise his very Person? for in
effect it was consulted whether they should murder him and the Prince of Conde
with the rest; and all the murderers concluded on their death: nevertheless, by
a miracle, they after resolved to spare them.

Charles the ninth caused them to be brought to his presence; and having showed
them a mountain of dead bodies, with horrible He is constrained to turn
Catholic.
threats, not harkening to their reasons, told them, Either Death or the Mass.
They elected rather the last then the first, and abjured Calvinism: but because
it was known they did it not heartily, they were so straightly observed, that
they could not escape the Court during those two years that Charles the ninth
lived, nor a long time after his death.

During this time, our Henry exquisitely 1572.
dissembled his discontents, though they were very great; and notwithstanding
those vexations which might trouble his spirit, he clothed his visage with a
perpetual serenity, and humor wholly jolly. This was without His great dangers
and troubles at Court.
doubt the most difficult passage of his Life: he had to do with a furious
King, and with his two Brothers, to wit, the Duke of Anjou, a dissembling
Prince, and who had been educated in massacres; and with the Duke of Alenzon,
who was deceitful and malicious; with Queen Katherine, who mortally hated him,
because her Divines had foretold his reign: and in fine, with the house of
Guise, whose puissance and credit was at present almost boundless.

He was doubtless necessitated to act with a His wise and prudent conduct.
mavelous prudence in the conduct of himself with all these people, that he
might not create in them the least jealousy, but rather beget a great esteem
of himself; make submission and gravity accord, and conserve his Dignity and
Life: in the mean time he dis-engaged himself from all these difficulties, and
from all these dangers, with an unparalleled address.

He contracted a great familiarity with the He contracts friendship with the
Duke of Guise.
Duke of Guise, who was about his own age; and they often made secret parties
of pleasure together: but he agreed not so well with the Duke of Alenzon, who
had a capritious spirit; nor was he overmuch troubled at his ill accord with
him, because neither the King nor Queen Mother had any affection for this Duke.
However, he gave no credit to the ill He shuns contention with Duke d' Alenzon;
counsel of that Queens Emissaries, who endeavored to engage his contending in
Duel against him; so much the rather, because that he considering him as the
brother of his King, to whom he ought respect, he knew well it would have
proved his loss, and that she would not have been wanting to take so fair a
pretext to ruin him.

He shunned likewise other snares laid for him, but yet not all: for he
suffered himself but lets himself be overcome by the beauty of Ladies:
to be overtaken with the allurements of some Ladies of the Court; whom it is
said that Queen served her self expressly of, to amuse the Princes and Nobles,
and to discover all their thoughts.

From that time, ( for Vices contracted in the blossom of youth, generally
accompany men to their tomb) a passion for women which was his greatest
weakness.
was the greatest feebleness and weakness of our Henry; and possibly the cause
of his last misfortune: for God punishes sooner or later those who wickedly
abandon themselves to this criminal passion.

Besides this, he contracted no other crimes 1572.
in this Court; and it ought to be attributed He fell not into any other of the
horrible Vices of the Court.
to a particular grace of Heaven, that he was not infected with all; for there
was never any more vicious nor more corrupted. Impiety, Atheism, Witchcraft,
all most horrible wickedness, black ingratitude and perfidiousness, poisoning
and assassination, reigning there in a sovereign degree: yet all these
abominations, in stead of infecting him, fortified him in the natural horror he
had against them; and, though amongst wicked persons, he had never any thoughts
to become their Companion, but many to be their Enemy.

On St. Bartholomews-day succeeding, they 1573.
would finish to exterminate the Hugonots; and The Duke of Anjou besieges
Rochel, and carries the King with him.
to this purpose the Duke of Anjou went to besiege Rochel, carrying him with
him; but caused him to be so well observed, that he could neither evade to the
right hand nor the left. It may be judged what heart-grief it was to him to be
made an instrument in the destruction The siege raised, by the election of Duke
d' Anjou to the Kingdom of Poland.
of those which yet remained his friends and servants, and had refuged
themselves in this City. After a long siege, it was relieved by the arrival of
the Ambassadors of Poland, who came to seek the Duke of Anjou, whom the Estates
of that Country had elected their King.

Some months afterward, Charles the 1574.
ninth fell mortally sick, vomiting forth blood Charles 9. falls mortally sick
at Bois de Vincennes.
through all the conduits of his body; so that by many it was believed he was
empoisoned: but however it were, it may justly be said, (if it be permitted to
judge of Kings, who ought to be judged by none but God) That it was a Divine
punishment for his blasphemies.

His extreme malady gave birth to a league A league made at Court, into which
Henry enters.
made by the Duke of Alenson, the Marshals of Montmorency and Cosse, and some
Catholics, with the Hugonot party, to deprive the Queenmother of the
Government, and drive the Guises from the Court, where they were very puissant.
Our Henry entered into it, not out of any design to oblige himself with those
The Queenmother discovering it, causes him and the Duke Alenson, etc to be
arrested;
people, but only that he might have the means to retire with security into
his own Country.

The Queen Mother having understood these practices, caused him and the Duke of
Alenson to be arrested and committed to Guard. The Prince of Conde saved
himself happily in Germany. She caused likewise the two Marshals of Montmorency
and Cosse to be secured; and to let the world see she treated not Princes of
their degree in this manner without sufficient cause, she made them be strictly
examined, on many treasonable Interrogatories, but which were all false: there
were only put to and la Mole, Coconas, and Tourtray, to be put to death.
death la Mole, Coconas, and Tourtray; three Gentlemen of note, who had engaged
themselves in their intrigues: and possibly this execution was necessary to
calm the spirit of the Nobility and People, who began to murmur, that a son of
France, and the first Prince of the blood, should be treated in this manner.

In this affair, the Chancellor would have The Chancellor would examine the
King of Navarre.
examined the King of Navarre: but though captive and threatened, he would not
so much wrong his Dignity as to reply to him. However, to content the
Queen Mother, he made a long discourse, addressing his speech to her; by which
he declared many things touching the present estate of affairs, but charged no
person, as the Duke of Alenson had weakly and unworthily done.

King Charles the ninth being near his death, Charles 9. near his death, sends
for him.
and hating possibly not without reason both his two brothers, and his mother,
sent to seek our Henry, in whom alone he acknowledged to have found faith and
honor; and most affectionately recommended to him his wife and his daughter.

Katherine de Medicis, knowing that he had sent for him, was fearful lest he
should leave 1574.
to him the Regency; and to this purpose Queen Katherine alarmed, would
affright him.
would cast some fear into his soul, to the end he should not dare to accept
it. As he went to attend the King, who was at Bois de Vincennes, she gave order
he should be made pass under the Arches, between the Guards, who lay in ambush
and posture to massacre him. He startled at first with fear, and recoiled two
or three paces backwards: however, Nanzay le Chastre, Captain of the
Life-guards, reassured him, swearing to him he should receive no prejudice; he
was therefore constrained, though he trusted but little to his words, to pass
through the Carabines and Halberds.

After the death of Charles the ninth, Katherine After the death of Charles 9.
she seizes on the Regency.
de Medicis, partly by force, and partly by cunning, seized on the Regency,
expecting the return of her dear Son the Duke of Anjou, who was named Henry the
third.

When he was returned from Poland, she The two Princes set at liberty.
brought the two Princes before him, to do with them what he pleased; whom
after some chidings and threatenings, he set at liberty.

These two Princes making reflection on the continual dangers they had for two
years past been in, resolved with the first occasion to deliver themselves from
these fears. The Prince The Prince of Conde was in Germany.
of Conde, who was in Germany, had raised Levies for the Hugonot party; who,
about the end of the reign of Charles the ninth, had retaken Arms: and
Damville, second son to du Feu Constable, and brother of the Marshal of
Montmorency, who was a prisoner in the Bastile, had joined himself to their
party; not taking Religion for his pretext, (because he was a Catholic) but
the public Liberty, and Reformation of the State. This sort of Catholics who
joined themselves in league with the Hugonots, were named The Politicians.

Our Henry could not escape from the The King of Navarre cannot escape as he
desires.
Court so soon as he desired: he was diligently watched, and his very
Domestics were as so many spies over him. He well understood, that if he were
surprised whilst he endeavored to save himself, he should certainly be
murdered; and now whilst he sought occasions to do it with security, he
engaged himself in new snares; becoming passionate of la Dame de Sauves, wife
to a Secretary of State, He falls in love with a Lady.
and at present the fairest in the whole Court.

In the mean time the Queen Mother, who with so much diligence kept him at
Court, could have been well contented he had been gone. For the King her dear
Son, began to take some knowledge of his own affairs; a thing much displeasing
to her, because she would have governed all: she therefore apprehending, The
Queenmother alluminates all the factions and civil wars.
that as he took the Authority into his own hands, hers would be diminished;
believed that she ought to embroile all by factions and civil wars; of which
she alone, as it may be said, had the Key, so that nothing could pass without
her. See here the reason wherefore so long as she lived she did underhand
nothing but suscitate troubles, and animate different parties both at Court and
abroad; that in the end, after having caused the desolation of the Estate, and
the subversion of all Laws and all Orders, she might her self perish in those
flames which she had kindled, and supplied with so much fuel.

Amongst these transactions, as the King went 1575.
to Rheims to be enstalled, a conspiracy was discovered Conspiracy against
Henry 3. who confides in our Henry.
against his Person; fostred by the Duke of Alenson, at the instigation of the
friends of the defunct Admiral, and of de la Mole, who had been his favorite:
many believed this to be a thing devised by the Queen Mother, of purpose to
astonish and weaken the spirit of her Son: and the reason they had to believe
it, was, because she obliged the King to pardon this crime so lightly, none
either of the Accomplices or Instigators being punished for it. However it were,
Henry the third testified in this occasion a particular confidence in our King
of Navarre; who, assisted by his friends, served him as Captain of his Guards
through the whole way, never stirring from the boot of his Coach: and in this
appeared so much the more generous, having no reason to love him, beside the
obligation of his duty, being his kinsman and his vassal.

Henry the third being arrived at Rheims, Henry 3. anointed and espoused to
Louis de Lorrain.
was on the fifteenth of the month of February, installed by the Cardinal of
Guise; and on the marrow espoused to Louise de Lorrain, daughter of the Count
of Vaudemont: which added yet a great luster to the house of Guise, of which
Duke Henry was chief, who was at present in favor, though after killed at
Blois. This Prince, one of the bravest in all manners Familiarity between our
Henry and the Duke of Guise.
that Age produced, had ever promised himself to govern the King by Queen
Louise his kinswoman. He had contracted a very strait familiarity with the King
of Navarre, whom he called his Master* as that King called him his Gossip.

Queen Margaret, who, to speak the truth, could not live without Intrigues nor
Galanteries, contributed with all her power to the entertainment of this good
intelligence, and essayed to make the Monsieur (who is he we call Duke d'
Alenson) enter into it, whom she most passionately loved.

But the union of Princes being the ruin of The Queenmother breaks this union.
Favorites, and those that governed, the Queenmother straight broke this
design; begetting in the King a jealousy of his wife; incensing Monsieur
against the Duke of Guise, by the remembrance of the massacre of the Admiral;
continually confounding the King of Navarre by the intrigue of some Ladies, but
particularly of de Sauves, who enjoying such person as Katherine commanded her,
received the love and services of Monsieur to create a difference between them.

The Queen Mother entertained likewise an irreconcilable hatred between the
King and Monsieur: by which means there arrived an affair which as much
proclaimed the greatness of Courage and Generosity of our Henry, as any action
he had done in his life.

The King being fallen sick, and in great danger Henry 3. falls very sick.
of death with a pain in his ear, believed himself to be poisoned, as Francis 2
died of an Aposthume in his* ear, which was believed to come of poison.
Francis the second had been, and accused Monsieur. In this belief he sent to
seek the King of Navarre, and commands him to dispatch Monsieur so soon as he
was dead; enforcing himself by all reasons possible, to persuade him that that
wicked one would make him perish, and all his, if he prevented it not. The
favorites of the King having the same opinion with their Master, seeing
Monsieur pass, sacrificed him already to their revenge, by murdering regards.

Our Henry endeavored to sweeten the fury A noble and generous action of our
Henry.
of the King, and remonstrated to him the horrible consequences of this
command: but the King, not content with reasons, contrary to them, emported
himself in such manner, that he would he should presently execute it, for fear
lest he should fail of it when he were dead.

If the two brothers, to wit, the King and 1575.
Monsieur, had been out of the world, the Crown appertained to him. Now one in
all appearances was about to die; and he might easily find a death for the
other, having the Favorites, the Officers of the King, the Guise, all their
friends, and almost all the Nobility at his devotion: for Monsieur was a Prince
of an ill presence, and of low inclinations, yet malign and cruel; and for all
these fair qualities* hated by almost all the world, and sustained only by the
brave Bussy d' Amboise. How few Princes are there that would have let slip so
fair an occasion! I dare boldly speak it, how few are there would not seek it?
and yet our Hero (for in such an action I must of force call him so) was so far
from prevailing himself of it, that he conceived a horror at the furious
vengeance of Henry the third. There is no nobler ambition, then to know how to
moderate ambition when it is not just; and to endeavor to conserve our
conscience and honor, rather then acquist a crown by wicked ways. Diadems
gained by ill means, are not marks of glory to those fronts that carry them,
but rather frontlets of infamy, such as are placed on Thieves and Villains.

Heaven, without doubt, approved the generous sentiments of our Henry, and
destined to him the Scepter of the Flower de Luce, because guiltless of an
impatience to reach it before his degree. On the contrary, these brothers of
the house of Valois, who endeavored to ravish it one from the other, died all
unhappily, and had him for their successor, who by a crime refused to be so.

Henry the third being recovered, knew well that he had wrongfully accused his
brother to have impoisoned him; yet he loved him never a whit the more: he
daily suffered his favorites to give him a thousand affronts, and to domineer
over him in the public Assemblies. He would likewise cause Bussy d' Amboise,
who was his favorite and only support, to be murdered by night at the gates
of the Louvre; and it was believed he had given order, if the Duke of Alenzon
had gone to his assistance, (for there were people appointed to come and tell
him that Bussy was assassinated) to slay him likewise. In such manner, that
1576.
Monsieur departs from Court and joins with the Hugonots.
getting the bridle out of his teeth, he escaped from Court, put himself in the
field, gathered together some malcontents, composed an Army, and joined with
that of the Hugonots, commanded by the Prince of Conde, and by Casimir,
youngest son of the Count Palatine; who, in these civil wars of the Religion,
twice or thrice led great levies of German Horse into France.

Our Henry was puissantly solicited to follow Our Henry could not soon follow
him, but at length saves himself at Alenzon.
him; and Monsieur said he had promised him to do it: but they had taken from
about him all those who might favor his escape, and placed in their stead
people of their own hire. He was moreover promised the Lieutenant-Generalship
of the Kings Army; which was a strong lure to retain him; nor was the love of
the fair de Sauves less powerful. However, the natural spurs of his courage,
and the fear he had left Monsieur and the Prince of Conde should seize on the
chief Command amongst the Hugonot party, which had been his Cradle, and was to
be his Castle; the remonstrances of some of his servants, and the inventions of
Queen Katherine, who expressly incensed the King against him, in the end obliged
him to escape, and made him take his resolution.

He saved himself therefore by feigning to Peace made with Monsieur and the
Hugonots.
go on the Chase toward Senlis, and retired to Alenzon; where however he acted
nothing, the peace being soon after concluded with them all. There was granted
to Monsieur a great Portion in money and places; to the Hugonots many very
advantageous conditions; to the Prince of Conde the Government of Picardy, and
the City of Peronne, for his retreat: but to our Henry nothing else but hopes;
of which being in the end dis-abused, he renounced the peace, re-entred into
the Hugonot party; and quitting the Catholic Church, returned anew to his
first Religion. It is to 1576.
be believed, that he did it because he was persuaded Our Henry again turns
Hugonot.
it was the better: thus his fault will be worthy of excuse, nor can he be
accused but for not having the true light. In the mean time it must not be
forgot to observe on this, that the greatest reproach his enemies ever made
him, I mean those of the League, was his having thus relapsed; and this was
likewise the greatest obstacle he found at Rome, when being converted, he
demanded the absolution of the Pope. He is received into Rochel, and after goes
into Guyenne.


The Rochellers received him into their City, but not without great
Pre-cautions, and not until he had driven from him some people, who were
neither Catholics nor Hugonots, but Atheists, and horrible wicked persons. It
has been held, that they followed him against his will; that truly he had
served himself of them in some intrigues, but that it was himself who by secret
advice obliged the Rochellers to demand their expulsion.

After he had so journed some months at Rochel, The gates of Bourdeaux shut
against him.
he went to take possession of his Government of Guyenne, where he had the
displeasure to see shut against him the gates of the City of Bourdeaux, under
pretext that the inhabitants feared that if he became Master of it, he would
banish the Catholic Religion. A very sensible injury to a young Prince full of
courage; but he knew most wisely how to dissemble it at present, because he had
not power to revenge it; and generously forgot it, when he had the means to do
it.

About this time the League took birth, that The birth of the League.
puissant faction, which for twenty years together tormented France; which
thought to introduce the Spanish Domination, and which would have renversed the
order of the succession of the Royal family, under the fairest pretext in the
world, to wit, the maintenance of the Religion of our Ancestors.

At other times, under the reign of Charles the ninth, there were diverse
Leagues and Associations made in Guyenne and Languedoc to defend the Church
against the Hugonots, (I leave it to judge whether those who rendered themselves
Chief of them, had most Zeal, or most Ambition) but they were not pressed so
forward, nor so diligently formed, and therefore became extinct. The Grandees
of the These Leagues a fair path for the ambitious to rise by.
Realm however might by them observe, that if at any time such associations
were made, it would be a fair means to elevate to a great height him who could
render himself their Chief.

Henry Duke of Guise, who had a King-like The Duke of Guise makes himself chief
of the League.
heart, had in all likelihood this thought; or if he at first had it not, the
favorites of Henry the third, by persecuting him, forced him to entertain it,
and to apply himself to this party, to defend himself against them. There were
of his house seven or eight Princes, all brave to the utmost extent. The
principal of them were the Duke of Mayenne, and the Cardinal de Guise his
brothers, the Duke d' Aumarle, and the Marquess d' Elbeuf his Cousins.

Now the Evasion of Monsieur, of which we The War of Monsieur, and his joining
with the Hugonots, the cause of the League.
have spoken, to the Hugonots, and the advantageous peace after granted them,
made the League show it self, which was but little in its commencement. Those
who to render themselves puissant desired a new faction in the State, took this
subject, to make it be represented by their Emissaries the great danger in
which the Catholic Religion was, and to remonstrate the excessive puissance of
its enemies, who had on their side the two first Princes of the blood, and
Monsieur who was their friend. What would it be, said they, if he should come
to the Crown with such ill intentions? that therefore they ought to advise in
good time, and fortify themselves against that danger which threatened the holy
Church. They whispered at present these Considerations, and other like them,
into men ears; and when they had disposed their spirits, published them aloud.

Upon this, the Burgesses of Peronne, a free The Cities of Picardy begin it,
and why.
City, and which was accustomed to have so puissant a Governor, refused to
receive the Prince of Conde, because a Hugonot. He made his complaints to the
King, and demanded the execution of the treaty of peace. The Picards opposed
him, and were the first that made a League or Union for the defense, as they
said, of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Faith. The Prince of Conde could
never have reason, and was constrained to retire into Guyenne.

James Lord d' Humieres, was made Chief of this League in Picardy; and
Aplincourt a young Gentleman took the Oath of the Inhabitants of Peronne; by
whose example the Cities of Amiens, Corbie, St. Quintins, and many others, did
the like. Lewis de Tremoville began one likewise in Poictou. The Queen Mother
secretly favored this design, to the end she might retain her authority among
these discords and disturbances. The first Model, and the Articles of this
League, were brought to Paris; and there were Christopher de Thou hinders its
procedure at Paris.
some so zealous as to carry them from house to house, endeavoring to engage
the most backward: but Christopher de Thou, chief president, hindered for the
present the progress of this conspiracy.

Those who were the first inventors of it, had deliberated among themselves,
that to the end to give it means to aggrandize it self, and to keep the spirits
of the people still warm, it was necessary to continue the war with the
Hugonots: for this purpose, they stirred up diverse persons who surprised their
places, and committed a thousand affronts against our Henry and the Prince of
Conde. And much The Leaguers oblige the King to call the Estates. They assemble
at Blois.
more, they raised so many factions and complaints on all sides, of people who
demanded the summoning of the Estates, that the King was obliged to agree to
it. They assembled then at Blois, and began in the month of December, in the
year 1575. The Hugonots themselves were not at all troubled at this
Convocation, because they imagined that the third Estate, which ordinarily is
the strongest, and which has most reason to apprehend the war, would cause the
peace to be confirmed: but War resolved against the Hugonots.
the Juncto of those which were for war, was so strong, that it was resolved
puissantly to prosecute it.

They judged it notwithstanding convenient to depute beforehand some persons
of the Assembly to our Henry and to the Prince of Conde, to exhort them to
return into the bosom of the Catholic Church. And this taking Henry 3.
declares himself chief of the League.
no effect, the King was obliged to declare himself Chief of the League; and so
from Sovereign, become Chief of a faction, and enemy to a part of his subjects.

He raised three or four Armies, who made war against the Hugonots in the
Daulphinate, in 1577.
Guyenne, in Languedoc, and in Poictou; and reduced, He raises three or four
Armies against the Hugonots.
and might have quite crushed them, if their ruin had been resolutely
prosecuted, in that astonishment wherein he had put them. But the Queen Mother,
who only desired the The Queenmother obliges him to grant them peace
war, that she might have affairs in agitation, and not that they might have
their issue, persuaded the King her son, for certain studied reasons, to grant
them peace.

The Treaty being concluded, the Queenmother 1578.
made a voyage into Guyenne: she She makes a voyage to Guyenne, and carries
with her her daughter Margaret.
feigned that it was to cause it to be punctually executed, and to carry her
Daughter Margaret to the King of Navarre her husband; but it was in effect to
sow seeds of Discord among the Hugonots, to the end she might be Mistress of
that party as she had been in that of the Catholics. Henry now kept his little
Court at Nerac: he had before kept it at Again, where he was beloved of the
people by reason of his justice and goodness: But it happened, that at a Ball
The King of Navarre looses Again and la Reole by two follies of youth.
or Dance some young people of his own train blew out the Candles, to commit
insolences; which so scandalized the inhabitants, that they delivered their
City to the Marshal of Byron, whom the King had sent Governor into the
Province of Guyenne.

A little time after, Henry likewise lost la Reole by another folly of his
young people. He had given the Government of it to an old Hugonot Captain named
d' Ussac, who had his visage horribly deformed: his deformity however hindered
him not from becoming passionate of one of the Ladies attending the
Queenmother; for she had brought many of the most bewitching with her, to
kindle a fire every where. The Viscount of Turenne, afterward Duke of
Bouillon, aged at present about twenty one or twenty two years, with some
others of his age, would make Raillery of this business: our Henry, instead of
commanding them silence, made himself of their party; and having a fluent
spirit, assisted them in lancing out some mocks and jeers against this doting
Lover. There is no passion renders a heart so sensible as this. Usac could not
suffer this Raillery, though proceeding from his Master; but in prejudice of
his Honor and Religion, he yielded and delivered up la Reole to Duras; a Lord
who having been in favor with our Henry, had quitted him, out of envy, because
he testified less affection to him then to Roquelaire, who was without doubt
one of the most honest and most pleasant men of his time.

These two losses of Again and la Reole, gave him, and ought to give all
Princes, two very necessary instructions.

The first, that a Prince ought well to govern Two exquisite Reflections.
his Courtiers; the rather, because all their disorders are imputed to him: and
that it is presumed when they do them, that it is himself commits them, because
obliged to hinder them.

The second, that above all things he abstain from Raillery: for there is no
Vice which makes so many enemies, nor which is more dangerous, because others
may be concealed. Such a word as issuing from the mouth of a particular person,
would be accounted but a light jest, is like a stab of a poniard from that of a
Prince; and leaves in the heart mortal resentments. Nor must great ones be
flattered with this opinion, that their subjects or their inferiors ought to
suffer all things from them: for where honor is concerned, the more the person
that wounds is superior, the greater is the wound; as the impression of a body
is deeper, the more feet it has, and the higher it falls.

The Queen Mother had taken with her, as Queen Margaret did not over-well love
her husband, nor he her:
we have said, Queen Margaret to her husband. Neither the one nor the other of
the two Spouses were over-well content. Margaret, who loved the splendor of
the French Court, where she swam, if we may so speak, in full intrigues,
believed to be in Guyenne was a kind of banishment: and Henry, knowing her
humor and carriage, would rather have chose her room then her company.
However, seeing it a remediless ill, he resolved to suffer it; leaving her an
entire liberty: he considered her rather as a Sister of his King, then as his
Wife. He likewise pretended some nullities in the Marriage, but attended time
and place to make them known. In the mean time, accommodating himself to the
season, and to the necessity but he draws advantages from her intrigues.
of his affairs, he endeavored to draw advantages from her intrigues, and from
her credit. He received no small one in the conference which he and the
Deputies of the Hugonots had at Nerac with the Queen Mother: for whilst she
thought to inchant them by the charms of those fair Ladies she had expressly
brought with her, and by the eloquence of Pibrac; Margaret opposed the same
Artifices, gained the Gentlemen who were near her Mother, by the attractions of
her Ladies; and employed so well her own, that she enchanted the spirit and
will of the poor Pibrac in such manner, that he acted not but by her motion,
and quite contrary to the intentions of the Queen Mother, who, not distrusting
that a man so wise could be capable of so great folly, was deceived in many
Articles, and insensibly carried to grant much more to the Hugonots then she
had resolved.

Scarce were eight months spent since the peace, but the Queen Mother, Monsieur
and The Queenmother, Monsieur and the Guises* weary of the peace.
the Guises, began to be weary of it. The Queen Mother, because she would not
have the King rest any long time without having need of her Negotiations and
intermission: Monsieur, because by re-kindling the War, he thought to render
himself redoubtable to the King, and to make him give him forces to carry into
the Low Countries; which being revolted from Spain, demanded him for their
Sovereign: And in fine, the Guises, because they feared lest the ardour of the
League should by too long a calm, grow cold.

In these wishes, they pressed the King to redemand 1579.
the places of security granted to the They underhand persuade the King of
Navarre to a Rupture;
Hugonots; and underhand Monsieur and the Queen Mother caused it to be told to
our Henry, that he should not surrender them, but hold it out that his cause
was just, and that his safety consisted in his Arms. Margaret, who knew his
weakness, and who likewise wished the War, excited him by the persuasion of
Ladies whom she fostered to this design; and by the same means animated alike
all those braves who approached her; nor spared she her self with the Viscount
of Turenne for this purpose: so that this Prince, possibly with very little
justice, and certainly to very ill purpose, was carried to a rupture, and
engaged the Hugonots in a new Civil War, which was named for the reasons I but
now spoke of, The War of the Lovers.

This was the most disadvantagious they ever which proves very disadvantagious
to him.
yet made: by it they lost a great quantity of strong places; and were in such
manner weakened, that had the pursuit of them been finished, they could never
have regained strength. But Monsieur, who desired to transport Monsieur
procures the peace.
all the forces both of the one and the other party into the Low Countries,
made himself Mediator of the peace, and obtained it by an Edict, which was
concluded after the Conference of Fleix.

This peace was the cause of almost as many evils to the Estate, as all the
former Wars had Of much damage to the Estate, being the cause the two Henry's
plunged themselves in pleasure
been. The two Courts of the two Kings, and the two Kings themselves, plunged
themselves in their pleasures; with this difference however, that our Henry was
not so absolutely lulled asleep with his delights, but he thought sometimes of
his affairs, being awakened and lively reminded by the Remonstrances of the
Ministers of his Religion, and by the reproaches of the old Captains of the
Hugonots, who spoke to him with great liberty. But Henry the third was wholly
overwhelmed with softness and feebleness; he seemed to have neither heart nor
motion: and his subjects could scarce know that he was in the world, but
because he daily charged them with new Imposts; all the money of which, was
disposed to the benefit of his Favorites.

He had always three or four at a time; and Henry 3. has favorites, who
prejudice his affairs.
at present he began to cast his graces on Joyeuse, and the two Nogarets; to
wit, Bernard and Jean-Lewis, of whom the eldest died five or six years after,
and the youngest was Duke d' Espernon, one of the most memorable and most
wonderful Subjects that the Court had ever seen elevated in its favor; and who
certainly had qualities as eminent as his fortune. In the mean time, the
excessive gifts which the King gave to all his favorites, excited the cries of
the people, because they were trampled on; and their monstrous greatness
displeased the Princes, because they believed themselves despised; in such
manner, that they rendered themselves odious to all the world: and the hate
carried to them, fell likewise upon the King, whilst that violence which they
obliged him to use toward his Parliaments, to confirm his Edicts of Creation
and Imposts, augmented it yet more: for if his Authority made his Wills pass as
absolute, he drew the peoples curses; and if the vigor of the Sovereign
companies, as often happened, stopped them, he attracted their disdain.

The people, who easily licentiate themselves to Rebellion against their
Prince* when they have lost for him all sentiments of esteem and veneration,
spoke strange things of him and his favorites. The Guises, (whom the Minions
Dispositions to the League, and to the loss of Hen. 3.
(for so the favorites were called) opposed in all occasions, endeavoring to
deprive them of their Charges and Governments, to re-invest themselves) were
not wanting to blow the fire, and to increase the animosities of the people;
particularly of the great Cities, whom favorites have always feared, and who
have always hated favorites. These were the principal Dispositions to the
aggrandizing the League, and to the loss of Henry the third.

It is not to our purpose to recount here: all 1584.
the intrigues of the Court during five or six years; nor the War of the
Low Countries, from which Monsieur Monsieur intending to surprise Antwerp, and
treating ill the people of the Low Countries, who had called him, was driven
thence.
brought nothing but disgrace. It is only necessary to tell, that in the year
1684. Monsieur died at Castle-Thierry, The death of the Monsieur begets
thoughts of a Successor to the Crown.
without having been married; that Henry the third had likewise no Children;
and that it was but too well known he was incapable of ever having any, by
reason of an uncurable disease which he contracted at Venice, in his return
from Poland. See here the reason why, as soon as Monsieur was judged to death
by the Physicians, the Guises and Queen Mother began to labor each on their
side to assure themselves of the Crown, as if the succession had been open to
them: for neither the one nor the other accounted for any thing our Henry; so
much the rather, because he was beyond the seventh degree, beyond which in
ordinary successions is accounted no kindred; and because he was not of that
Religion, of which all the Kings of France have been since Clouis, and by
consequence incapable to wear the Crown, or bear the Title of Thrice-Christian.
Add to this that he was two hundred Leagues distant from Paris, and as it were
shut up in a corner of Guyenne, where it seemed to them easy to The
Queen Mother designs to give the Crown to the children of her daughter married
to the Duke of Lorrain.
ensuare him or oppress him.

The Queen Mother had a design to give the Crown to the Children of her
Daughter married to the Duke of Lorrain, whom she would have treated as Princes
of the blood, as if the Crown of France could fall under the command of the
Spindle. Nor was she carried to this only out of the love she had for them,
but out of a secret hatred she had conceived against our Henry, because she saw
that contrary to all her wishes, heaven opened him a way to come to the Throne.

Besides, she was too much deceived, for so able a woman, to believe that the
Duke of Guise would favor her in her design: there A belief that the Duke of
Guise hoped to Reign himself.
was much appearance, and after affairs sufficiently testified it, that seeing
himself persecuted by the Favorites, and ill treated by the King himself, for
their sakes he had thoughts to assure the Crown for his own head. For ill
treatments work at least no other effect then to cast into extreme despair,
Souls so Noble and Elevated as that of this Prince. But he knowing well that of
himself he could not arrive at so high a pitch, and that specially because it
would be difficult to divert the affection which the people of France naturally
have for the Princes of the Blood; he advised himself to gain the old Cardinal
de Bourbon, who was Uncle of our Henry: he promised him therefore, that the
death of Henry the third Arriving, he would employ all his power, and that of
his Friends, to make him King: and that good man doting with age, permitting
himself to be flattered with these vain hopes, made himself the Bauble of the
Dukes Ambition, who by this means drew to his party a great number of
Catholics, who considered the house of Bourbon.

The Question was, if the Uncle ought to precede the Son of the Elder Brother
in the Succession: and to speak truth, the business was not without some
difficulty, because according to the Custom of Paris, the Capital of the
Realm, and many other Customs, collateral representation has no place. This
point of right was diversely agitated by the Reverend Judges; and many treats
were had, some in favor of the Uncle, and others of the Nephew: but these were
but Combats of words; the sword was to decide the difference. It seemed to many
great Politicians, that the Duke of Guise acted contrary to his own interests
and design, by acknowledgeing that the Cardinal of Bourbon ought to Succeed to
the Crown; this being to avow, that after his death, which could suffer no long
delay, it would appertain to our Henry Henry 3. knew his design, or was
advertized of it by his favorites. He sends the Duke d'Espernon to the King of
Navarre, to oblige him to return to the Catholic Church: but he refuses.
his Nephew.

Henry 3. knew well his design, or rather was advertised of it by his
Favorites, who saw in it their certain ruin, and therefore so much desired to
bring back the King of Navarre to the Catholic Church, to the end he might
deprive the Leaguers of that specious Pretext they had to entertain the League:
He sent therefore to him the Duke d'Espernon, who Essayed to Convert him by
reasons of interest and policy. Our Henry hearkened to him; but he testified
that those were not motives sufficiently puissant to make him Change; and sent
him back with many Civilities.

The Hugonots were so vain, as to publish and cause to be Printed the
conference of this Prince with Espernon, to show that he was unshaken in his
Religion, and possibly likewise The Duke of Guise profits himself of it.
to engage him more strongly in it. The Duke of Guise was not wanting to profit
himself of it, and to remonstrate to the Catholic people the stubbornness of
this Prince; and what they might hope, if he came to the Crown with such
sentiments.

To stop therefore his way to it, he made the The League Established at Paris.
zealous openly renew the League; and boldly bringing it into Paris, where some
new religious persons inspired this Ardour into peoples souls by Confessions,
held the first public Assembly at the College de Fortet, which was called
the Cradle of the League. Many Burgesses, many Tradesmen, and likewise some
Clerks of Paris, entered into it. They carried it to Rome, and presented it to
Pope Gregory the 13. for his approbation; but he never The Pope disapproves it.
would give it: and continually, so long as he lived, disavowed it.

So soon as it grew a little great and strong, those who had engendered it, made
it appear that it was not only to provide for the security of Religion for the
future, but that at present they might approach themselves near to the Crown;
and that they not only would have it against the King of Navarre, who was It
is turned against Henry the third.
to Succeed, but against Henry the third, who now reigned: They kept in Salary
certain new Divines, who durst openly sustain, that a Prince ought to be
deposed who acquits himself not well of his duty: That no power but that which
is well ordered, is of God; otherwise, when it passes due bounds, it is not
Authority, but Usurpation: and that it is as absurd to say that he ought to be
King who knows not how to govern, or who is deprived of understanding, as to
believe a blind man a fit guide, or an immovable Statue able to make living
men move.

In the mean time the Duke of Guise was retired to his Government of Champagne,
feigning himself discontented; but it was to make the Duke of Lorrain sign the
League, out of hopes he would cause his Son to Succeed to the Crown, to which
he pretended to have right by his Mother, Daughter to Henry the Second. He held
to this purpose a The Treaty of Joinville where the Spaniards enter into the
League, and furnish money.
Treaty at Joinville, where he likewise found Agents from the King of Spain,
who signed to the Treaty, and as it was reported, did by Letters of Exchange
supply the Duke of Guise with great sums of money.

At his departure thence, the Duke assembled Troops on all sides: his friends
seized The League seize many places.
on as many places as they could, not only amongst the Hugonots, but likewise
amongst the Catholics. The King might easily have dissipated these Levies,
had he taken the field. But the Queen Mother, like to self-interested
Physicians, who would for their profit augment the disease, withheld and amused
him in his Closet, persuading him that if he would leave to her the management
of this affair, she would easily reduce the Duke to his obedience. To this
purpose she The Queenmother enters into conference with Guise; who breaks it
when he sees himself in an Estate to fear nothing. The King astonished, grants
him all he desires.
held a Conference with him at Vitry, and so gave him time to strengthen his
party; and when he saw himself in an Estate to fear nothing, he broke the
Conference, and made show of some resolutions to come directly to Paris.

The King astonished, prayed his mother to conclude an accommodation upon any
terms: which she did by the Treaty of Nemours, by which she granted to the Duke
and other Princes of his house, the Government of several Provinces, many great
sums of money, together with a most bloody Edict against the Hugonots, which
forbad the profession of any other Religion then the Catholic, under Penalty
of Confiscation of Goods and Estate; with Command to all Preachers and
Ministers to depart the Realm within one month, and all Hugonots of what
degree or quality soever within six months, or otherwise abjure their false
Religion. This Edict was called the Edict of Juillet, which the League farther
constrained the King to carry himself into the Parliament, and cause it to be
ratified. 1585.


A little after arrived news from Rome that Pope Sixtus 5. excommunicates the
King of Navarre and Prince of Conde.
Sixtus the fifth, who succeeded Gregory the eighteenth, had approved the
League, and had besides fulminated out terrible Bulls against the King of
Navarre and Prince of Conde, declaring them Heretics, Apostates, Chiefs,
Favorers and Protectors of Heretics, and as such falling under the Censures
and Pains concluded on in the Laws and Cannons, depriving them and their
descendants of all Lands and Dignities, incapable to succeed to any
Principality whatsoever, especially to the Kingdom of France; and not only
absolving their Subjects from all Oaths of Fidelity, but absolutely forbidding
them to obey them.

It was now that our Henry had need of all The virtue of our Henry awakened.
the forces both of his Courage and Virtue to sustain so rude assaults. He
seemed in a manner lulled asleep by his pleasures: when the noise of these
great assaults awakened him, he recalled all his Virtue, and began to make it
appear more vigorously then ever before. And certainly he afterward avowed
that his enemies had highly obliged him, by persecuting him in this manner: for
had they left him in repose, that rest had possibly Entombed him in a corner of
Guyenne, and he not have been constrained to think of his affairs; so that at
the death of Henry the third, he would not have been in an Estate to attempt or
entertain the Crown.

He now did two Actions of great renown: He does two noble actions.
the first, was his commanding Plessis Mornay, a Gentleman of excellent
Education, and who could be reproached with nothing but being a Hugonot, to
answer the Manifesto of the League by an Apology, and by a Declaration which
he caused to be drawn. In this last piece, (the Chiefs of the League having
spread abroad diverse calumnies against his honor) he with all submission
besought the King his Sovereign, that he would not be offended if he did
pronounce, saving still the respect due to his Majesty, that they did falsely
and maliciously lie: and moreover, that to spare the blood of his Nobles, and
shun the desolation of the poor people, those infinite disorders, and above
all, those blasphemies, burnings and violations which the license of War must
cause, he offered to the Duke of Guise, chief of the He defies the Duke of
Guise to single Combat.
League, to decide this quarrel by his person against his, one to one, two to
two, ten to ten, or what number he should please, with Arms generally in use by
Cavaleers of honor, either in the Realm of France, or in such place as his
Majesty should command, or else in such place as the Duke of Guise himself
should choose.

This Declaration had a great effect over peoples spirit. They said, That force
could not justly be employed against him, who so far submitted himself to
reason: and the greatest part of the Nobility approved this generous procedure;
and proclaimed aloud, that the Duke of Guise ought not to refuse so great an
honor.

That Duke wanted no courage to accept the Why the Duke of Guise accepted not
the defiance.
Defiance; but he considered, that drawing his sword against a Prince of the
blood, was in France accounted a kind of Parricide; that otherwise he could
willingly have reduced the cause of Religion, and of the Public, to a
particular Quarrel. He therefore prudently answered, That he esteemed the
person of the King of Navarre, and would have no controversy with him; but
that he only interested himself for the Catholic Religion, which was
threatened; and for the tranquillity of the Kingdom, which only and absolutely
depended on the unity of Religion.

His other Action was thus. Having understood The other gallant Action of our
Henry.
the noise of those paper-Thunder-bolts which the Pope had thrown out against
him, he dispatched one to the King to make his Complaints to him; and to
remonstrate to him, That this procedure concerned his Majesty nearer then
himself; That he ought to judge, That if the Pope took upon him to decide
concerning his succession, and should seize to himself a right to declare a
Prince of the blood unable of the Crown, he might afterward well pass further,
and dethrone himself, as Zachary is reported to have formerly degraded
Childeric 3.

Upon these Remonstrances, the King hindered the publication of those Bulls in
his Dominions. But our Henry, not contenting himself He causes to be fixed up
at the corners of the chief streets of Rome, oppositions to the sentence of
Sixtus 5.
there with, knowing himself to have friends at Rome, proved so hardy as to fix
his and the Prince of Conde his opposition at the corners of the chiefest
streets of the City: by which those Princes appealed from the sentence of
Sixtus, to the Court of Peerage of France; giving the Lie to whoever accused
them of the crime of Heresy; offering to prove the contrary in a general
Council: and in the end, professing that they would revenge upon him, and upon
all his successors, the injury done their King, the Royal Family, and all the
Courts of Parliament.

It could not but be supposed, that this opposition who at first is incensed,
but afterward conceives a great esteem for him.
would incense to the utmost the spirit of Sixtus the fifth; and indeed at
first he testified a very furious emotion. However, when his Choler was a
little assuaged, he admired the great Courage of that King, who at such a
distance had known how to revenge himself, and fix the marks of his resentment
even at the gates of his Palace: in such manner, that he conceived so great an
esteem for him, (so true is it, that Virtue makes it self be reverenced by its
very enemies) that he was often afterward heard say, That of all those who
reigued in Christendom, there was none but this Prince, and Elizabeth Queen of
Enland, to whom he would have communicated those great things which agitated
his spirit, if they had not been Heretics. Nor could all the prayers of the
League ever oblige him to furnish any thing toward the charges of this War;
which possibly overwhelmed the greatest part of their Enterprises, because
their hopes in part depended on a Million which he had promised them.

Now as on their side, the Chiefs of the League endeavored to engage on their
party all the Lords and Cities they could; our Henry on his part reunited with
him all his friends The King of Navarre makes a League to defend himself.
both of the one and the other Religion: the Marshal of Damville-Montmorency
Governor of Languedoc: the Duke of Montpensier, Prince of the blood, who was
Governor of Poictou, with his Son the Prince of Dombes: the Prince of Conde,
who held a part of Poictou, of Xaintonge, and of Angoumois: the Count of
Soissons, and the Prince of Conty his brother. Of these five Princes of the
blood, the three last were his Cousen-Germans, the two first were removed one
degree further; and all professed the Catholic Religion, save only the Prince
of Conde. He had likewise on his part Lesdiguieres, who, from a plain
Gentleman, had by his Valor elevated himself to so high a point, that he was
Master of the Daulphinate, and made the Duke of Savoy tremble: Claudius de la
Trimouille, who possessed great Lands in Poictou and Brittany, and was
sometimes before turned Hugonot, that he might have the honor to marry his
Daughter to the Prince of Conde: Henry de la Tour, Viscount of Turenne, who
either out of complacency, or true persuasion, had espoused the new Religion:
Chastillon, son to the Admiral of Coligny; la Boulaye Lord Poitevin; Rene,
chief of the house of Rohan; George de Clermont d' Amboise; Francis, Count of
Rochefoucaud; the Lord de Aubetterre; James de Caumontla-force; the Seigneurs
de Pons; Saint Gelais-Lansac: with many other Lords and Gentlemen of remark,
all, or most, of the new Religion. At the same time he dispatched to Elizabeth
Queen of England, and to the Protestant Princes of Germany, such able Agents,
that they joined all together in a strong Union, The One to maintain the Other:
so that all these being united, all things arrived contrary to what the League
expected; and our Henry found himself fortified in such manner, that he had no
longer any apprehension of being oppressed, without having the means to defend
himself.

I shall not make here a particular Recital of the Actions either of the one or
the other party during the years 1585. and 1586. because I have observed
nothing very considerable.

King Henry the third was extremely perplexed 1586.
at this War, which was maintained at his expense, and to his great prejudice,
since they disputed the succession, he yet living, and Henry 3. hated both the
League and the Hugonots, and loved none but his favorites.
well, and already considered him as one dead. He loved neither the one nor the
other party; but did so much cherish his Favorites, (strange blindness!) that
he could have desired, had it been in his power, to have parted his Estate
amongst them. The League on The Queen Mother endeavors an accommodation with
the King of Navarre.
their side pretended to have power enough to carry it; and our Henry hoped to
frustrate the designs both of the one and the other. The Queen Mother having
other wishes for the children of her Daughter married to the Duke of Lorrain,
promised the King to find means to calm all these tempests. To this purpose
she procured a Truce with our Henry: during which, an Interview was agreed upon
between The Interview and conference at St. Brix.
him and her at the Castle of St. Brix near Coignac; where both the one and the
other met in the month of December.

There was some difficulty to find security A noble and generous Action of our
Prince.
both for the one and the other; but especially for the Queen Mother, who was
wonderfully distrustful. Our Henry hereupon did an Action of great Generosity;
which he managed in this manner: There had a Truce been agreed upon for the
security of this Conference, in such sort, that if either party broke it, they
were in fault, and might justly be arrested: now some of our Henry's followers,
feigning to be Traitors, had enticed some of the Catholick-Captains, too greedy
of the booty, to Fontenay, which they would have let them take: by this means
the Catholics would have remained convict of perfidy, and he had had good
pretense to arrest the Queen Mother: but this generous Prince, having
understood the carriage of this foul play, was extremely troubled against those
who contrived it, and forbad them to continue it. Was not this to have the true
sentiments of honor founded in his Soul, and not only in his exterior
Carriage?

And as he testified his Generosity in that His constancy in the whole
conference.
Rencounter, so he made known his Constancy and the power of his Spirit in all
the Discourse. The Qeen demanding of him what it was he would; he answered,
regarding those Ladies she had brought with her, Madam, there is nothing that I
would have: as if he would have said, That he would not longer permit himself
to be drawn away by such allurements. She endeavored above all things to
disunite him with the other Chiefs of his party, or to render him suspected,
offering all that he demanded as to his particular: but he, knowing well her
stratagem, held firmly to this point, That he could not treat any thing without
communicating it to his Friends.

After a long entertainment, she once demanding him if the pains she had taken
should produce no more fruit, especially to her, who only wished for repose;
he answered her, Madam, I am not the cause of it; nor is it I who hinder you
from resting in your Bed: it is you that hinder me from resting in mine. That
pains you take, pleases and nourishes you; for Repose is the greatest enemy of
your life.

He made many other Replies, very lively and full of spirit: but above all,
that was observable which he made to the Duke of Nevers, of the house of
Gonzague, who accompanied the Queen Mother. This Duke advancing once to tell
him that he might live much more honorably near the King then among those
people who had no authority; and A handsome answer to Duke de Nevers.
that if he should have occasion for money at Rochel, he would scarce have the
credit to raise one impost; he fiercely replied, Sir, I do at Rochel all that I
please, because I shall please to do nothing but what I ought.

This Conference of St. Brix having produced Conference at St. Brix produces
nothing.
nothing but new Exasperations, and the Queen Mother being returned, the
Guises, who endeavored by all means possible to revenge themselves of the
Favorites, made offer of their service to our Henry; and the Duke of Mayenne
sent to tell him, that there might means be found for an accommodation, if he
would understand them: that he would come to find him with four horse, at
whatever place he pleased; and that he would give him his Wife and Children for
Hostage. This Negotiation had no success, nor can I find the cause why it was
interrupted.

The rest of the Winter passed in the two Dances and Feasts in the Courts of
the two Kings.
Courts in Feasts and Dances: for though among the miseries and troubles of the
Kingdom, Queen Katherine had introduced that custom of Dancing in all places
and in all seasons: Blaise de Monluc, Marshal of France, who writ in these
times, says in his Memoires, That whatever affair there were of force, the
Dancing was still to go forward.
which she did, as it was said, to amuse the great ones of the Court in those
vain Divertisements; there being nothing which more dissipates the powers of
the spirit, nor which is more capable, if we may speak so, to dissolve the
forces of the soul, then the ravishing sound of Violins, the continual
agitation of the body, and Charms of Ladies. After the Examples of the Court,
Dances and Maskes reigned in all the Realm: Nor could the Remonstrances of the
Ministers hinder these Dances among the greatest part of the Hugonot Lords,
though there were still some who could not suffer it.

In the Spring, some Enterprises began, 1587.
both on one part and the other; but they An Army of German Protestants enter
France.
were nothing in comparison of what was done toward the end of the Summer. The
Protestant Princes of Germany sent an Army to the assistance of the Hugonots,
consisting of Five thousand Lansquenets or German Foot, Sixteen thousand
Switzers, and Six thousand Reistres or German Horse. They traversed Lorrain and
Champagne, afterward passed the Seine, and marched toward the Loire, as if
they would have passed it, or coast along it in their re-advancing. At the same
time the King of Navarre had gathered his forces toward Rochel, and
endeavored to come to meet them unto the Banks of the Loire; but he was
hindered by an Army of the Kings, commanded by the Duke of Joyeuse, who had
order diligently to pursue him. The Duke of Guise It is followed by the Duke of
Guise.
having likewise gathered the forces of his party; and though they were very
small, followed sometimes the German horse, sometimes coasted them, and
oftentimes mixed himself amongst them without any great danger; so much the
rather, because this too weighty body of strangers could not easily move, being
troubled with a great baggage, not having a Chief either of any great Credit,
or sufficiently intelligent to Conduct; and all its Captains being in discord
and bad intelligence one with the other.

By reason of all these defaults, this Army It does nothing to purpose.
could never take any good Resolution. The Loire was fordable in many places;
for it was about the end of September: but nevertheless they would not pass it,
but came to spread themselves in the Champaines of Beaustre, expecting News
from the King of Navarre, in stead of advancing amongst the Nivernois, and
gaining Burgongne. The intention of the King The King of Navarre would join
with them, but the Duke of Joyeuse makes head against him with an Army.
of Navarre, was to advance along Dordogna, and from thence enter into Guyenne;
and after having gathered together all his Forces, to meet the Protestant Army
in Burgongne, by the favor of those Provinces were his friends. But the Duke
of Joyeuse obstinately pursued him; imagining he fled, because in effect he
avoided fighting, having no other end then a Conjunction with the Germans.

This new Duke was much declined in his favor with the King, who had received
advice that he inclined much to the League; not that he loved the Guises, but
because he had permitted it to be put into his head by his flatterers, that he
deserved to be Chief of that great party; and he held the destruction of the
Hugonots so certain, that he had obtained from the Pope the Confiscation of all
the Sovereign Territories of our Henry. Desiring* The Duke overtakes him near
Coutras.
therefore to sustain his Reputation and Favor, which were then tottering, he
pursued him so closely, that he overtook him near to Coutras. What the Army of
Joyeuse was*


The Army of Joyeuse was, as one may say, all of Gold, shining with Silver and
Gold Laces; with Damasked Arms; with Feathers in great Plumes; with Embroydered
Scarfs; with Velvet Coats, with which every Lord, according to the mode of the
times, had furnished his Companies: but the Army of the What that of the King.
King of Navarre, was all of Iron, having no other then Grizled Arms, without
any Ornament, with great Belts of Buff, and laboring Habits. The first had the
advantage in number, having six hundred Horse, and a thousand Foot, more then
the other; the half of its Infantry, Dragoons; its Cavalry almost all Lances,
and most mounted on managed Horses: it had besides for it, the Name and
Authority of the King, and assurance of Rewards; but the better half of it was
composed of new Troops, which wanted Order and Discipline: It had a General
without Authority; an hundred Chiefs in stead of one; and all young people,
elevated in the Delights of the Court; having sufficient Heart and Courage, but
without any Experience.

The other on the contrary was composed of all the choice men of its party: the
old remnant of the Battails of Jarnac and Montcontour; people bred up in the
mystery of War, and hardened by the continual endurance of Fights and
Adversities. It had at its Head, three Princes of the Blood, the Chief of them
well obeyed and reverenced as the presumptive Heir of the Crown, the love of
the Soldiery, and hope of all good Frenchmen: besides, it was armed with a
necessity either to overcome or die; Armor of more proof then either Steel or
Brass.

Orders being given, the King of Navarre His Exhortation to his Army, and to
the Princes of the Blood.
called all his Chiefs; and from a little rising ground, exhorted them in few
words, but such as were agreeable both to his Quality and the time; taking
Heaven to witness, that he fought not against his King, but for the Defense of
his Religion and Right. Afterward addressing himself to the two Princes of the
Blood, Conde and Soissons; I shall say nothing else to you, said he, but that
you are of the house of Bourbon; and if God live, I will now show you that I am
worthy to be the firstborn of that Family.

His Valor that day appeared above that of all others. He had placed on his
Headpiece a Plume of white Feathers, both to make himself known, and because
he loved that color: so that some putting themselves before him, out of
design to shelter and defend his person, he cried out to them, To your
Quarter, His valor and bravery.
I pray you, and do not shadow me; for I would appear. A Bravery without doubt
absolutely necessary for a Conqueror, but which would be temerity and an
unsupportable fault in a Prince well established. He broke the first ranks of
the Enemy, and took Prisoners with his own hand, and came even to handy-gripes
with one named Chasteau-Reynard, Cornet of a Company of Gens * Arms, saying to
him, Deliver thy Colors*

The Battle being gained, some having seen the Flyers, who made a halt, came
to tell him, that the Army of the Marshal of Matignon appeared: he received
this News as a new subject of Glory; and turning bravely toward his people,
Let us go, my Friends, said he; this will be a thing never before seen, two
Battails in one day.

It was not only his Valor made him worthy to be admired in this occasion; it
was likewise his Justice, Moderation and Clemency: for his Justice, we may
recount what follows.

He had debauched the Daughter of an* Officer An Action of great Justice, and
Christian Humility.
of Rochel; a thing which had dishonored that Family, and very much
scandalized him among the Rochellers. A Minister, as the Squadrons were almost
ready to go to the charge, and that the Prayer was to be made, took the Liberty
to remonstrate to him, That God could not favor his Arms, if he did not before
demand pardon for that offense, repair the scandal by a public satisfaction,
and restore Honor to a Family he had deprived of it. The good King humbly
hearkened to these Remonstrances, fell upon his Knees, demanded of God pardon
for his fault; prayed all those who were present to serve as witnesses of his
repentance; and to assure the Father of the Maiden, that if God gave him the
grace to live, he would repair as much as possible the Honor he had deprived
her of. So Christian a submission, drew tears from all the Assistants: nor was
there any who would not have ventured a thousand Lives for a Prince who so
cordially inclined himself to do Reason to his inferiors.

Having thus overcome himself, God made him Conqueror over his Enemies: and
who knows but that he exalted him, because he so Christianly humbled himself?
The Enemies The Battle of Coutras, which he gains.
Army was wholly defeated, with the loss of five thousand men: all their
Cannon, baggage, Ensigns, and all their chief Commanders, were taken
Prisoners, except two or three, among whom were the Duke of Joyeuse, and of
Joyeuse slain.
St. Savior his brother, who were found dead on the place.

That night, our Conqueror finding his Lodgings full of Prisoners and wounded
persons of the Enemy, was constrained to cause his Bed to be carried to those
of Plessis Mornay: but the Body of Joyeuse being laid forth on the Table in the
Hall, he was there forced to mount on high; and there, while he supt, were
presented unto him the prisoners, fifty six foot-Ensignes, and twenty two
Standards and Cornets.

It was a fair and glorious Spectacle for this Prince, to have under his feet
that Enemy who had obtained from the Pope the Confiscation of his Territories;
to see his Table environed with so many Noble Captains, and his Chamber
tapistred with Ensigns. But to speak truth, it was much more agreeable to
generous Souls, to see, that amongst so many subjects of Vanity and Pride; and
in so just resentments of those bloody injuries done him, (things which often
transport the sweetest Souls to insolence and cruelty) there could not be
observed either in his words or countenance, the least sign that might breed
any suspicion, that either his Constancy or His moderation and admirable
Clemency in his Victory.
Goodness were ever so little altered: but on the contrary, showing himself as
Courteous and Humane in his victory, as he had showed himself brave and
redoubtable in fight; he sent back almost all the Prisoners without ransom,
restored their baggage to many, took great care of the wounded, and gave the
body of Joyeuse and S. Saveur to the Viscount de Turenne, who was their
Kinsman; and dispatched the next morning his Master of Requests to the King, to
entreat peace of him: from whence it was judged, that so great a courage would
overcome all its enemies, and that nothing would be capable to renverse his
fortune, whom so great a prosperity was not able to move.

He was however blamed, for not having He pursues it not, and wherefore.
hotly pursued his victory, and for having permitted that Triumphant Army to
break by, not again employing them in some great exploit. It was believed, and
there was much appearance for it, that he would not press things too forward,
for fear of too much offending the King, with whom he desired yet to keep some
measures; hoping daily that he might reconcile himself to him, and return to
Court, where it was necessary he should be, that he might be in a condition to
take the Crown, when Henry the third should dye. In fine, were it for this
reason, or other, he retired into Gascoigne, and from thence into Bearne, under
pretext of some affairs; carrying with him only Five hundred horse, and the
Count of Soissons, whom he kept near him, out of hopes to make him Espouse his
sister. The Prince of Conde returned to Rochel, and Turenne to Perigord.

In the mean time, that great Army of Defeat of the German horse.
Germans having received many checks in several places, but especially at
Auneau in Beausse, where the Duke of Guise slew or took Prisoners Three
thousand Reistres; afterward at Pont de Gien, where the Duke d' Espernon took
Twelve hundred Lansquenets or Foot, and almost all the Cannon; willingly
hearkened to an agreement, which the King caused to be proposed to them: and
afterward retired by Burgongne, and by The rest of that Army retire.
the County of Montbeliard, but were still purs^ed farther in that County, by
the Duke of Guise.

Now began the year One thousand five 1588
hundred eighty eight; which all Judicial Prognostications of the evils of the
year 1588.
Astrologers had called the wonderful year, because they foresaw so great a
number of strange accidents, and such confusion in natural causes, that they
were assured, that if the end of the world came not, there would happen at
least an Universal Change. Their Prognostics were seconded by a a number of
terrible Prodigies which arrived throughout all Europe. In France there were
great Earthquakes, along the River Loire, and likewise in Normandy. The Sea
was for six weeks together disturbed with continual tempests, which seemed to
confound both heaven and earth. In the Air appeared diverse Phantasmes of fire;
and on the four and twentieth of January, Paris was covered with so horrible a
darkness, that those who had the best eyes, could scarce see any thing at
noonday, without the help of lights. All these Prodigies seemed to signify
what soon after Arrived, the death of the Prince of Conde, the Besieging of
Paris, the Subversion of the whole Realm, the Murdering of Messieurs de Guise,
and in fine the Parricide of Henry the third.

As for the Prince of Conde, he died in the Death of the Prince of Conde.
month of March, at S. John d' Angeli, where he then made his residence. Though
there had been a secret jealousy between him and the King of Navarre, even to
the making of two factions in their party; yet the King resented The King of
Navarre much afflicted.
this loss with an extreme grief; and having shut himself up in his Closet,
with the Count de Soissons, he was heard to cast forth great cries, and say
that he had lost his right hand: However, after his grief was a little
evaporated, he recovered his Spirit; and But in his affliction puts his trust
in God.
casting all his trust on Divine Protection, he came forth, saying with a heart
full of Christian assurance: God is my refuge and my support, it is in him
alone I will hope, and I shall not be confounded.

It was truly a great loss for him: he was now alone to Support all the weight
of affairs; and being denuded of this assister, remained more exposed to the
attempts of the League, who had now only to give a like blow to his person, to
remain Conquerours in all their affairs. He had therefore just cause to fear
their attempts: However, the Duke of Guise had a heart so Noble and great* that
whilst he lived, he would never suffer such detestable ways.

The Confidence of the League increased The League rejoice.
wonderfully, by the death of this Prince; they testified extraordinary
rejoycings, and published that it was an effect of the Justice of God, and of
the Apostolic curses. The Hugonots on The Hugonots afflicted.
the contrary, were in an extreme consternation, considering that they had lost
in him their most assured Chief, because they believed him firmly persuaded in
their Religion; but had not the same opinion of the King of Navarre. In effect,
the Confusion and Disorder was so great amongst them, that in all appearance,
had they continued strongly to prosecute them, they might have soon ruined
them. Sentiments of Hen. 3.
The King hated them mortally, and would willingly have consented; but he would
manage things in such manner, that their destruction should not prove the
agrandizing of the Duke of Guise, and his own loss: but this Duke knowing his
intentions, pressed him The Duke of Guise presses him to give him forces to
exterminate the Hugonots. The Duke of Guise much loved, and Hen. 3. much ha^ed.
continually to give him forces utterly to exterminate the Hugonots, in whose
ruin he infallibly hoped to involve the King of Navarre.

He had this advantage over the King, that he had acquisted the love of the
people, principally by two means; the first, by his opposing himself to the new
Imposts; and the second, by continually being at variance with the Favorites,
nor ever bending before them: whilst the doing of things contrary, had made the
King fall into an extreme low Esteem, and had likewise taken away the heat of
some of his servants love. See here an Example.

The King had two great men in his Council, D' Espinac and Villeroy become
friends to the Duke of Guise, and why.
Peirre d' Espinac Archbishop of Lions, and Villeroy Secretary of State: The
Duke d'Espernon, who was fierce and haughty, would treat them according to his
proud humor; they grew exasperated against him, and thereupon change their
affection to the Duke of Guise his party, but without doubt still in their
hearts remaining most faithful to the King and Crown of France, as afterward
well appeared, especially in the person of Villeroy.

In the mean time, the King lived after the The ill Conduct of Henry 3.
ordinary manner, in the profusions of an odious Luxury, and in the laziness of
a contemptible Retreat; passing his time either in seeing Dances, or in playing
with little Dogs, of which he had great numbers of all sorts; or else in
Teaching Parriquito's to speak, or in Cutting of Images, or in other
Occupations more becoming an In^ant then a King.

But the Duke of Guise lost no time: he The Conduct and employs of the Duke of
Guise.
made daily new friends, conserved his old ones, caressed the people, testified
a great zeal for the Ecclesiastics, undertook their defense against all would
oppress them; and every where appeared with the Splendour and Gravity of a
Prince, but yet without Pride, without Arrogance: The Parisians were
intoxicated with esteem for him; the greatest part of the Parliament, and most
part of the other Officers attended his motions, and testified to him the
affection they ought to the service of the King.

There were an infinite number of people who had signed the League: and in the
sixteen Quarters or Wards of Paris, when they could not gain the Quarteniers or
Aldermen, they chose one the most violent of the Leaguers to act in their
function; by reason of which, they afterward called at Paris the Principal of
this party, and their faction, What the sixteen were.
the sixteen: not that they were but sixteen, for their number exceeded Ten
thousand, but all dispersed through the sixteen Quarters.

Now the King, principally incited by the The King would punish them.
Duke d' Espernon, resolved to punish the forwardest of these sixteen, who in
all occasions showed themselves furious enemies of that Favorite. By this means
he thought to overthrow the League, and absolutely ruin the Credit and
Reputation of the Duke of Guise. He caused therefore some Troops secretly to
enter into Paris, and gave order to seize on those persons.

The Duke of Guise being advised of it, The Duke of* Guise hastes to defend
them.
posts from Soissons, where he then was, resolving to perish rather then lose
his friends. Barricadoes were raised in the month of May, even to the Gates of
the Louvre, and the Kings Troops were all cut in pieces or disarmed. The
Queen Mother, according to her ordinary custom, became mediatrix of an
Accommodation, The King retires to Chartres. The league becomes Mistress Paris.
but the King fearing to be enclosed; in a fright, retires to Chartres.

The League by this becoming Mistress of Paris, take possession of the
Bastille, the Hostel de Ville, and the Temple; hang the Provost of the
Merchants, and the Civil Lieutenant. And at the same time they assured
themselves of Orleans, Bourges, Amiens, Abbeville, Montreuil, Rouen, Rheims,
Chaalons, and more then twenty other Cities in several Provinces; the people
every where crying, Long live Guise, Long live the Protector of the Faith.

The King, not without much reason, was extremely affrighted. The Parisians
deputed The Parisians send Deputies to the King
some to him to Chartres, to ask pardon: but withal, they demand the
extirpation of Heresy. All the world increased his fears, none fortified his
Courage. In this distress he knew no securer way to shun that danger which
threatened him, then by essaying to disarm his subjects. To this effect he sends
one of his Masters of the Requests to the Parliament, to The King pardons all;
so they lay down Arms.
let them understand, that his absolute intention was to forget all that was
past; so that every one returned to his Duty, and to labor diligently for the
Reformation of the Kingdom: for which end, he found it convenient to assemble
the General Estates at the end of the year, where they might provide for the
assuring a Catholic Successor of the Blood Royal; protesting, that he would
observe inviolably all the Resolutions of the Estates, but that he would have
them free, and without Faction, and that from that day all his Subjects should
lay down Arms.

It much troubled the Duke of Guise to The Duke of Guise demands the expulsion
of Espernon; which is in the end granted.
consent to the laying down Arms; fearing lest when he was left defenseless, he
should remain at the mercy of his enemies, and particularly of the Duke d'
Espernon. He therefore stirred up the Parisians by a famous deputation, to
demand the continuation of the War against the Hugonots, and the expulsion of
that Duke. The King, after some resistance, granted both the one and the other:
for he caused to be Ratified in Parliament an Edict most advantagiously
favorable for the League, and most bloody against the Hugonots; and he bid
Adieu to the Duke d' Espernon, who retired into his Government of Angoumois.

After this, the Duke of Guise came to attend And after comes to the Court at
Chartres.
the King at Chartres, having the Queen-mothers word for his Security; and both
gave great assurances of his Fidelity, and received all the testimonies he
could wish, of the affection of the King; insomuch that he made him great
Master of the Gens d' Arms of France.

In the mean time the League gained the upper hand throughout all the Provinces
on this ^ide the Loire, and caused Deputies for the Estates to be elected at
its pleasure. In the month of November, the Estates assembled in the City of
Blois. It is not necessary here to recount The Estates of Blois.
all their intrigues. In fine, the King persuading that they had conspired to
dethrone him, caused the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal The death of the
Guises.
his Brother, to be slain in the Castle; and kept prisoner the Cardinal of
Bourbon, the Archbishop of Lions, the Prince of Joinville, who after the Death
of his Father was called Duke of Guise, and the Duke of Nemours, brother by the
mother to the first Duke.

The Queen Mother, under whose word the Guises thought to have been in
security, was so touched with the reproaches made her, and with the ^lightings
of the King her Son, who after this, believed he had no more need of her, that
she died with grief and envy few Death of Queen Katherine de Medices.
days after, lamented by no person, not so much as by her Son, and generally
hated by all parties.

In truth, if ever there were an Action ambiguous Different Judgments
concerning the death of the Guises.
or problematical, it was this. The servants of the King said that he was
constrained to it by the extreme audacity of the Guises; and that if he had not
prevented them, they had shaved him, and shut him up in a Monastery. But the
ill repute he had among all men, the general esteem these Princes had
acquisted, and the odious circumstances of the murder, made it appear horrible
even to the eyes of the very Hugonots, who said, that this much resembled the
bloody Massacre of St. Bartholomew.

Our Henry conserved a wise Mediocrity in Our Henry speaks very wisely.
this rencounter: he deplored their death, and gave praises to their Valor:
but he said, That certainly the King had very puissant Motives to treat them in
that manner: and for the rest, that the Judgments of God were great, and his
Grace thrice-special toward him, having revenged him of his Enemies, and
neither engaged his Conscience nor his hand in it. For certain Gentlemen having
often offered themselves to him with a determinate resolution to go kill the
Duke of Guise, he had always let them know, that he abhorred such a
Proposition; and that he would neither esteem them his friends, nor honest men,
if they conserved it in their thoughts.

His Council being assembled upon this great He changes not his Conduct.
News, found, that he ought not for it make any change in the conduct of his
Affairs, because the King, though himself might be willing to it, durst not for
some months speak of a Peace with him, for fear lest he should make it be
believed that he had slain the Guises to favor the Hugonots; so that he
continued the War, and kept several places.

In the mean time, the progress of Affairs beat him out a path to lead him to
the heart of the Kingdom, and return him to the Court, which was the post he
ought most to wish for.

Henry the third, amusing himself after the 1589.
murder of the Guises, to examine the Acts of Henry 3. amusiag himself too
much at Blois, the League is re-assured, and grows furious.
the Estates at Blois, in stead of mounting presently to horse, and showing
himself in those places where his presence was most necessary; the League,
which at first had been astonished at so great a blow, regained its spirits.
The great Cities, and principally Paris, who were possessed with this madness,
having had leisure to dissipate their amazement, passed from fear to pity, and
from pity to fury. The Sixteen chose at Paris the Duke of Aumarle for their
Governor. The Preachers and Churchmen declaimed horribly against the King;
the people snatched down his Arms wherever they found them, and dragged The
Parliament imprisoned in the Bastille by Bussy le Clerk; forced to swear to the
the ^eague. A part remains at Paris, and the others go to the King, who
transfers all to Tours
them through the dirt. The Parliament, who would have opposed this rage, were
imprisoned in the Bastille by Bussy le Clerk, a simple Proctor, but very much
esteemed among the Sixteen; and were forced, to regain their Liberty, to swear
to the League. At their coming forth of the Bastille, there were many who
continued to hold the Parliament at Paris; the others stole away by little and
little, and went to the King, who transported the Parliament to Tours, where
they kept their Session until the reducement of Paris, in the year fifteen
hundred ninety four. These without doubt testified most fidelity to their King;
but those who remained at Paris, rendered him afterward much greater service,
as shall be observed in its place.

The Widow of the Duke of Guise presented Those of the Parliament remaining at
Paris, make process against Henry 3.
her request to these, to take information of the Death of her Husband; and
demanded of the Commissaries, that process might be made against those should
be found convicted of it. She received favorable Conclusions from the
Proctor-General; and they proceeded very far on this subject, even against the
person of Henry 3. but I cannot say to what point, because the Papers were
taken from the Registers of Parliament, when Henry the Great re-entred into
Paris.

We cannot sufficiently detest like Revolts An excellent reflection for Kings.
against a Sovereign: but these Examples ought to make him know, that though he
holds his power from on high, yet the Obedience depends on the Caprichio of the
people, and that he ought so to carry himself as not to attract their hatred;
otherwise, since men have the impudence to blaspheme God, why may they not have
it to revolt against Kings?

Whilst these things were acting, Henry the Henry 3. excommunicated by Pope
Sixtus 5.
third understood that Pope Sixtus the fifth had excommunicated him for the
murder of Cardinal de Guise. This great fire in a little time flamed quite
through France. The Duke The Duke of Mayenne assures himself of Burgongne and
Champagne, and comes to Paris.
of Mayenne, who was at Lions making war against the Hugonots, being advertized
by a Courrier from Roissie^ his Secretary, (who prevented the Kings) departing
from that City, came into his own Government of Burgongne, assured himself of
Dijon and of Province; and thence passed into Champagne, who stretched out
their Arms to him; after to Orleance, which was already revolted; and so
Chartres, whom his approaches made likewise rise: and in the end he came to
Paris. The Sixteen, and many of his friends, would have advised him to have
taken the Title of King, which they would have caused to be given him by the
Council which the League had established: but he refused, contenting himself
with the Title of Lord-General to the Estate and Crown He takes the quality of
Lieutenant General of the Estate and Crown of France: they likewise break the
Kings Seals.
of France; which he took, as if the Throne had been vacant. They likewise
broke the Seals of the King, and made others, whereon on one side was engraven
the Arms of France; and on the other, a Throne empty; and for inscription about
it, the Name and Quality of the Duke of Mayenne in this manner; Charles Duke of
Mayenne, Lieutenant of the Estate and Crown of France.

All France took part in this occasion; and almost all the Cities and Provinces
of the Realm ranged themselves on the Duke of Mayenne's side. The King, fearful
that he should Henry 3. for fear, retires to Tours.
be shut up in Blois, retired to Tours. There now rested only one way for him
to defend himself against so many dangers as were ready to environ him; and
this was, to call to his assistance the King of Navarre, who had five or six
thousand men, old Soldiers, by whom he was well beloved. Yet he durst not do
it, for fear to be esteemed a Favourer of Heretics, or incur the blame of
violating those Edicts against the Hugonots he had so solemnly sworn to in the
Estates of Blois. He tried He in vain endeavors to appease the Duke of Mayenne.
therefore all sorts of ways to appease the resentment of the Duke of Mayenne;
offering him very advantageous Conditions. But what assurance, said the
Leaguers, can this Duke have, his Brothers being murdered in so perfidious He
in the end calls the King of Navarre, and gives him Saumur.
a manner? So that he not harkening to any Proposition of Accommodation, Henry
the third was constrained to turn his thoughts toward the King of Navarre.

This Prince above all things would have a passage over the River Loire: the
City of Saumur was given to him, where he established Governor Plessis Mornay,
who fortified the Castle, and made it the head of the Hugonot-Garisons. Being
afterward from thence approached Tours, his old Captains kept him for some
time in distrust, and hindered him The King persuaded by his friends not to
trust him.
from going to see the King, whom they feared (they said) lest in a time
wherein a Treason was so necessary for him, to draw him out of that Labyrinth
wherein the Action of Blois had involved him, he should buy his Absolution at
the price of the King of Navarre's Life.

The Duke d' Espernon* who was returned to Court to serve his Master at his
need, and the Marshal d' Aumont, would have engaged him to it, and given him
their words: but his friends could not consent that he should expose himself to
the Faith of a Prince, who as they believed, had not any. In truth their fears
were just, and our Henry was without doubt possessed with them as well as they:
However, after he had well considered that he Yet he resolves to go, arrive
what will:
acted now for the safety of France, for the service of the King, and to open
to himself a way to defend that Crown appertained to him, he resolved to hazard
all, and to resign himself absolutely to the holy Guard of the sovereign
Protector of Kings.

The City of Tours is situated as it were in an Island, a little below the
place where the River Cher mingles its streams with the Loire, having coasted
that great River three or four Leagues. The King of Navarre's people would to
which purpose he passes the River Cher.
not that he should engage himself between these Rivers, but that the
Conference should be held beyond the Cher. He almost alone was of opinion
contrary to them all; nevertheless to content them, he was constrained to hold
a Council on the Banks, and after to permit his Captains to pass first, as if
to sound the Ford. He passed after them, and arrived at Plessis les Tours,
about three a Clock in the Afternoon, in a Warlike Habit, all durty, ready to
be covered with his Cuira^s; himself only having a Cloak, all his people being
in their Doublets, and ready to put on their Arms, that he might show he was
not come to compose his Court, but to serve him well.

He went to meet the King, who heard Vespers at the Minimes. The crowd of the
people was so great, that they were a long time before they could join. Our
Henry being His interview with the King at Tours.
within three paces of the King, cast himself at his feet, endeavoring to kiss
them; but the King would not permit him, but lifting him up, embraced him with
great tenderness: they reiterated their embraces three or four times, the King
naming him his* Thrice-dear Brother, and he calling him his Lord. There were
now heard echo the joyful Cries of Vive le Roy, which had for a long time been
silent; as if the presence of our Henry had given a new birth to the peoples
affections, which seemed extinct for Henry the third.

After the two Kings had for some time entertained He repasses the River, and
lies in the Faubo^rg;
each other, our Henry passed the River, and went to lodge at the Suburb of St.
Simphorien: for he had been obliged to promise thus much to the old Hugonots,
who believed snares and traps every where laid for him. But he who was pricked
forward by other but on the morrow visits the King alone.
Motives, and who was endowed with that generous Principle, That we ought not
be too sparing of our Lives when there is something to be gained which ought to
be more precious then Life it self to a great Courage, departed the next
morning at six of the Clock, without advertizing his people; and attended only
by one Page, passing the Bridge, went to give a visit to the King. They
entertained one another a long time in two or three Conferences; in which our
Henry gave great marks of his Capacity and Judgment. Their Resolution in sum,
was to raise a puissant They resolve to besiege Paris.
Army to assault Paris, which was the principal head of the Hydra, and gave
motion to all the rest: a thing easy for them to do, because the King expected
great Levies from toward the Switzers, whither he had sent Sancy for that
purpose; adding, that the design of the siege being published, it would
infallibly draw a great number of Soldiers and Adventurers, out of hopes of so
rich a pillage.

The two Kings having passed two days together, he of Navarre went to Chinon,
to cause the rest of his Troops to advance, who hitherto had refused to mingle
themselves among the Catholics.

During his absence, the Duke of Mayenne, Duke of Mayenne wants little to
surprise King Hen. 3 ^^ Tours.
who had taken the Field, fell upon the Suburbs of Tours, thinking to surprise
the City, and the King within it, by means of some intelligence. The Combat was
very bloody, and the Dukes design wanted little of taking effect; but after
the first endeavors, having lost the hopes to compass it, he easily retired.

Afterward the Kings Troops being wonderfully increased, they marched
conjoyntly, he and the King of Navarre toward Orleans; took all the little
places thereabouts, and from thence descended into Beauce, and drew together
all of a sudden toward Paris. All the Posts round about it, as Poissy,
Estampes, and Meulan, were either forced, or obtained Capitulation: in which
they desired no other security then the word of the King of Navarre; to which
they trusted more then to all the Writings of Hen. 3. So great a profession
made he of keeping his word, even to the prejudice of his interests.

Let us consider a little the different Estate to which these two Kings were
reduced by their different conduct. The One, for having Great and profitable
Reflections made on the different Conducts of Hen. ^. and the King of Navarre.
often broken his Faith, was abandoned by his Subjects, and his greatest Oaths
found no belief amongst them: and the Other, for having always exactly kept it,
was followed even by his greatest Enemies: in all occasions he gave marks of
his Valor and Experience in point of War; but above all, of his Prudence, and
of those Noble Inclinations he had to good, and to oblige all the world. He was
always seen in the most dangerous places, to accelerate Labors, animate his
Soldiers, sustain them in Sallies, comfort the wounded, and cause Money to be
distributed amongst them. He observed all, inquired into all, and would himself
with the Marshal of the Camp, order the Lodgings of his Soldiers. He observed
strictly what was done in the Army of Henry 3. where though he often found
faults, he concealed them, out of fear to offend those who had committed them,
by discovering their ignorance; and when he believed himself oblito take notice
of them, he did it with so much Circumspection, that they could not find any
reason to take it in ill part. He was never niggardly of giving praises due to
Noble Actions, nor of Caresses and generous Deport to those came near him: he
entertained himself with them when he had time to do it; or at least so obliged
them with some good word, that they still went away satisfied. He feared not at
all to make himself familiar, because he was assured that the more men knew
him, the more they would esteem him. In fine, the conduct of this Prince was
such, that there was no heart he gained not, nor no friend he had who would not
willingly have become his Martyr.

Paris was already besieged; the King lodged Paris besieged.
at St. Clou, and our Henry at Meudon, keeping with his Troops all that is
between Vanvres to the Bridge of Charenton. Sancy was already arrived with his
Levies of Suisses; and they labored with Orders to give a general Assault, to
the end they might gain the Suburbs beneath the River. The Duke of Mayenne, who
was in the City with his Troops expecting those Supplies the Duke of Nemours
was to bring, was in great apprehensions that he should not be able to sustain
the furious shock was preparing; when a young Jacobin of the King Hen. 3.
killed by a Jacobin.
Convent of Paris, named James Clement, spurred on by a Resolution as devilish
and detestable as it was determinate, smote King Henry the third with a blow of
a knife in the Belly; of which he died the morrow after. If the frantic Monk
had not been slain upon the place by the Kings Guards, many things might have
been known, which are now concealed.

Our Henry being advertized late in the Our Henry comes to visit him dying.
Evening of this mournful Accident, and of the danger in which the King was,
came to his Lodging, accompanied only by five and twenty or thirty Gentlemen;
and being arrived a little before he expired, he fell on his knees to kiss his
hands, and received his last Embraces. The King named him many times his Good
What the King said to him, and those present.
Brother, and Legitimate Successor; recommended the Kingdom to him; exhorted
the Lords there present to acknowledge him, and not to disunite. In fine, after
having conjured him to embrace the Catholic Religion, he gave up the Ghost;
leaving all his Army in an astonishment and confusion which cannot be
expressed, and all the Chiefs and Captains in Irresolutions and different
Agitations, according to their Humors, Fancies or Interests.

The Second PART OF THE LIFE OF Henry the Great.
Containing what he did, from the day he came to the Crown of France, until the
Peace which was made in the year 1598. by the Treaty at Vervin.

THE Death of Henry the third 1589
caused an entire change in Change caused by the Death of Hen. 3.
the face of affairs. Paris, the League, and the Duke of Mayenne, were
transported from a profound Sadness, to a furious Joy; and the Servants of the
Defunct King, from a Pregnant Hope to see him Revenged, to an extreme
Desolation.

This Prince, who had been the object of the peoples hatred, being now no more,
it seemed that that hatred should cease, and by consequence the heat of the
League relent: but on the contrary, not only all those who composed that
faction, but likewise many others who had held it for a Crime to League
themselves against Henry the third, their Catholic and Legitimate King,
believed themselves in Conscience Obliged to oppose themselves against our
Henry, at least till such time as he should return into the bosom of the true
Church: a qualification they believed absolutely necessary for that him should
succeed Charlemagne of S. Lewis. So that if the League lost that heat which
hatred gave it, it gained one much more specious, from a zeal to Religion; and
had likewise a most plausible pretext not to lay down Arms till Henry should
Profess the Religion of his Ancestors.

It was very difficult to judge, whether the Problem, if Hen. 3. died in a time
favorable to Hen. 4. or not.
point of time wherein this unhappy Parricide arrived, were good or ill for
him: for on one side it seemed that Providence had not drawn him from the
utmost parts of the Kingdom, where he was like a banished man, and led him by
the hand to the fairest Theater in France, but only to make known his goodness
and virtue, and put him in an Estate to gain that Succession, to which, had he
been absent, he had never been called. But on the other side, when the
multitude of his Puissant enemies, which armed themselves against him, are
considered, the small Treasure, and few Forces he had, the Obstacle of his
Religion, and a thousand other difficulties, it could not be certainly judged,
whether the Crown was ordained for him to enjoy, or fallen upon his head to
crush him in Pieces: and there might be reason to say, that if this Conjuncture
Elevated him, it was upon a Throne trembling, and erected on the brink of
Precipices.

Whilst Henry the third was in his Agony, Henry 4. holds many Councels.
our Henry held many Tumultuary Councels in the same lodgings, with those whom
he Esteemed his most faithful Servants. So soon as he understood he was
expired, he retired to his quarter at Meudon, and attired himself in the
mourning Purple: he was presently followed by a great quantity of Noblemen, who
accompanied him as well for Curiosity as affection. The Hugonots with those
Troops which he had led, presently swore Allegiance to him: but this number was
very small. Some of the Catholics, as the Marshal Same Catholics acknowledge
him, but most refuse.
d' Aum^nt, Givry, and Humieres, swore Service to him until death, and that
willingly, without desiring any Condition of him; but the greatest part of the
others, being either estranged by inclination, or exasperated by some
discontent, or else believing now to have found the time to make their Services
be bought, kept at a greater distance, and held several little Assemblies in
diverse places, where they formed a number of Fantastic designs.

Each of these proposed to make themselves Some design to make themselves
Sovereigns
Sovereigns of some City, or some Province, as the Governors had done in the
decadence of the house of Charlemagne. The Marshal of Byron among others, would
have The Marshal of Byron among others; but the King made him forgo his desire.
had the County of Perigord; and Sancy, not to reject him, spoke to the King.
This Proposition was very dangerous: for if he denied it, he incensed him; and
if he accorded to his demand, he opened the way to all others to make the like,
and so the Kingdom would be rent in Pieces. It was only his great spirit and
understanding, which could walk safely in so dangerous a path: he therefore
charged Sancy to assure him on his part of his affection, of which he would
willingly in time and place give him all the marks a good Subject could expect
from his Sovereign; but at the same time, he furnished him with so many
puissant reasons wherefore he could not accord to what he desired, that Sancy
being himself first persuaded, found it not difficult to work the same effect
on the spirit of Byron; whom he obliged not only to renounce that pretense, but
likewise to protest that he would never suffer any piece of the Estate to be
dismembered, in favor of whomsoever.

We may without doubt conclude, that the great Henry did reason puissantly; and
that he explained his reasons in the best manner, since he could in occasions
so important, persuade such able Spirits against their proper interests.

Byron being thus gained, went with Sancy to assure themselves of those Suisses
which Byron and Sancy assure the Catholic Suiss to the Kings Service.
Sancy had brought to the deceased King, but who being of the Catholic
Cantons, made some difficulty to bear Arms for a Hugonot Prince, and that
without new order from their Superior. As for the French Troops of the Defunct
King, it was not so easy to gain them. The Lords who Commanded them, or who
had their Chiefs under their dependence, had every one diverse designs; one
would have one thing, and the other another, according to their several
interests or Caprichio's.

There were six Princes of the house of What was the disposition of the Princes
of the blood toward the King.
Bourbon, to wit, the old Cardinal of Vendosme, the Count of Soissons, the
Prince of Gonti, the Duke of Montpensier, and the Prince of Dombes his Son;
which in stead of being his firmest Prop, gave him no little inquietude;
because there was none of them which had not his particular pretense; which
proved to him a continual Obstacle.

Many of the Lords which were in the Army Many Lords in Camp and Court ill
intended.
were not very well intentionated, particularly Henry Grand Prior of France,
Natural Son to Charles the ninth, (after Count of Auvergne and Duke of
Angoulesme) the Duke of Espernon, and Terms Belle-garde; who out of the fear
they had formerly had, lest he should deprive them of the favor of their
Master, had opposed him in diverse Rencounters. For the Courtiers, as Francis d'
O, and Manou his brother, Old-Castle and many others, they knowing that our
Henry detested their Villainous Debaucheries, and that he would not prove a
person of so ill management, as to lavish out his Revenues to supply their
Luxury, had no great inclination for him. Nevertheless, hoping to find things
better, they resolved to declare in his favor; but with such Conditions as
should restrain and bridle him, and in some manner oblige him to depend on them.

For this purpose there met an Assembly of Assembly of Noblemen at d' O's, who
would have the King converted.
some Noblemen, at d' O's Palace (a man Voluptuous, Prodigal, and by
consequence not very scrupulous; but who at present made Conscience a Cloak to
render himself necessary) who there resolved not to acknowledge him, till he
were a Catholic. Francis d' O d' O carrys him word of it.
accompanied with some Noblemen, had the confidence to carry to the King the
Resolutions of this Assembly; and added a studied discourse, to persuade him to
return to the Catholic Religion: but the King, who had already past over his
greatest fears, made them an answer so mixed with sweetness and The King answers
them hansomely and courageously.
gravity, with spirit and reservedness, that Courageously repulsing them,
without too severely taunting them, he testified to them that he desired to
conserve them his, but that after all, he feared not much the loss of them.

Some time after, the Nobility, after diverse Another greater Assembly resolved
to acknowledge him, provided he will permit himself to be instructed.
little Assemblies, held a great one, with Francis de Luxembourg Duke of Piney.
There many Propositions being made, at last the Dukes of Montpensier and Piney
subtly Matraged the Spirits, and Steered the Opinions of the most importunate
to this Resolution, That they would acknowledge Henry for King, upon these
Conditions: 1. Provided that he would cause himself to be instructed; for they
presupposed conversion must necessarily follow instruction. 2. That he should
not permit the exercise of any but the Catholic Religion. 3. That he should
neither give charge nor employment to the Hugonots. 4. That he should permit
the Assembly to depute Agents to the Pope, to let him understand and agree to
the Causes which Obliged the Nobility to remain in the Service of a Prince
separated from the Roman Church.

The King had the knowledge of this Resolution, The Duke of Piney carries their
resolution to the King; who agrees to it;
from the Duke of Piney: he thanked them for their zeal for the Conservation of
the Estate, and the affection they had for his person; promising them, that he
would sooner lose his life, then the remembrance of those good services they
had rendered him; and granting them easily all the points they demanded, and
grants a Declaration touching the exercise of the Catholic Religion through
all his Territories.
only the second: In stead of which, he promised them to re-establish the
exercise of the Catholic Religion through all his Territories, and to remit
the Ecclesiastics into the possession of their Estates: and of this he caused
a Declaration to be engrossed, which after all the Lords and Gentlemen of Note
had signed; he sent to be confirmed, by that part of the Parliament which was
at Tours.

There were many who signed it with some Many sign it with regret, and others
refuse, as Vitry, who becomes a Leaguer.
regret, and others who absolutely refused it; among whom were the Duke of
Espernon, and Lewis d' Hospital Vitry. This last, disturbed as it was said by a
scruple of Conscience, cast himself into Paris, and gave himself for some time
to the League; but first of all, he abandoned the Government of Dourdan, which
the Defunct King had given him. Such were then the Maxims of persons of true
honor in the Civil Wars, that in quitting one party, which ever it was, they
quitted likewise those places they held, and returned them to those had
conferred them.

The Duke d' Espernon protesting, that he And the Duke of Espernon, who retires.
would never be either Spaniard or Leaguer, but that his Conscience would not
permit him to stay with the King, demanded leave of him to retire to his
Government. The King after having in vain endeavored to retain him, gave him
leave, with many Carresses and praises: but so much was he in his heart
troubled at his abandoning him, that it has been believed he conserved against
him a secret resentment so long as he lived.

The Duke of Mayenne was not a little The Duke of Mayenn^ troubled what party
to take.
troubled in Paris, what resolution he should take: he saw that all the
Parisians, even those who had held of the party of the Defunct King, had fully
resolved to provide for the security of Religion: But that however they would
all have a King, contrary to some of the Sixteen, who imagined they might form
a Republic, and turn* France into Cantons, like to the Suisses; but those were
neither sufficiently powerful in Number, Riches, or Capacity, to Conduct such a
design. So that the most part of his friends counseled him to take the title
of King: but when he went about to sound this Gulf, he found that this
proposition was neither agreeable to the people, nor yet to the King of Spain,
from whom he received, and was to receive his Principal stay, and means of
Subsistence. Two Counsels given him.


Hereupon two other Counsels were given him: the one, to accord willingly with
the new King, who without doubt in the conjuncture wherein things were, would
grant him most advantageous conditions: The other, that he should by
Declaration publish to the Catholics of the Royal Army, that all resentments
remaining Extinct by the Death of Henry the third, he had no other interest
then that of Religion: That that point being of Divine obligation, and
regarding all good Christians; he summoned and conjured them to join with him,
to exhort the King of Navarre to return to the Church; upon which, they
promised to acknowledge him immediately for King: but if that he refused to do
it, they protested to Substitute in his place another Prince of the blood. This
advice was the best. And indeed it was proposed by Jeannin President of the
Parliament of Burgongne, one of the wisest and most Politic heads of his
Council, and who acted in his affairs without Sleights or Stratagems; but with
great judgment, and singular Honesty.

The Duke of Mayenne equally rejected He rejects them, and causes to be
Proclaimed the old Cardinal of Bourbon.
both these advices; and took a third, to wit, the causing the old Cardinal of
Bourbon (who was at present detained prisoner by order of our Henry,) to be
proclaimed King; still reserving to himself the quality of Lieutenant General
of the Crown. He published after several Declarations, one of which he sent to
the Parliament, the other to the Provinces and the Nobility, inviting them to
endeavor to deliver their King, and defend their Religion.

At the same time the King tried by diverse The King tries in vain several
Treaties with the Duke.
Negotiations, and caused him to be exhorted rather to seek his advancement by
his friendship, then by the troubles and miseries of France. But to this the
Duke answered, that he had engaged his Father in the Public cause, and given
Oath to King Charles the tenth, (for so they called the old Cardinal of
Bourbon, who was named Charles) to whom, according to the sentiment of the
League, the Crown appertained, as to the nearest Kinsman of the Defunct. And in
the mean time, he entertained Plots and Conspiracies in the Royal Army; where
his emissaries from day to day debauched many persons, even of those whom the
King believed most assured. There were many Generous enough to resist the
temptations of Silver: but nothing was proof against the intrigues of the
Ladies of Paris, who cunningly attracted the Gentlemen and the Officers in the
City, sparing nothing to engage them.

The King knowing that there daily remained some caught in these snares, and
having just reason to fear that those which returned, tempted by their
Mistresses, might bring back some per^itious designs; and the Duke of Nemours
being upon the advance with his Troops, to join with the Duke of Mayenne; the
Duke of Lorrain being likewise to send He raises his League from Paris, and
why. He writes to the Protestant Princes, to justify himself.
his; having cause to doubt his retreat might be cut off on all sides, found it
convenient to discamp *from before Paris.

But before he dislodged, he writ to the Protestant Princes, to give them an
account of what he did, and to assure them that nothing should be capable to
shake his Constancy, or separate him from Christ: and he spoke at present
according to his thoughts and Conscience, not having any desire to change:
which yet the Ministers of his Religion would not believe, but watched him so
close on this Subject, that they became importunate.

It was oertainly an unspeakable trouble, His troubles for 4. years to content
both Catholics and Hugonots.
which continually for three or four years he was forced to undergo; to hear on
one side the exhortatious of those people, and on the other, the most instant
Remonstrances of the Catholics: for it was necessary he should allay the
distrust of the first, and entertain the second with continual hopes of making
himself be instructed. How much prudence had he need of? how much patience?
with how much jugdement and policy must he manage such great differences?
Certainly he could not do it without employing all the powers of his Spirit and
experience. And he well knew how far it was necessary He had need of infinite
prudence, address, and eloquence.
for a Prince to have his Spirit happily exercised, and to be well instructed
how to Negotiate, and Speak well, to be able at his necessity to serve himself
of his talent. Without falsity he might well at present praise those, who
having had the care of bringing him up, had formed him in his youth to the
Management of affairs, to Treating with men, and to the gaining the affections
of all the world.

Those last devoirs he desired to render his Predecessor, served as a fair
pretext for raising his Siege from before Paris. To put He carries the Corpse
of Henry the third to S. Cornille de Compeigne.
his body in a place where the resentment of the Duke of Guises creatures might
not outrage it, he carried it to Compeigne, and laid it in the Abbey of S.
Cornille, where he celebrated all the funebrous Ceremonies, as honorably as
the confusion of the time would permit. Not able to assist himself, because of
his Religion, he committed the care to Bellegarde and Espernon; the last of
which accompanied him thither, and then retired into Angoumois.

There were three advices given, concerning the place to which he ought to
retire, Three advices touching the place to which he should retire.
when he raised his siege from Paris. The first was, to repass the Loire, and
abandon to the League all the Provinces on this side it; because he could
difficultly maintain them. The second, to re-advance along the Marne, and
seizing those Bridges and Cities, expect an assistance from the Protestant
Suisses and Germans promised to come to him. And the third, to march down into
Normandy, to assure himself of some Cities, whose Governors were not yet
engaged in the League; to gather the money received for Taxes; and to join with
the Assistance of England, which Queen Elizabeth had promised him, and which
could not be long absent.

He concluded on the last of these advices: 1590.
and so many of the Nobles who accompanied He follows the last, which was to
march into Normandy.
him, desiring some time to go and refresh themselves, he gave them leave. He
sent a part of his Troops into Picardie, under the Conduct of the Duke of
Longueville; another into Campaine, under that of Marshal d' Aumont; and with
three thousand French foot, two Regiments of Suisses, and twelve hundred horse
only, which he kept with him, he descended into Normandy. Rolet brings him the
Keys of Pont d' Arche; and Chattes of Diepe.


The Duke of Montpensier, who was Governor there, came to join him with two
hundred Gentlemen, and fifteen hundred Foot. Rolet Governor of Pont d' Arche,
a man of Courage and Spirit, brought him the Keys of that place, demanding no
other recompense but the honor to serve him. Emer de Chattes, a Commandado^e
of Malta, did the same with those of Diepe. After which, the King approached
Rouen, where he believed to have some* intelligence.

This Enterprise put him in extreme danger; He would besiege Rouen: but the
Duke of Mayenne coming to its suecour, drives him to Diepe, and invests him.
but in revenge, gave him a fair occasion to acquist Glory, in retiring himself
from so great a peril. See how it passed!

The Duke of Mayenne came to the succor of Rouen with all his forces, and
passed the Rivers at Vernon. The King much astonished, retires to Diepe, and
sends to the Duke of Longueville and d' Aumont, to return to him with diligence
with their forces. The Duke in the mean time takes all the little places about
Diepe, to inviron and invest himself within. In effect, he shuts him up so
close, that if he had not amused himself by an untimely motion to go to Bins in
Hainault to confer with the Duke of Parma, he had in that disorder dissipated
the greatest part of his little Army. He had already caused a report to be The
Duke reports he cannot escape him.
spread through France* and had writ with assurance to all strange Princes,
That he held the King of Navarre (so he called him) shut up in a little corner,
from whence he could not get, but either by yiedling himself to him, or leaping
into the Sea. The danger appeared so eminent, even to his most faithful
servants, that the Parliament at Tours sent expressly to him a Master of
Requests; proposing The Parliament at Tours counsel him to associate the
Cardinal of Bourbon in the Royalty.
as the only expedient they saw to save the Estate* the associating him and
the Cardinal of Bourbon his Uncle in the Royalty; giving to One the conduct of
Civil Affairs, and the Other of Martial. There were likewise the greatest part
of the Captains of his Army of opinion, that leaving his Forces on shore, well
entrenched in their posts, he should as soon as Others counsel him to retire to
England. He derides both one and the other
possible embarque for England or for Rochel, for fear lest if he should longer
delay it, he might be shut up by Sea as well as by Land. To the Proposition of
the Parliament, he made answer, That he had taken such good order, that the
intrigues of the Duke of Mayenne could not deliver the Cardinal of Bourbon, as
they apprehended; and the Marshal of Byron so stoutly opposed those who
counseled him to embarque, that they desisted.

It appeared soon after by the proof, that The Duke of Mayenne besieges Diepe.
the Forces of the League, which were thrice as great as his, were not to be
feared in proportion to their number; and that the more Commanders they had,
the less their power was to be doubted. The King was lodged at the Castle
d'Arques, which is seated on a little Bat^ail of Arques.
Hill, to stop the passage of the Valley which goes to Diepe. The Duke had
formed a Design to take this Post by Sea, by four or five Reprises; and on
diverse days he essayed to assault the Suburbs of Polet, and four or five times
was driven back. Our Henry daily doing wonders, and exposing himself so much,
that once he thought he should have been surprised and encompassed by his
Enemies. In The Duke raises the siege, retires, goes into Picardy, and why.
fine, the Duke, having lost eleven days time, and a thousand or twelve hundred
men, raised the Siege, and retired into Picardy.

It was believed, that he passed into this Province upon a fear* lest the
Picards, a free and honest people, but very simple, should permit themselves to
be surprised by the Artifices of the Agents of Spain, who would engage them to
cast themselves under the protection of the King their Master.

It was observed likewise, that that which What hindered the success of his
enterprise.
hindered the success of his enterprise at Diepe, and which kept him two or
three days without enterprizing any thing at the time he ought to have done it,
was the jealousy and contentions between the Chiefs that accompanied him*
particularly of the Marquess d^ P^nt^-Mousson, Son to the Duke of Lorrain; of
the Duke of Nemours, and of Cavalier d'Aumale: for they, believing the taking
of the King infallible, or at least his flight assured, and disposing already
of the Kingdom as of their Conquest, regarded one another with an Eye of
jealousy, and each formed designs in his head to have the better part of it.

It was observed likewise, that in one of He knew not how to take his
advantages.
these Combats of Diepe, the Duke of Mayenne, having at present some advantage,
had gained an entire Victory if he had advanced but a quarter of an hour
quicker: but marching too slowly, he let slip that opportunity he could never
redeem: which made the King, who well observed his faul^, say, If he act not in
another manner, I shall be assured always to gain the Field.

I have recounted these Particularities, because Th^ee^ auses for. (...) which
the great body of the League prospered not in their designs. The distrust
between the Spaniards and Duke of Mayenne.
they make known the defaults of that great Body of the League: and the true
causes which hindered its progress, and reduced it to nothing, I find three
principal ones.

The first, was the distrust which the Duke of Mayenne had of the Spaniards:
for though he could not be without them, yet he could not but regard them as
his secret Enemies; and they assisted him not for love of himself, but out of
the design they had to profit themselves out of the calamities of France. And
therefore when they saw that he concurred not with them for their ends, and
that he thought only of his own advantage without theirs, they afforded him
but seeble succor; in such manner, that they let him fall so low, that when
they would themselves have done it, they could not raise him.

The second, was the jealousy of the Chiefs, The jealousy among the Chiefs of
the League
who never agreed among themselves. They thought more of crossing and ruining
one another, then of weakening their common Enemy; and confounded themselves in
such manner by their delusions and partialities, that they were ever wanting in
the greatest Enterprises: whereas in the party of the King, there was only one
Chief, to whom all was reported, and by whose Orders all passed.

The third, was the heaviness and dullness of The sloth and negligence of the
Duke of Mayenne
the Duke of Mayenne, who at all times moved slowly. His Flatterers called this
Gravity. This default proceeded principally from his nature; and was augmented
not only by the mass of his Body, great and fat beyond all proportion, and
which by consequence required a great deal of nourishment, and much sleep; but
likewise from a coldness and numness, which a certain malady he had contracted
at Paris a little after the death of Henry the third, had reduced to a habitude
in his Body; of which, say some, he would very unhandsomely rejoice.

King Henry the fourth was not of the same Great activity and vigilance of
Henry 4.
temper: for though he very much loved feasting, and to divert himself with his
familiars when he had leisure; nevertheless when he had Affairs of War, or any
other nature, he never sat at Table above a quarter of an hour, and never
slept above two or three hours together: so that Pope Sixtus the fifth being
well informed of his manner of living, and that of the Duke of Mayenne,
confidently prognosticated, That the Bearnois (for so he called him, as all the
Leaguers did) could not fail to have the better of it, since he lay no longer
time abed then the Duke of Mayenne sat at Table. Officers and servants
resemble their masters.


Officers and Servants form themselves after the example of their Masters:
those of the King were ready, cheerful, vigilant; who executed his Commands so
soon as they came out of his mouth; who took care of all, and gave him advice
of all. On the contrary, those of the Duke were slow, negligent, idle; and who,
upon whatever pressing occasion, would not loose any thing of their Ease and
Divertisements.

It seemed to me that, for the better understanding our History, it was
necessary to observe these Circumstances, which are absolutely essential, and
very instructive.

We have particularized about the end of This History recounts only the chief
affairs
our first Part, who were the Chiefs of the League, and how that they held all
the best Cities and richest Provinces of the Realm. I should never end, should
I recount all the Factions, Fights, Enterprises and Changes which happened in
every Province for five or six years time. We shall follow only the gross of
Affairs, and behold how the Providence of God, and the incomparable Virtue of
our Henry, drew France out of its Labyrinth of Miseries, in such manner, that
the Estate and Religion which should have been destroyed by an irrecoverable
War, were both the one and the other miraculously saved, and re-flourished with
as much happiness and glory as ever.

Though the Duke of Mayenne was retired The Parisians made believe the King was
taken.
from before Diepe, yet the people were entirely persuaded that the King could
not escape him; particularly the Parisians, whom the Duchess of Montpensier
made believe by Courriers on purpose, which she caused to arrive from day to
day, Now that he demanded to yield himself, Now that he was taken; and in fine,
that he was conducting to Paris: insomuch that there were many Ladies who hired
windows in the street of St. Denis to see him pass by.

Whilst they amused themselves with th^se They ar^ much astonished to
understand him marching toward them*
false Reports, they were much astonished ^o understand, that having received a
Re-inforcement of four thousand English, he was now upon his march, and came
directly to Pa^i^. He had some Intelligences which promised him, that if he
could gain the Suburbs, they would open him a way into the City. He assaulted
He takes the Faubourgs of St. Germain* etc.
therefore those of St. Germain, St. Michael, St. James, St. Marceau, and St.
Victor, and carried them at unawares: but he could not gain the Quarter of the
University, as he hoped, because his Cannon was not brought in time. About
eight a Clock in the morning, on All-Saints-day, he entered the Suburbs of St.
James, where he found the people to have no aversion for him: for he saw them
not affrighted, nor despairingly fleeing; but looking out of their windows to
regard him, and crying, Vivele Roy. And he used his advantage with a great
Moderation; he forbad all sorts of Violences or Plunders, and gave o^der His
moderation in this rencounter.
that Divine Service should be continued* in such manner, that his people
peaceably assisted a^ it with the Burgesses, whilst he having mounted the
Steeple of St. Germain, attentively considered what was done in the City.

That Evening the Duke of Nemours having The Dukes of Nemours and Mayenne post
thither The King retires to Montlehery.
posted thither with the Cavalry, and the Duke of Mayenne following on the
morrow after with his Infantry, the King retired to Montlehery; but beforehand
he drew up his Army in Battalia in the sight of Paris, and kept them four hours
at their Arms, to make known to the Parisians the weakness of their Chiefs.

After this, Estampes, Vendosme, le Man's, He takes Estampes, Vendosm, le Man's,
and Alenzon.
and Alenzon, not able to sustain his presence and Arms, surrendered to him: and
in the manner things went, and as the Chiefs of the League defended themselves,
he had without doubt re-conquered the whole Realm in less then fifteen months,
if he had not wanted Want of money stops his progress.
money: this only default, retarded the course of his Prosperities. The
Ransoms imposed on Cities reduced by force, all that he could borrow, and the
money he could raise by Taxes, did not half suffice to keep his Troops in a
Body. For this reason he was In what manner he made his Troops subsist.
constrained for four or five years space, to make War in an extraordinary
manner. When his Troops had served some months, and consumed beside their pay
all they had forraged in their Quarters, he sent them home, as well to refresh
them, as to preserve their Country from the invasions of the League. In like
manner, when the voluntier-Gentlemen had spent that money they brought from
other houses, he gave them leave to return, to endeavor to furnish themselves
for another voyage; inviting them by his Example, to retrench the superfluous
expense of Cloths and Equipage; and otherwise treating them with so much
Civility and Courtesy, that he never wanted them in the most pressing
occasions; for they returned the soonest possible, serving him, if we may so
say, each his Quarter. He reduces almost all Normandy, and besieges Dreux.


In the mean time, he fell all of a sudden upon Normandy, and almost wholly
reduced it; took the Cities of Dompfort, Falaise, Lisieux, Bayeux, Honfleur;
this last by a very bloody Siege: after his return from thence, he took
likewise Meulan on the Seine, seven leagues off Paris, and laid Siege before
Dreux.

At the noise of these Conquests, the Duke of Mayenne was obliged in
reputation, to come forth of Paris, to assemble his Troops, and to receive,
contrary to his inclination, fifteen hundred Lanciers, and five hundred
Carabines, from the Duke of Parma Governor of the Low Countries: these forces
were Commanded by the Count d' Egmont.

After this Duke had regained several little The Duke marches to succor Dreux.
places which incommodated Paris and the Country adjacent, he passed the Seine
over the Bridges of Mantes, to go succor Dreux; imagining he might do it
without hazarding any thing. The King, so soon as he had advice The King
advances to fight him.
of his advance, raises his siege, but with an intent to fight him; and came to
this effect to lodge at Non^ncourt, on the passage of the River of Eure.

Two things principally obliged him to that Two reasons oblige him to it.
resolution of giving him battle: the one, because wanting money, he could not
long keep his Troops in the body of an Army; and had he led them into Normandy,
he should unprofitably have spent all the revenue of that Province, which alone
he valued above all others he held. The other, because he perceived so great a
rejoicing throughout all his Army, who seemed to leap for joy, when they were
told they should go to find out their enemy; demonstrating by their outward
appearances, that a day of fighting should be unto them as a day of feasting.

The Duke of Mayenne was not of opinion that he ought to engage his fortune and
honor to the hazard of one day, especially considering the valor of the Kings
forces, in comparison of his; the great experience, and incomparable virtue of
that Prince: and with all this, his great fortune, which had already gained so
great an ascendant over his, that he believed he could no better overcome him,
then by avoiding encounters with him. But the reproaches of the Parisians, the
instances of the Legate, which the Pope had sent to support the interests of the
League; the What causes engage the Duke of Mayenne to the Battle.
Spanish Cabal, which on which side soever fortune turned it self, promised
themselves great advantages from this battle; and in fine, the shame to have
lost more then forty places in six months, without having endeavored to
succor any of them; led him as it were perforce to the relief of Dreux: and
when he was so near it, the false advice he had, that the King retired toward
the City of Verneuil au Perch, and the Bravadoes of the Count of Egmont, who
boasted himself capable with his Troops alone to defeat the Army of the King,
engaged him with an extraordinary diligence to pass the River of Eure, over the
Bridge of Yvry.

To speak truth, both the King and he were equally surprised: the King, to
understand that he had so soon passed; and the Duke, to see that the King, whom
he believed to have taken the way toward Verneuil, came directly toward him:
but now though they would, they could neither withdraw; but of force Battle of
Yvry, March 14*
must come to a battle, which happened on the fourteenth of March, near the
Bourg of Yvry.

The Histories do at large declare the description of the field of the battle;
the order of both Armies, the Charges which the Battalions and Squadrons both
on the one and the other side made, and the faults of the Chiefs of the League:
We shall therefore speak nothing, but what concerns the person of our Prince.

His rare intelligence, his wonderful genius, Wonderful intelligence of Henry
the fourth.
and his indefatigable activity in the Mystery of War, were all admired. It was
wondered how he knew how to give orders without perplexing his intellectuals,
but with as little Confusion as if he had been in his Closet; how he could know
so perfectly to range his Troops; and how, having observed the enemies design,
he could in a quarter of an hour change the whole order of his Army: How during
the fight, he could be every where, take notice of every thing, and himself
give orders, as if he had had a hundred eyes, and as many arms: The noise,
confusion, dust and smoke, augmenting rather then troubling his judgment and
knowledge.

The Armies being ready to join, he lifted up his eyes to heaven; and joining
his hands, called God to witness of his intention, invoking His prayers to God.
his assistance, and praying that he would reduce the Rebels to an
acknowledgement of him whom the order of Succession had given them for
Legitimate Sovereign: But Lord, said he, if it pleases thee to dispose
otherwise, or that I should be of the number of those Kings whom thou
dedicatest to thy anger, deprive me of my life with my Crown; consent that I
may this day fall a victim to thy holy will: let my death deliver France from
the Calamities of War, and my blood be the last that shall be shed in this
quarrel.

Immediately after, he caused to be given him his Habiliment for his head, on
the top of which he had a plume of three white feathers; and having put it on,
before he pulled His exhortation to his Sould^ers.
down his Viziere, he told his Squadrons, My Companions, if you this day run my
fortune, I shall likewise run yours: I will overcome, or dye with you: let me
only conjure you to keep your ranks; and if the heat of the Combat make you
quit them, think as soon of rallying; it will be the gain of the Battle: you
may do it between those three trees which you see there on high, on your right
hand (they were three Pear Trees) and if you lose your Ensigns, Cornets, or
Banners, lose not the sight of my white Feather, which you shall always find in
the Road to Honor and Victory. The battle won by the King.


The Decision of the Battle having been a long time uncertain, was in the end
favorable to him. The Principal glory being due to himself alone, so much the
more, because he Charged most impetuously on that formidable body commanded by
the Count of Egmont; and that having entered that forest of Lances with his
sword in his hand* rendered them useless, and constrained them to come to their
short Arms; at which his had a great advantage, because the French are more
agile and active then the Flemings: so that in less then a quarter of an hour,
he pierced them, dissipated them, and put them to rout; the cause of the entire
gain of the Battle.

Of sixteen thousand men which the Duke Great loss of the Leaguers.
had, there were scarce four thousand saved. There remained above a thousand
horse on the place with the Count of Egmont, four hundred prisoners of Note,
and all the Infantry; for the Lansquenets were all cut in pieces. They took all
his Baggage, Cannon, Ensigns and Cornets; to wit, twenty Cornets of Cavalry,
the white Cornet of the Duke, the Colonel of his Reistres or German horse, the
great Standard of Count Egmont, and sixty Colors of foot.

The Duke of Mayenne behaved himself as The Duke of Mayenne escapes to Mantes,
and thence to Paris.
valiantly as he ought, and many times endeavored to make some rally; but in
the end, for fear of being encompassed, he retired toward the Bridge of Yvry;
and having passed it, caused it to be broken down, to stop those pursued him;
and so escaped to Mantes, and thence to S. Denis, and after to Paris. A part of
the flyers took the same way with him, others took that of the Plain, and
gained the City of Chartres.

The King having engaged himself, during The King too much exposes his person,
which Byron freely remonstrates to him.
the defeat, among a Squadron of Waloons, was in great danger of his person; so
that his Army for sometime believed him dead: upon which the Marshal of Byron,
accustomed to speak freely to him, and who had not at all fought, but had kept
his quarter with a body of reserve, to hinder the rallying of the enemies,
could not refrain from telling him; Ah Sir, this is not just; you have this day
done what Byron ought to do, and he only what the King ought to have done.

This Remonstrance was approved by all those that heard it; and the Principal
Chiefs took the liberty to entreat the King, not to expose any more his person;
but to consider, that God had not destined him to be a Musquetier, but to be
King of France: that all the arms of his subjects ought to fight for him; but
that they would all become lame and benumbed, should they lose their head,
which gave them motion.

His Valor this day out-shone that of the His Clemency a^ Generosi ^ after the
Victory.
greatest of his Chieftains; but besides that, his Clemency, his Generosity,
and his Courtesy, added a wonderful Splendour to his fair actions: and the
manner with which he used his victory, was a certain proof that he gained it by
his Conduct rather then fortune.

He chose rather to receive the Battalions of the Suisses on Composition, then
to cut them in pieces, as he might have done: he restored them their Ensigns,
and caused them to be reconducted into their Country, by his Commissaries; by
which he gained the affection of five little Catholic Cantons.

He had nothing more in his heart, then to make his Subjects know, that he
desired to spare their blood, and that they had to do with a mild and merciful
King, and not with a cruel and implacable enemy: he caused to be proclaimed in
the rout, Save the French, and let your blows fall on the stranger. He took to
mercy all those which demanded quarter, and saved them as much as he could from
the hands of the Soldiers fleshed in the slaughter. He treated the Prisoners,
particularly the Gentlemen, not only with humanity, but likewise with
courtesy: and he loaded with honor, praises and thanks, all the Nobility
which had fought for him; sharing with them His Acknowledgements and Justice.
the glory of the day, and giving them embraces, as earnests of those
recompenses they might expect from him when he should be in power.

I cannot forget one Action which he did, of A Noble Action he did.
wonderful goodness, and which was of wonderful efficacy to assure to him the
hearts of his Officers and Gentlemen. Colonel Thische, or Theodoric of
Schomberg, commanding some Troops of Reisters, had been enforced the evening
before the Battle, by the clamours of those Brutes, to demand of him those
Musters were due to them; and to represent to him, that upon less Conditions
they would not fight. The Suisses and Allemans of that time, used often to act
so; of which Histories furnish us with an hundred Examples. The King, much
incensed at such a demand, answered him, How, Colonel Thische! is this done
like a Man of Honor, to demand money when you ought to receive Orders for the
Battle? The Colonel retired much confused, without replying any thing. On the
morrow, the King, having arranged his Troops, remembered that he had ill treated
him; and thereupon, pressed forward by a motion which could find no place but
in a generous Soul, went to seek him, and told him, Colonel, you see we are
engaged in an occasion which obliges us to no long stay; but it is not just I
should take away the Honor of so brave a Gentleman as your self: I declare
therefore that I acknowledge you for an honest Man, and one incapable of
committing any thing unworthy.

This said, he cordially embraced him; and the Colonel having the tears
standing in his Eyes, with tenderness answered him, Ah, Sir, by restoring me
that Honor you had deprived me of, you deprive me of my Life; for I should be
unworthy if I should not this day lay it down for your service: if I had a
thousand, I would willingly spend them all at your feet. In short, he was slain
in this occasion, as were many other brave Gentlemen.

I will yet recount another worthy Action, Another worthy Action.
which may admirably demonstrate how our Henry spared neither Civilities nor
Caresses to Gentlemen who served him well: At night, when he supt at the Castle
of Rosny, being advertized that the Marshal d' Aumont came to render him an
account of what he had done, he went forth to meet him; and having straightly
embraced him, carried him in to supper, and made him sit at the Table, with
these obliging words, That there was great reason he should be at the feast,
since he had so well served at his Nuptials.

The terror was so great in Paris after the What hindered the King to go
directly to Paris.
loss of this Battle, that if the King had gone directly thither, there could
no doubt have been made but they had received him without much difficulty. Some
said, that it was the Marshal of Byron who diverted him; fearing lest
afterward, not having more need of him, he should consider him less. Others
thought that it was the Hugonot-Ministers and Captains dissuaded him, because
they feared lest he should accommodate with the Parisians for Religion; and
therefore they counseled him Devilish counsel.
rather to gain this great City by famine: which the Marquess d' O, at present
Superintendant, pressed very strongly; to the end the King taking it by this
way, might treat it as a conquered City, draw thence great Treasuries, seize
the Rents of the Hostel de Ville, making Bankrupt of the Burgesses for the
Debts of the King, which were very great.

The Widow of Montpensier, one of the principal The widow of Montpensier amuses
the people.
Organs of the League, who was accustomed to amuse the people with false News;
could not plaster the mischief of the loss of this Battle, but by saying, That
truly the Duke had lost it, but that the Bearnois was dead. The Burgesses
believed it for five or six days; and this was enough to restrain their first
fears, and to gain time to give Orders, and send to levy Succors on all sides.

After the Battle, the King, having stayed The King departs from Mantes, takes
some Cities, and goes to block up Paris.
some days at Mantes by reason of the great Rains, re-took the Field, takes
Lagni, Provins, Motereau and Melun, without permitting himself to be amused by
the Propositions of Truce made him by Villeroy. After having in his passage
attempted the City of Sens with little success, he came to block up Paris, and
took all the Posts and Castles about it, where he lodged Garrisons of Horse to
beat the Champaigne.

The Duke of Mayenne was not within; he had left the Duke of Nemours for
Governor, The Duke of Mayenne was gone to meet the Duke of Parma, and had left
the Duke of Nemours at Paris.
and was gone to meet the Duke of Parma at Conde on the Escaut, to demand of
him some assistance in his necessity. He was in a great trouble, and in a just
fear to loose Paris, whether he relieved it, or whether he permitted it to be
taken; and that the rather, because that he saw well that if he brought in the
Spanish Assistance, the Sixteen would serve themselves of that advantage again
to raise up themselves, and possibly would out of despite to him, engage Paris
under the Spanish Yoke. For these Sixteen loved him not at all, because he had
broken up their Council of Forty, which bridled his Authority; and that to show
himself absolutely averse to a Republican Government, which they would have
introduced, he had created another Council, a Keeper of the Seals, and four
Secretaries of State; with which he governed Affairs, without calling them,
except when he had need of money.

Besides this trouble, there happened to him The death of the old Cardinal of
Bourbon troubles him.
another subject of inquietude, which was the decease of the old Cardinal of
Bourbon, who died at Fontenay, where he was guarded by the Lord de la Boulay.
He had reason to fear, lest his death should give occasion to the Spaniards and
to the Sixteen to demand the Creation of a King; and that they should press him
so much, that in the necessity he had of their aid, he should be constrained to
suffer it. In effect, this was the first Condition which the Agents of Spain
proposed in the Treaty they The Spaniards and the Sixteen ^^^^s him to make a
King* he assigns the Estates to Paris.
held with him to give him Assistance: and he, out of fear to displease them,
testified that he ardently wished the Convocation of the Estates to elect a
King; and transferred the place of their assembly from the City of Melun, where
he had assigned it; to that of Paris; that is to say, from a City which he had
lost, to one which was besieged. In the mean time he employed He keeps to
himself the Title of Lieutenant General.
his Friends with the Parliament and at the Hostel de Ville, to keep to himself
the quality of Lord-General: which being continued to him, he demonstrated that
he feared nothing so much as the Estates, and endeavored by all his power to
hinder them; that which, to speak truth, completed the ruin of his party.

Paris being blocked up, the Legate and the Sixteen forgot nothing to encourage
their people. They consulted their faculty of Theology, and obtained what
Resolutions they pleased against him they named the Bearnois. They caused many,
both general and particular, Processions to be made; and the Officers received
their Oath of Fidelity to the Holy Union: so it was they called the League.

At the same time the Duke of Nemours Nemours takes order for the defense of
Paris.
took great Order to put the City in a posture of Defense; and the Burgesses
being for the most part persuaded, that if the King took it, he would establish
Preaching, and abolish the Mass, were possessed with an extreme ardour, and
contributed all that was demanded, either of their Purse or Labor, toward its
Fortification.

There is no finer passage in the Histories of that time, then the Relation of
this Siege, the Orders which Nemours gave in the City, the Garrisons he
established in diverse quarters, the Sallies he made for the first month, the
Inventions he used to animate the people, the Endeavors and diverse Practices
of the Kings Friends to bring him into the City, the Negotiations held in one
part and the other to essay a Treaty of Accommodation; how Provisions
diminished, how they sought means to make them last, how notwithstanding all
their economy, the Famine was extreme; and how in the end, that great City
being within three or four days of utter perishing, was delivered by the Duke
of Parma.

I shall observe only some Particularities Number of the inhabitants of Paris.
very memorable. There were in Paris when it was blocked up, only two hundred
thousand persons; and there were of them near thirty thousand of the
Country People thereabouts, who had there refuged themselves; and there were
retired near one hundred thousand of the natural Inhabitants: so that in those
times there were no more then three hundred thousand Souls in Paris; whereas it
is now believed, that there are twice as many.

The King was made hope, that so soon as It proves not so easy to take it by
famine.
the Parisians had for seven or eight days seen the Granaries and Markets
without Bread, the Butcheries without Meat, the Ports without Corn, Wine, and
other Commodities with which the River is accustomed to be covered, they would
go take their Chiefs by the throat, and constrain them to treat with them: or
at least if a seditious humor did not so soon prompt them to it, Famine would
force them in fifteen days. In effect, they had but five weeks Victuals, but
they managed them carefully; and those who had said that, knew not well the
people of Paris, for they are wonderfully patient: nor is there any extremity
they are not capable to suffer, provided they have those know how to conduct
them; and principally when they act for their Religion. It cannot be read
without astonishment, how blind was the Obedience, and how constant the Union
of that fierce and indocile people, for four whole months of horrible Losses
and Miseries. The Famine was so great, that the People eat even the Herbs that
grew in the Ditches: Dogs, Cats, and Hides of Leather, were Food; and some have
reported, that the Lansquenets, or Foot-souldiers, fed upon such Children as
they could entrap.

The Hugonots, ravished with delight to The Hugonots would have it taken by
force, but the King will not.
hold that City blocked up which had done them so much mischief, insisted
strongly in the Kings Council; and not only cried it there themselves, but
made it be cried aloud among the Soldiers, That it should be assaulted by
lively force; and that in six hours it would so become a desolate thing. But
the good and wise King took no heed to follow those passionate counsels: he
knew well, that they would take parts by force, that they might murder all, in
revenge of the Massacres of St. Bartholomew. And moreover, he considered that
he should lay desolate a City, the ruin of which, like a wound struck in the
heart, might possibly prove mortal to all France: That he should in one day
dissipate the richest, and almost the only Treasure of his Estate; and that no
person would be benefited by it, but only the simple Soldiery; who, becoming
insolent by so rich a booty, would either overwhelm themselves in their
Delights, or as soon abandon him.

Those who within had taken the care of the Useless mouths starve Paris.
Politic part, had committed a great fault in not putting forth the poor,
populary and useless mouths. The scarcity augmenting, they sought too late
means to remedy it: but not finding any, they deputed some to the King, to gain
permission of him to let a certain number depart; who, hoping for this grace,
were already assembled near the Gate of St. Victor, and had taken leave of
their Friends and Neighbors with those Regrets which even rent asunder the
Hearts of the most insensible.

The King was so good and merciful, that he permitted himself easily to yield
to grant them his Favor: but those of his Council opposed it so strongly, that
for fear to disgust them, he was at first constrained to send back those
miserable People. His Clemency nevertheless Great Clemency of the King, to let
the miserable people go forth.
could not for any long time suffer their violence: for having understood by
many, who fearing death less then Famine, had leapt from the Walls, the pitiful
estate of the City, and they having truly represented unto him what they had
beheld of their horrible necessities, with the incredible obstinacy of the
Leaguers; his heart was in such manner overburthened with grief, that the tears
start out of his eyes; and having a little turned himself away, to conceal that
emotion, he cast forth a great sigh, with these words: O Lord, thou know who
are the causes of this: His generous words.
but give me the means to save those, whom the obstinate malice of my enemies
would make perish.

In vain did the most averse of his Council, and especially the Hugonots,
represent to him that these Rebels merited no favor; he resolved to open a
passage to the innocent. I wonder not at all, said he, if the Chiefs of the
League, or if the Spaniard have so little compassion on those poor people: they
are only Tyrants; but for my self, who am their Father and their King, I cannot
bear the recital of these calamities, without being touched to the bottom of
my soul, or without ardently desiring to remedy them. I cannot hinder those
whom the fury of the League possesses, from perishing with it; but for those
who implore my clemeney, and who are only guilty of the Crimes of others, I
will stretch forth my arms to them. This said, he commanded that they should
permit those miserable people to depart. There were some who crawled, and
others were fain to be carried. There came out at this time more then four
thousand, who all with great and unanimous shouts, cried out, Long live the
King.

After that day, since they knew it offended Those of the Army send victuals
into Paris.
him not, the Captains that kept the Guards let daily great bands escape, and
likewise took the boldness to send victuals and refreshments to their friends,
and to their ancient hosts, and particularly to the Ladies. For Paris being the
common Country of the French, there are few people who love it not, and who
have not there some gage of friendship, which forbids them from procuring its
loss and utter ruin.

After the example of the Captains, the Soldiers licensed themselves to convey
to them meat, bread, and barrels of wine over the walls; receiving in Exchange
some rich goods at a vile price, and making themselves brave at the expenses of
the Merchants: that which these were in some manner constrained to tolerate,
because the others had no money wherewith to pay them. This made Paris Which
makes them subsist.
subsist near a month longer then it would have done: but it is almost
impossible but this should always happen in like occasions, as has been seen
not long time since. God be pleased for ever hereafter to preserve France from
so great ills.

After all, the King knew certainly that that great City could not long
subsist; and he desired to gain absolutely their hearts, to the end he might
undermine the very foundations of the League. For this reason he combated their
Obstinacy with an excess of Indulgence. He gave Passe-ports to the Scholars,
not able to refuse them to their Parents who were with him; after, to the
Ladies and to the Ecclesiastics; and in the end, to those who had showed
themselves his most cruel enemies.

In the mean time, to hasten a little the The King takes all the Suburbs in one
night.
Chiefs of the League to come to a Capitulation, it was agreed in his Council
that he should render himself master of the Suburbs. The evening of the 27. of
July, he caused them all to be assaulted at once. They were forced in less then
an hour, and all the gates blocked up; his Soldiers having first fortified
their quarters, and thrown down the houses nearest the ditch.

By this last action he took the Parisians by the throats, and pressed them in
such sort, that they could scarce breath: for which cause their Chiefs
apprehending that neither their defenses, exhortations, or fear of punishments
would be longer capable to retain them, concluded after ten or twelve
deliberations, to enter into conference with the King; not out of a cordial
intention to treat with him, but only to spin out things to a length, that they
might give time to the Duke of Mayenne to make an attempt to succor them.

They received intelligence from that Duke twice every week, and each time he
promised The Duke of Mayenne advances to Meaux, but dares not relieve Paris.
them that he would be with them with a puissant Army in five or six days.
Having fed them with these hopes for five or six weeks, he advanced in the end
to Meaux, where Vitry was Governor, and from thence gave them some greater
hopes of relief: however, he was too weak to hazard it.

The Duke of Parma, who had order from Spain to go join with him, and not to
spare any thing for the relief of Paris, came with great unwillingness. He
feared lest during his absence the Council or Cabinet should appoint a
Successor in his Government; and that he should loose more in the
Low Countries, then he should gain in France: Notwithstanding he received
Commands so express, that he was constrained to obey. He parted therefore The
Duke of Parma comes to join with him with an Army from the Low Countries.
from Valencienne on the sixth of August, and arrived at Meaux on the two and
twentieth. He brought along with him only twelve thousand Foot, and three
thousand Horse; but Artillery and Ammunition, for an Army thrice as great; and
fifteen hundred Wagons of Provisions to refresh Paris.

He was without doubt the greatest Captain He had so well contrived all things,
that he was assured to raise the siege of Paris.
amongst strangers of the Age he lived, for all Exploits which depend on
profound Reason, and judicious Conduct: he had so well laid the Model of his
Design in his Head, so well taken his Measures by the exactest Mapps of the
Country, and so well meditated on all that could arrive him, and all that he
could do, that he held himself assured of success.

Those who were about the King, had always The King never believed he would
quit the Low Countries.
made him believe, that this Duke would not leave the Low Countries; and said,
That if he did either, that he could not raise so great a power as to dare
engage in the heart of France: or that if he raised any great Army, he would
not arrive time enough to deliver Paris. The King suffered himself to be a
little carried away with these false Reasons: but when he understood he marched
in this manner, he began already to fear that which arrived; and the danger
appeared so much more, because he had less foreseen it. In these Apprehensions
he was well content to renew the Negotiation with the Duke of Mayenne, He
renews the Negotiation with the Duke of Mayenne, who feigns to entertain it, to
amuse him.
who on his side feigned to desire an Accommodation more then ever; to the end
he might amuse him, for fear he should assault Paris by plain force; and to
entertain the Parisians with the pregnant hopes of their Delivery: for the
Famine made them despair in such manner, that it was no longer in his power,
with all his inventions, to retain them from surrendry for more then five or
six days at most.

When the Duke of Parma was within two days Journey of Meaux, he caused it to
be signified to the King, That the Duke of Mayenne could no longer treat but
conjoyntly with him. At present the Council of the King was The Kings Council
mech ironbled.
much astonished, and in a great irresolution, not knowing what to do. It was
without doubt a great shame for the King, and a notable diminishing of the
Reputation of his Arms, to raise a Siege which had endured four months; and it
must needs be a most sensible displeasure to this Prince, who was brave and
glorious, to raise it on the Eve of the taking of that great City, the
reduction of which had been a mortal wound to the League.

He had therefore but one course to take, The King would take a place of
battle, and not raise the siege.
but which was without doubt very hazardous; nevertheless the King resolved it:
this was, to leave a part of his Troops in the Suburbs, and choose a place of
Battle, where the rest of the Army might make head against the Duke of Parma,
and not raise the Siege. To this effect, the King, confirmed in it by the
advice of la Noue, Guitry, and Plessis Mornay, left only three thousand men on
the side of the University, and put the rest of his Army in Battalia, in the
Plain of Bondy, which was between Paris and the Duke of Parma.

But the Marshal of Byron, disanulling absolutely Byron advises to raise the
siege, and carries it.
that counsel, wrought so far, that it was resolved to advance as far as
Chelles with intention to give Battle. It was not known whether he was carried
to this advice either out of jealousy, because he had not given the first
counsel, or because it seemed to him too dangerous to remain so near Paris,
from whence there might sally fifteen or sixteen thousand men on the day of
battle to charge them behind. However it were, his Authority was so great among
the Men of War, and it was so dangerous in this Conjuncture to contract that
hot spirit, that they were forced to believe him, and absolutely raise the
Siege to go encamp at Chelles.

The Duke of Parma seeing that, and judging it not convenient to fight,
retrenched himself readily in a Marish so well, that he feared not to be
forced: he boasted likewise that the King should not in that Post know how to
force him to discharge one Pistol; and yet that he would take a City in his
sight, and open a passage on the Rivers to send Provisions into Paris. In sum,
he executed punctually what he The Duke of Parma takes Lagny in the sight of
the King, and relieves Paris.
had said. It was not in the power of the King to oblige him to fight; and he
took Lagny on the Marne, whilst he was not able to relieve it. Thus Paris was
absolutely delivered, receiving on the morrow a very great quantity of Boats,
Abundance of Victuals carried to Paris.
laden with all forts of Provisions. Yet their Joy was not equal to their
Comfort: for their too long Misery had in such manner weakened their Bodies, and
suppressed their Courages, that they were not capable of any sentiments of
rejoicing.

The Troops of the Duke of Nemours having regained heart by this refreshment,
sallied daily with the most courageous of the Burgeffes, and cut off all
Provisions from the Kings Camp, in such manner, that a little Scarcity being
got amongst them, Sicknesses began to multiply; and the Gentlemen who had
flocked thither out of the hopes of a Battle, began to grow impatient; which
the King seeing, assembled his Council to seek some remedy to these
inconveniences. He found, that throughout his whole Army there were very ill
dispositions; and that he had better make a Retreat, then expose himself to
greater Affronts: but being loath to quit the Enterprise of Paris, he tried in
passing to carry it by storm on the University-sides, between the Gates of St.
James and St. Marceau: which having done in vain, he retired to Senlis, and
thence to Creil. In the end, not able to do better, he took Clermont in
Beauvoisis, which incommodated Senlis and Compeigne. Afterward he put a The
Army of the King constrained to separate.
part of his Troops in the Cities about Paris; sent another into the Provinces,
to re-assure them in their Obedience; and kept only with himself a flying Army.

So soon as he was retired, the Dukes of Parma Duke of. Parma besieges Corbeil,
and takes it.
and Mayenne enlarged themselves in the Brie. Parma, instantly solicited by
the Leaguers, besieged Corbeil: he thought to take it in four or five days, but
he lay before it a whole month, through the Duke of Mayenne's fault; who either
out of neglect or jealousy furnished him with Ammunition but by little and
little. So that seeing his Army much diminished, and the rest to licentiate
themselves to all Disorders, after the Example of the He returns to Flanders.
French Soldiers, he returned to Flanders, much discontented with the Conduct
of the French Nation, whom he had found ( as he said) inconstant and volatile;
full of Jealousies and Divisions; insatiable and ungrateful. His vexatious
Melancholy sure made him say so.

Before his departure, he had the displeasure Corbeil regained by storm.
to hear of the loss of Corbeil, which had cost him so much. Givry, Governor
of Brie for the King, re-gained it in one night by storm: and the League,
whatever instances they made to him, could not oblige the Duke of Parma to stay
in France till they had re-taken it. He left them only eight thousand Men of
his, promising to return at the Spring with a greater Army, and counselling
them in the mean time to amuse the King by Treaties of Peace until the next
Campaign: a Counsel which the Duke of Mayenne was not wanting to follow; which
kept many Cities to his party, were ready to abandon him.

The expedition of the Duke of Parma into France, retarded much the Affairs of
the King, but advanced not at all those of the Duke of Mayenne: on the
contrary, it embroiled them, and begat those dispositions which in the end
ruined them. For the Duke of Parma, knowing the defaults of the Duke of
Mayenne, represented to the Council of Spain, That he was very improper for the
advancement of their interests, being both too weak, and having The Duke of
Parma counsels the King of Spain to become chief Master of the League.
too little Authority to keep in Unity so great a Party; too jealous, too slow,
and too idle to give order in all things: that therefore it was necessary that
the King of Spain should take care of the League, and become absolute Master of
it. That to this effect he should gain the Ecclesiastics; and the people of
the great Cities; who having a great desire to see the Estate of the Government
changed, because under the last Kings it had been very oppressive to the
people, would be easily induced either to join the Cities together in form of
Cantons, or make a King, whose power should be so limited, that he could never
weaken them, either by Taxes or by Arms, as the two last Kings had done.

In effect, the King of Spain, finding this way The King of Spain no longer
considers the Duke of Mayenne, but thinks to render himself Master of the great
Cities by factions.
most commodious to his designs, and thinking by it to change France into a
Republic, or make a King who should only subsist by him, considered no longer
the Duke of Mayenne so much as he had done, and assisted him but weakly, and
endeavored to create factions among the great Cities, and particularly that of
the Sixteen at Paris, not sparing any money: so that many believed he expended
such great sums in this way, that had he laid them out in raising Armies, he
had conquered a good part of the Realm. The King endeavors to re-gain the Duke.


Now our Henry considering his designs, labored on his part to frustrate
them. And first, as to the Duke of Mayenne, he flattered him with Kindnesses
and many good Treatments; which he did for two ends; to wit, to essay to gain
him, and likewise to render him more suspected to the Spaniards. To the same
effect he endeavored to augment in him the disgust he already had for that
Nation; and withal, promised him great Advantages if he would accommodate with
him. By these means he daily a little restrained him, cooled his ardour, and
hindered him from carrying things to exreamities. And as for the people, knowing
He endeavors likewise to regain the people.
that it was the ill Government of his Predecessor which had altered their
Affections, and had furnished them with the pretext and occasion of the League
to cause their emportments, he omitted no diligence nor no goodness which might
reduce them sweetly to their Duty.

This good King considered, that to the recovery of a disease, it is necessary
that the causes be taken away; and that to this purpose he was to correct and
sweeten the ill humors which had put the Estate into this extremity. His sight
of it had likewise made him know, that three things principally had rendered his
Predecessor odious and contemptible.

The first, was his softness and saintheartedness; Three means by which Henry
3. lost the affection of his subjects. His negligence and inapplication.
which made him, in stead of employing those fair Talents which God had given
him to rule in his Estate and act in the functions of a King, to neglect to
apply himself, and not take sufficiently to heart the conduct of his Affairs,
but addict himself wholly to his pleasures. As if Royalty, which is the
greatest and most eminent of all things here below, were only a vain
divertisement* or as if God had made Kings only for the love of themselves,
and not for his glory, and the common good of men.

The second, was his ill management, and the wasting his Revenues; which
obliged The wasting his Revenues.
him to seek extraordinary and oppressive ways to exact money. Now he had not
only consumed his Revenues by his own extreme profuseness, and by the immense
Gifts he made to his Favorites; a thing which made the people desparate: but
much more by his negligence, because he would not give himself the trouble to
take knowledge of, or watch over those to whom he trusted their Administration:
who, forgetting that they were only his dispensers, became prodigal in a
thousand foolish expenses; and distributed them to their Creatures, as if they
had been their proper Goods.

The third, was the little belief they had in His ill keeping his word.
his Faith; and his manner of acting with his subjects too subtle, too fine,
and too clouded; in such manner, that he had always this misfortune, they were
in continual distrust of him; insomuch that all his words and actions seemed
falsities, and they thought they did prudently in believing quite contrary to
all he would have them believe.

Now our Henry, having known that these ill ways had conducted his Predecessor
to a Precipice, resolved, as well out of the inclination he had to good, as out
of good Policy, to follow paths quite contrary. Three other ways quite
contrary, by which Henry 4. gained the esteem and affection of his subjects


First, he would show to the League, who disputed the Scepter with him, that he
was worthy to carry it. And for this effect, he acted continually not only in
the Field, and in matters of War, but in his Cabinet by his deliberations of
important Affairs, by his Negotiations, by the order and distribution of his
Revenues, by his dispensation of his Charges and Employments, by his knowledge
of the principal Laws, the order and policy of his Realm; and in fine, in all
his Actions, like one who contents himself not with the name of a King, but
would be one in effect. He would have faithful Ministers, His activity and
greatness of soul.
but would have no Companions. He committed to them the care of his Affairs in
such manner, that he still remained the absolute Master, and they the servants.
He loved them tenderly, as it was just, and used a great familiarity with them;
but yet permitted them not to be wanting either in submission or respect. If he
took their counsel, it was by form of advice; and he obliged them much oftener
by reason to follow his, then he followed theirs. He honored them with his
Graces and with Benefits, but in proportion and measure: he gave them not all
to one alone, or to two or three; but like a common Father, distributed his
recompenses to all those he judged worthy: and he would that they should
receive them from his hands, and not from others; for he knew that to give and
do good is the most glorious Attribute of Sovereignty, which ought not to be
communicated to any person.

In the second place, he took a most particular care to cause his Revenues to
be His care of his Revenues.
well administered: to which, four motives obliged him. The first, because he
was naturally, though not covetous, yet a good husband, and one who hated
profuseness. The second, because he loved his people, and would spare them the
most he could possibly; for he made conscience of drawing money out of their
purses, except upon most necessary occasions; and therefore he never kept near
him any of those blood-suckers of the Court, who draw all to their Coffers, and
who never care from whence it comes, so that they have it. The third, because
the necessity he had often been in, had made him know the value and need of
money; and that it was good to manage it well, because hard to recover it. And
the fourth, because not having been bred up ignorant in affairs, as too often
Princes are, he had been well informed that the greatest part of those ills
which had afflicted France, proceeded from the ill administration of public
moneys. And therefore among all the cares he took to govern well his Estates,
he had none greater nor more continual, then that of ordering well his
Revenues, and to clear this matter. The Superintendants had imbroyled and
perplexed them with an hundred thousand knots, so that they could neither be
loosned nor distinguished; and they had acted in such manner, that this
management, as a Treasurer of that time said, was a kind of Black Art, where
nothing could be seen; so that thus the goods of the Prince and the blood of
the poor people remained ever at their discretion.

He who at present had care of the Revenues, Francis d' O Superintendant of the
Revenues, a great expender.
was a Norman Gentleman, named Francis d' O, who had been Superintendant since
the time of Henry the third. This man, to speak the truth, was horribly
prodigal in all sorts of Expenses: his profuseness rendered him more ingenious
and more subtle to find out new inventions to grasp the substance of the
people, even to their very marrow; and to perplex more and more the order of
the Revenues, to the end it might not be discovered what spoil he made. Now
though The King constrained to suffer him in this charge, but pares his nails.
the King knew him well for such as he was, nevertheless, because he had a
strong Cabal with the Minions and Servants of the Defunct Henry the third, who
acted the parts of zealous Catholics, he was constrained to suffer him in that
charge, expecting while his affairs were in a better Estate. In the mean time,
to give a check to his insatiable Covetousness; he by little and little himself
took knowledge of the management of his moneys; and sweetly introduced some
orders, now by one means, and then by another, so that he knew in time how to
bridle him; and reduced things in such manner, that he could take but little in
comparison of what he had done before.

It will be superfluous to tell with what Nobleness and what freedom our Henry
acted His constant keeping his word, and freedom.
with all the world. We may see through the whole course of his life, that his
very enemies had more confidence in his word alone, then in the writings of all
others. He used much prudence in all his conduct; but he used no deceit,
cunning, or artifice. The Prudent man never walks, but by ways straight and
virtuous; and the cunning man, on the contrary, by paths oblique and wicked.
The Prudent cannot but be generous and good; whilst the other cannot but be
base, deceitful, and unworthy. Now it is certain, that all the life of this
great King was nothing but generosity, goodness, sweetness, and clemency;
having a wonderful inclination to oblige all sorts of persons; at least with
kindnesses, embraces, and sweet words, when he had no other means: he
acknowledged the least services, when he could do it: he showed himself easy
and affable to all the world, familiar His goodness.
to his Soldiers, pitiful to the Countrypeople; so that he would often excuse
himself to them when occasion presented, for the evils they suffered;
protesting, that he was not the cause of them, but desired ardently that peace
which Jesus Christ recommended to Christians; and that it was his enemies which
forced him to make that War, which of himself he detested, as the source and
fountain of all crimes and miseries. There appeared in his countenance a
certain alacrity, in his discourse a vivacity and particular Grace of Spirit,
in all his actions a resolution and promptitude which contented the most
difficult, and animated the most frozen. Though he were yet a Hugonot, he spoke
with respect of the Pope and of the Ecclesiastics, treated the Great ones and
Gentlemen as his Companions, and flattered them with the glory of being the
right hand of his Estate, and the upholders of the Crown on his head. He scarce
knew what vengeance He pardoned injuries, and never knew vengeance.
was; his great heart was without any gall: he pardoned injuries, and likewise
easily forgot them, so as he knew those that had committed them did repent, and
were disposed to do good, or at least to do no more ill. It was with these
Arms, rather then This reconquered his kingdom, rather then his sword.
with his Sword, that he vanquished his cruellest enemies, that he forced the
most obstinate and envenomed hearts to love him, and that of the most
passionate Leaguers, he made his most faithful servants; esteeming it a
procedure agreeing with the grandeur and goodness of a Sovereign, not to lose*
those he might gain; and to withdraw men from their faults, rather then ruin
them in them. See here how he followed ways quite contrary to those his
predecessor had taken.

After the departure of the Duke of Parma* 1591.
the two parties, that of the King, and that of Divisions and Jealousies in the
party of the League, and that of the King.
the League, remained some time in great weakness; and both were equally
tormented with that mischief of Divisions and Jealousies: but with this
difference, that those on the Kings party were extinguished by his good
conduct, and those of the League daily increased.

There was a furious jealousy between the Duke of Nemours and the Duke of
Mayenne, brothers by the mothers side. Nor was it less between the Duke of
Mayenne and the Duke of Lorrain; and greater much between the same and the
Spaniards, who raised a thousand traverses against him, by means of the
Sixteen: for as he could not suffer them for Companions, they could not suffer
him as Master; but desired above all things, that the League had another Chief
then he.

In the party of the King, there was likewise In the party of the King, three
factions of Hugonots, Catholics, and Servants of Henry the third.
three or four factions. The first, of the rigid and obstinate Hugonots, who
would not that the King should speak of permitting himself to be instructed;
threatening to abandon him, if he thought of it; and to this effect, observing
him continually, and as it were counting all his footsteps. The second, that of
the Catholics, who were zealous, or who feigned to be so; these endeavored to
draw him from the Hugonots, and murmured when he either gave them charges or
employments, or entertained them particularly. The third was that of the
Servants and Courtiers of Henry the third, whom the humor of our Henry
displeased, because he gave them not all they would, and permitted himself not
to be led by their fancy. These were for the most part Atheists, and
Libertines; nevertheless communicated with the Catholics, and caused much
inquietude to the King.

Of these two last factions joined together, was a third party formed. Charles
Cardinal of Bourbon, who was called Cardinal of Vendosme, whilst the old
Cardinal of Bourbon lived, was the Chief of it: This Prince, vain and
ambitious, imagining that the Crown would be conferred on him, if his Cousen
Henry the fourth should be excluded, stirred up the Catholics to press his
Conversion, out of the belief he had that the Conscience of that King, and his
affairs not being yet disposed, he could not hearken to it; and would by
consequent, by these heedless shifts, be taken for an obstinate Heretic, and
oblige the Catholics to abandon him, and after turn on his side. This faction
was the most dangerous affair that ever our Henry had to deal with, though he
seemed to despise it, and called those who were of it, les Tiercelets, or the
Thirdlings. It shone not out with an unmasked face, nor did ever openly
separate it self from the other; yet for that it self it was the more to be
feared: but it produced in the end that good, that he was constrained to let
himself be instructed, and wrought to his Conversion.

As for the Hugonots, when they saw that he The Hugonots solicit the
Protestants to send Henry 4. powerful assistance to hinder him from turning
Catholic.
lent an ear to the Catholic Doctors, they advised with themselves, to the end
they might entangle him so that he could not escape them, that they ought
puissantly to solicit Queen Elizabeth and the Protestant Princes of Germany,
to send him great forces; by whose help they believed they might overcome the
League, after which there was no need of his Conversion, and in the mean time
they would continually keep him as it were besieged by those strangers forces.
In effect, Elizabeth, who had zeal for the Protestant religion, interested her
self very strongly in the cause of this King, daily generously assisted him,
and strenuously solicited the German Princes to co^cur with her.

At the same time the Hugonots pressed with all their force, that he would
grant them an Edict for the Free exercise of their Religion: they pursued it so
strongly, that he was forced An Edict granted to the Hugonots.
to accord it them; and they sent it to the Parliament sitting at Tours, but
they could never obtain it to be confirmed by them, but with these words, by
proviso only: showing themselves as much enemies to this false Religion, as
they were to the factions of the League.

During this time, Pope Sixtus 5. died, Death of Pope Sixtus 5.
leaving in the Treasury of the Church Five Millions of gold, which he had
heaped up. He was much disgusted at the League, and stretched forth his arms
as much as he could to our Henry, to recall him into the Church; whilst the
League endeavored to shut the gates against him, that they might exclude him
from his Royalty. To Sixtus succeeded Urban 7. who held the Seat only thirteen
Election of Gregory 14.
days: and to that Urban, Gregory the 14. who being of a violent spirit, and a
Spaniard by inclination, zealously embraced the party of the League, as we
shall see hereafter.

I silently pass over diverse enterprises made Enterprise of the League. on S.
Denis, where the Cavalier d' Aumale is killed.
both by one party and the other. The Parisians made one upon St. Denis. The
Cavalier d' Aumale, one of their Chiefs, whom they called, the Lion Rampant of
the League, was killed in the midst of the City, when he had made himself
almost master of it. The King on his side, made an other attempt upon Paris. It
was called the battle of the Flour, Enterprise of the King on Paris, called
the battle of the Flour.
because he was to surprise the City, under pretext of a Convoy of Flour or
Meal carried thither: but it was discovered, and obliged the Duke of Mayenne,
upon the vehement cries of the Sixteen, to receive four thousand Spaniards into
the Garrison; which retarded for more then a year the reduction of Paris.

It is convenient to understand, that neither the one nor the other party
having any foundation to keep continually their Armies on foot, they only (as
we may say) made War by intervals. When they had been three months together,
they retired, and then re-assembled again; and according as they were stronger
or weaker, made their enterprises.

The King having Rendezvouzed his, besieged Chartres besieged and taken by the
King.
the City of Chartres, where la Bourdaisiere commanded. There was but a small
Garrison within; yet however, the siege was long, difficult and bloody. Its
length gave subject to the third party to continue many dangerous intrigues:
but the taking of that place repressed them for some time. He restored the
Government to Chiverni Chancellor of France, who had had it before the League
seized it.

After this, the Duke of Mayenne, who beheld himself in no very good Estate,
following the Counsel of the Duke of Parma, renewed a Conference for peace;
which ending without doing any thing, the Princes Lorrains, and the Principal
Chiefs of the League, held a general Assembly at Reims. It was resolved that
they being altogether too weak to resist the King, and wanting money, it was
absolutely necessary to unite themselves more firmly with Spain then they had
formerly done: and to this Effect, they dispatched the President Janin sent to
Spain on the part of the League The Spaniards design to profit themselves by
the ruin of France.
President Janin to Philip the second. This President was a man of a strong
brain, and a good Frenchman, who labored for the League, and for the Duke of
Mayenne; but who would save the Estate by saving the Religion: so that he well
endeavored to serve himself of the Spaniard; but he would not serve them, or
procure their advancement. Yet we cannot doubt, but as he had his ends, they
had likewise theirs; and that they designed to make good their expenses laid
out for the League, on the Kingdom of France.

The Spaniard had for Aid and Second in his design, the new Pope Gregory the
14. who yet went on more swiftly, and with more heat then he: for without
having regard either to the Letters which Monsieur de Luxembourg, after Duke of
Piney, writ to him on the part of the Princes and Catholic Lords which were in
the Kings party; or to the submissions, and three humble Remonstrances made him
by the Marquis of Pisany, who was there at Rome, deputed from them; he
strenuously embraced Gregory 14. sends an Army to the League.
the party of the League, entertained correspondence with the Sixteen,
receiving Letters from them, and writing to them; and which is more, he
prodigally wasted that treasure which Sixtus 5. had heaped up, to raise an Army
of twelve thousand men, giving the Command to Count Hercules Sfondrato his
Nephew, whom he made expressly Duke of Montmarcian, to authorize him the more
And a Bull of Excommunication against those Prelates follow the King, and money
to the Sixteen.
by this new title. He accompanied this Army with a Monitory or Bull of
Excommunication against the Prelates which followed the King, and sent it by
Marcelin Landriano his Nuntio, with great quantity of Silver to the Sixteen of
Paris, to be distributed among them, and the Chiefs of the Cabals in the great
Cities.

The Parliament at Tours having had advice of this Monitory, caused it to be
torn by the hand of the Common Scavenger, and decreed an Arrest against the
Nuntio. That at Paris, on the contrary, annulled that Arrest, as being, said
they, by persons without power; and commanded that the holy Father and his
Nuntio should be obeyed.

After all, these Bulls produced no great effect at present; and the Cardinal
of Bourbon tormented himself in vain, to make the assembly of the Clergy which
was held at Chartres, declare against the Arrest at Tours. Nor did the Army of
the Pope do any great exploits, but was almost quite dispersed, ere it came to
render any Service.

The same arrived not to those Troops the O^r Henry well served by the Count of
Turenne.
King had caused to be raised in Germany, by the Viscount of Turenne. They
served the King well in his affairs, and gained him notable advantages. In
recompense, he honored this Lord with the Staff of Marshal of France; to
render him the more capable to Espouse Charlotta de la Mark, Duchess of
Bouillon, and Sovereign Lady of Sedan: who though a Hugonot, had been
puissantly sought to, both by friendship and force, by the Duke of Lorrain, who
desired to marry her to his Eldest Son the Marquis du Pont. The King made this
Match, to oppose a man to the Duke of Lorrain, who helped to sustain the
League. Of which the new Marshal acquitted himself, having among other fair
exploits surprised Stenay the night preceding his Nuptials. And by the Duke
Lesdiguieres.


The King had another great Captain in the Daulphinate, which was Lesdiguieres;
who held that Country, having reduced the City of Grenoble; and who saved
Provence for him, of which the Duke of Savoy thought to seize himself, and
dismember that piece from the Crown. This Duke being Son-inlaw to Philip the
second, King of Spain, the puissance of his Father-in-law had raised his
Ambition and Courage, and made him forget that constant affection which his
Predecessors have almost continually had for France, insomuch that they have
held themselves much honored to be Pensioners to our Kings. But the Conduct
and Valor of Lesdiguieres made him repent all his high, designs, especially by
the battails of Esparon de Palieres, and of Pont-Charra, where that Duke
received as much loss as confusion.

About this time, our Henry conceived a He becomes passionate of the fair
Gabriella.
passion for the Fair Gabriella d' Estrees; who was of a very noble house: and
that passion by degrees grew so strong, that whilst she lived, she held the
Principal place in his heart: so that after having had by her three or four
Children, he had almost resolved to marry her, though he knew not how to do it,
but by hazarding great troubles, and very dangerous difficulties. Having taken
the City of Noyon, he gave the Government to Count d' Estrees, Father of this
fair one; and a little after, gave him likewise the charge of Great Master of
the Artillery, which had formerly been held by John d' Estrees, in the year
1550.

Not long after the Siege of Noyon, he understood the escape of the Duke of
Guise, who The Duke of Guise escapes from prison
after many other attempts, had got at highnoon out of the Castle of Tours,
where he had been in prison since his fathers death. The News at first no less
touched the King, then it surprised him: he feared this great Name of Guise,
which had given him so much trouble; and he doubted lest this young Prince
should re-ingross the love of the people, which his father had possessed to so
high a pitch: he was troubled to have lost such a Gage, which The judicious
reasoning of Hen. 4. on his escape.
might serve him in many things. However, after he had a little meditated, he
diminished his apprehensions, and told those who were about him, That he had
more reason to rejoice then be troubled: for of force it must happen, that
either the Duke of Guise must take his party; and that if he did so, he would
treat him as his Parent and Kinsman: or that he must cast himself into the
League; and then it would be impossible that the Duke of Mayenne and he could
continue any long time without contending and becoming enemies.

This Prognostic was very true. The Duke of Mayenne having seen those
Rejoycings which all the League testified at this News; the Bonefires made in
the great Cities, those Actions of thanks which the Pope caused publicly to be
rendered to God, and the hopes which the Sixteen conceived to see revived in
this Prince the Protection and Qualities of his Father, which they had
idolatrized: the Duke of Mayenne, I say, seeing all this, was struck The Duke
of Mayenne becomes jealous of his nephew
with a very strong Jealousy: and though he sent him moneys, with entreaties
that they might have an Interview; yet notwithstanding he looked not upon him
as a new renforce, but as a new subject of inquietude and trouble to him.

In effect, this young Prince immediately The Sixteen lean to the Duke of
Guise, and would lose Mayenne.
knit himself in firm bond with the Sixteen, and promised to take their
protection. By this means, and by the help of the Spaniards, they emboldened
themselves in such manner, that they resolved to loose the Duke of Mayenne, not
ceasing to cry down his Conduct among the people. I have been assured, that
They write to the King of Spain.
there was some amongst them who writ a Letter to the King of Spain; by which
they cast themselves into his Arms, and entreated him, if he would not reign
over them, to give them a King of his Race, or to choose a Son-inlaw for his
Daughter, whom they would receive with all Obedience and Fidelity. They advised
themselves besides this, to make a new form of Oath for the League, which
excluded the Princes of the Blood; to the end they might oblige all suspected
persons, who would not swear a thing so contrary to their thoughts, to depart
out of the City, and to abandon their Goods to them. By this artifice, They
drive the Cardinal of Gonde. and many others, from Paris.
they drove away many persons; among others, the Cardinal of Gonde, Bishop of
Paris, whom they had begun to hate, because that with some Clerks of the City,
he honestly endeavored to dispose the people in favo^r of the King.

There remained nothing now but to dissolve the Parliament, who watched them
day and night, and stopped their Enterprises. They had pursued the Condemnation
of one named Brigard, because he had Correspondence with the Royalists; and the
Parliament having pardoned him, they were so incensed, that the most
passionate, by conspiracy amongst By a horrible attempt they cause to be hanged
the President of Brisson, and two Counselors.
them, and by their private Authority having caused those of their faction to
take arms, went to seize on the persons of the President de Brisson, and of de
Larcher, and de Tardiff, Counselors, whom they carried prisoners to the
Castelet; and after some formalities, one of them pronounced against them the
sentence of death: in execution of which, they caused them all three to be
hanged at the window of the Chamber, and on the morrow to be carried to the The
public place of execution in Paris.
Greve, to the end they might move the people in their favor: but the greatest
part abhorred so damnable an attempt; and even the most zealous of the party
remained mute, not knowing whether they ought to approve or blame it.

Yet there were some of these Sixteen found Some would likewise kill the Duke
of Mayenne, but want heart to do it.
so determinate as to pass farther: they said, They must finish the Tragedy,
and rid themselves of the Duke of Mayenne, if he came to Paris, he being at
present at Laon: That after that, they might assure to themselves the City,
elect a Chief who should depend of them, re-establish the Council of Forty
which that Duke had abolished, and demand the Union of the great Cities. And
certainly there was some appearance, that having the Bastille, of which Bussy
was Governor, the common people and the Garrison of Spaniards for them, that
they might render themselves Masters of Paris, and afterward treat at their
pleasure, either with the King, or with the Duke of Guise, or with the
Spaniards: but they wanted Resolution. In the mean time, the Duke Upon this,
the Duke comes to Paris, and hangs four; which quite quells the faction of the
Sixteen.
of Mayenne having been in two days doubt whether he should come to Paris,
because he feared they would shut the Gates against him, at length comes with a
warlike attendance; and seeing that the Parliament durst not attempt to make
process against these people, he resolved, whatever might arrive, to chastise
them himself; and thereupon, without form of Process, in his Cabinet, condemns
nine to death. They could catch but four, whom he caused to be hanged in the
Louvre; the other five saved themselves in Flanders. The most remarkable of
these five, was Bussy le Clerk, who had been constrained to yield the Bastille
to the Dukes people. He was seen to lead a miserable life in the City of
Bruxels; yet still to conserve his hatred against the French, even to the last
gasp, which he breathed forth a little before the last Declaration of War
between the two Crowns.

This terrible blow having quite quelled the faction of the Sixteen, the Duke
made four Presidents of Parliament, there being now He makes four Presidents of
Parliament
none at all; for Brisson was remaining alone, the rest being gone to Tours.
But he demonstrated by this, that he did not well understand his own interests:
for in my opinion, it is impossible that the Parliament and the Nobility should
remain any long time separate from the King: nor can the force of a Party
contrary to Royalty consist but only in two things, to wit, the People or the
Soldiery.

So soon as the King had received the aid of 1592.
England, and that of the Protestant Princes The King besieges Rouen, where
Villars was Governor
of Germany, he besieged the City of Rouen. This was one of the most memorable
Sieges of that time. Villars, a Provincial Gentleman who was Governor, did
wonderful Actions. The Duke of Parma came to his assistance, having for that
purpose joined with the Duke of Mayenne: but Villars, who feared that they
would not come in time, and likewise that the Duke of Mayenne would deprive him
of his Government if he entered the stronger into his place, endeavored to
relieve himself; and by a Sally, which we may almost call a Battle, Great and
memorable Sally.
drove the Besiegers a good distance from the Walls. The Dukes seeing that, and
that he was no more pressed, retired; and Parma lodged his Troops about de Rue
in Ponthieu. But two months after, Villars wanting Victuals, and the Courage
of the Burgesses slackning, he was constrained to write to them, that they
should make haste to come and relieve him. The Dukes on so hot an advice, The
City pressed, Parma comes to relieve it.
re-assembled their Troops in one day, repassed the Soame; and marching without
Baggage, came more then thirty Leagues in four days, though there were on their
way four Rivers to pass.

Being arrived within a League of Rouen, The King raises his Siege, and retires
to Pont de l' Arche.
they drew into Battalia, in a Valley on the side of Dernetal. The King, who
was gone to Diepe, finding at his return his Army too much weakened to resist
those within and without, raised the Siege, to his great discontent; and having
at a Leagues distance attended them for twelve months space in Battail-array,
he after retired to Pont de l' Arche. It was held by many, that had they
pursued him, he could difficulty have shunned either the fighting of a Battle,
or the loosing of it: but the Duke of Mayenne, either out of the jealousy he
had of the Duke of Parma, or for other Reasons, was obstinately of opinion,
that it was necessary to take Caudebec, to open the mouth of the Seine, and
bring provisions to Rouen. The The Duke of Parma takes Caudebec, and is
wounded; and the Duke of Mayenne falls sick.
Duke of Parma was forced to yield to yield to his advice. They took Caudebec
in four and twenty hours: but Parma was wounded in the Arm with a Musket Shot;
and some days after, the Duke of Mayenne fell sick; so that both Generals were
both at one time in their Litters.

In the mean time, in five or six days, the The Army of the King increases, and
the pursues the two Dukes.
Army of the King increased by three thousand Horse, and six thousand Infantry,
which flocked to his assistance from the adjacent Provinces; so that he was
stronger then his enemies by near five thousand men. Now Fortune turned, he
went to search them, and shut them up near to Yvetot, and cut off all
provisions from them; so that they were constrained to dislodge by night, and
go encamp near Caudebec. The two Generals being yet in bed, and Byron beats up
one quarter, but will not quite defeat them.
their Troops very much amazed, the Marshal of Byron beat up one Quarter; and
in the end, defeated their Light Horse. The Kings Infantry prepared at the same
time to charge the Walloon-foot; which without doubt, in the fear they were in,
would have demanded quarter: but Byron called them back, for fear, said he,
lest they should engage themselves between two quarters of the Enemies. It was
believed he did thus, that he might not finish the War where he had the
principal Command. And see here a sufficient proof of it at another time. The
Baron of Byron his Son, who was likewise afterward Marshal, having demanded of
him five hundred Horse, and as many Dragoons, to go and invest the Duke of
Mayenne, who was as it were in a trap; the Father seeing He would continue the
War.
in effect that this enterprise was infallible, regarding him with an angry
look, told him swearing, A French Proverb, a^ if he should say, Would thou
have me ruin my own Fortune?
How now, Villain, would thou have us send to plant Cabbages for Byron? From
hence we may know how Wars come to be of such continuance; it being for the
interest of their Chiefs to prolong them, because they find in them their
advantage, in the same manner as Lawyers do theirs in retarding a Process.

Some days after, the Duke of Parma, being recovered, re-called to mind all
those inventions and all those stratagems which he had learnt by a long
experience, and by profound meditation, to retire himself from so ill a
condition. He found in the end no other way then to pass the River, and retreat
in all haste toward Paris. He to this effect caused to be Wonderful retreat of
the Duke of Parma, which the King cannot hinder
built two Forts, directly opposite to each other, on the banks of the Seine,
with Redoubts which commanded on the Water, and greater ones on the outside,
which looked toward the Army of the King. By the favor of these Forts, he
passed in an obscure night both his Baggage, Cavalry, Infantry and Artillery,
over Bridges of Boats, covered with Planks which he had made to descend from
Rouen; whilst the King, who in effect had perceived it too late, could not
hinder him. So soon as he had passed, he took his march by the plains of
Neuf-bourg, and made such haste, that in four days he arrived at Pont de
Charenton, not having been able to sleep (as himself avowed afterward) till he
was come into Brie.

Afterward he led back his Troops to the Low Countries, covered with glory,
for having the second time made a great King raise his Siege when there was
least appearance; and having in his sight, deceiving his Vigilance and
Diligence, passed a great River, or rather an arm of the Sea, without his
being able to assault him.

This action was so gallant, that our Henry The King admires the action.
could not refrain from wondering at it; esteeming it more glorious then the
gain of two battails. Acknowledging that the chief work of a great Captain, was
not so much to fight or overcome, as to do what he enterprises without
hazarding a combat.

We ought not forget how that the first time that the Duke of Parma advanced to
the relief of Rouen, the King went to meet him with a part of his Army as far
as Aumale, as well to hinder him from passing that little River, as to take
notice of him; and how with four or five hundred Carabines only he stopped for a
long time all the enemies Army, by three or four vigorous Charges. The Duke of
Parma believed not that the King was there; not judging that he would hazard
his person in so dangerous a post, and with so few forces: but so soon as he
knew that himself A noble and dangerous action of the King at Aumale, where he
saved his Rereguard.
was present, he caused all his Carabines to give the Charge, sustained by his
lighthorsemen. The King seeing his men so pressed, gave two vigorous Charges,
during which they drew forth the greatest part of the Baggage out of the Bourg:
but all the body of the Dukes Cavalry coming on, the King lost many of his men,
and himself ran great danger of being slain, or taken prisoner; but God
permitted that he was only wounded with a Pistol-shot, on the Reins, which had
been mortal if the Bullet had had more force; but it pierced only his cloths
and his shirt, and somewhat razed the skin. His valor and his good fortune,
both equally contributed to draw him out of this peril, and to bring, after so
sharp a check, both his person, and what remained of his Troops, into safety.

The Duke of Parma admired this action; Grave answer of the Duke of Parma's
concerning the Kings action.
but praised the Courage which our Henry had testified, more then his Prudence:
for when he was demanded what he thought of this Retreat, he answered, That in
effect it was very gallant; but for his part, he would never bring himself into
a place where he should be forced to retire. This was tacitly to say, that a
Prince and a General ought to secure themselves better. And so all the Kings
faithful servants came the same evening to entreat him that he would spare his
person, on which the safety of France depended. And the Queen of England, his
most faithful friend, prayed him that he would preserve himself, and at least
keep within the terms of a great Captain, who ought not to come to
handy-stroaks, but in the last extremity.

After the raising the siege of Rouen, the greatest part of the Kings Army
passed into Champagne, in pursuit of the Duke of Parma, and laid siege before
the City of Espernay, and Byron killed at Espernay.
took it. The Marshal of Byron was killed by a Faulcon-shot, which carried away
his head as he was viewing the place. His eldest Son, who was named the Baron
of Byron, as great a Captain as the Father, and much loved by the King, was a
little after honored with the same Charge of Marshal of France: but he lost
his Head somewhat less gloriously then his Father.

The Duke of Mayenne and the Duke of Parma being parted ill satisfied one with
the other, it was not difficult to renew the Conferences between the first and
the Royalists: Conferences renewed.
however, things were not yet ripe; there were some seeds sown, which some time
after brought forth fruit: for the King consented that he would within six
months permit himself to be instructed by those means which might not wrong
either his Honor or his Conscience. He gave leave likewise to the Catholic
Lords of his party, to depute some toward the Pope, to let him understand the
duties he applied himself to, and to entreat him to add his Authority; and that
in the mean time, Peace should be daily treated of.

The Duke of Mayenne and his party demanded Conditions so advantageous, that
they were ill resented; and, to speak truth, many things in this Conjuncture
did much trouble our Henry: that which most of all perplexed The Duke of
Mayenne calls the Estates to Paris to elect a King.
him, was, that the Duke of Mayenne violently pressed by the instances of the
Pope, and the King of Spain, by the remonstrances of those great Cities which
took his party, and likewise by the necessity of his Affairs, had called the
Estates-General to Paris to proceed to the Nomination of a King.

Now this Nomination had been the indubitable The election of a King would have
been the ruin of Henry 4. and France.
ruin of France, and possibly caused the absolute expulsion of our Henry. For
there was much appearance and likelihood that all the Catholic Potentates of
Christendom would have acknowledged that King whom the States should have
elected; that the Clergy would have done the like; and that the Nobility and
people, who followed not our Henry but because he had the Title of King, would
not have made conscience to have quitted him, for another to whom the Estates
had granted it.

To the end therefore he might hinder this Expedient which the King finds to
hinder this election.
mortal blow, he wisely advised with himself to propose a Conference of the
Lords of his Party, with these pretended Estates. The Duke of* Mayenne was well
content with this Expedient, because he saw well that the King of Spain desired
that he who should be elected, should espouse his Daughter
Isabella-Clara-Eugenia; and thus the Election could not regard him, since he
was married, and had Children: but likewise out of fear lest they should
hearken to an acknowledgement of our Henry, he under hand stirred up some
Doctors to say, That this Conference with a Heretic was unlawful; and by
virtue of this advice, he wrought in such manner, that the Estates agreed they
would not confer with him, neither directly nor indirectly, touching his
Establishment, nor touching the Doctrine of the Faith; but that they would
confer with the Catholics holding his party, for the good of Religion, and the
public Repose.

The Legate knowing well what this would come to, endeavored with all his power
to hinder the effect of this Deliberation of the Estates: but in the end, he
was constrained to lend his hand to it. The Conference was then concluded; and
the Deputies of one part Confeence of Surene.
and the other assembled at the Borough of Surene, near Paris.

The Estates were assembled in the month of 1593.
Estates of the League assemble at Paris.
January, in the year 1593. and sat in the great Hall of the Louvre. There
were few Noblemen, a great number of Prelates, and a sufficient quantity of
Deputies of the third Estate; but the most part Creatures of the Duke of
Mayenne, or paid by the King of Spain. This Prince, desiring at any price
soever to have the Crown for his Daughter, had destined to send a puissant Army
into France, which should hasten the Resolutions of the Estates: but happily
for our Henry, the incomparable Duke of Parma was dead, and the Spaniard had
not in the Low Countries any Mansfield comes with a Spanish Army, takes Noyon,
afterward his Army dissipates.
Captains capable of great things. The Count of Mansfield had order to lead his
Troops; the Duke of Mayenne went to meet him. They re-took Noyon, but that was
all: afterward they melted away, and became so weak, that not daring to pass
any farther, they returned into Flanders, where Prince Maurice of Nassaw found
them sufficient employment.

During the Siege of Noyon, the young Byron, Byron raises the siege of Selles
to relieve Noyon, but dares not a^tempt it:
to whom the King had newly given the charge of Admiral, yielded up by the Duke
of Espernon in change for the Government of Provence, had besieged Selles in
Berry, to take that Thorn out of the foot of the City of Tours. The King,
perceiving that this paltry Town held him too long time, had called him thence
to go and relieve Noyon; which notwithstanding he durst not enterprise. These
little disgraces wonderfully puffed up the which puffs up the Kings enemies.
hearts of the Kings enemies, cooled his friends, and e^boldned the faction.
The third party, who had kept under a covert, now began to move; and likewise a
report ran, that there were some Catholics who had conspired to Conspiracy to
surp^ize his person.
seize the person of the King in Mantes, under color of snatching him out of
the hands of the Hugonots; and would carry him to Mass whether he would or not.
He was so much affrighted at it, or feigned to be so, that he took the Field,
gathered together his surest friends, and caused the English Forces to come and
lodge in the Suburbs of Limay.

At the same time the Duke de Feria, Ambassador The Duke of Feria brings a
Letter to the States General from the King of Spain.
from the King of Spain to the States General, arrived at Paris: he presented
to them a very civil Letter on the part of his Master, and made them a large
Speech, by which he exhorted them to expedite the naming of a King; offering
them all assistance both of men and moneys. In effect, the King of Spain
passionately desired the choosing of one, because, as we have said, he would
give him in marriage his Daughter Isabella, whom he singula^ly loved.

It was therefore now time that our Henry It was time for the King to convert.
should either publish to the world that he would persevere in his Religion
without wavering, in which case he must resolve on a War, of which possibly he
might never see the end; or return into the bosom of the Catholic Church.

The Spaniolized Leaguers feared above all things this change, which would take
from them all pretext: the good Catholics ardently wished it; they only
feared lest his Conversion should be feigned: the rigid Hugonots endeavored to
divert him; threatening him with the Judgments of God if he abandoned, said
they, the Evangelical Truth. But all Politicians, both of the one and the other
Religion, counseled him not to delay it. They told him, that of all Canons,
the Canon of the Mass would prove best to reduce the Cities of his Kingdom*
they besought him that he would serve himself of it; and to their Prayers, they
added Threats to abandon him, and to retire themselves, being wearied with
consuming themselves in his service for the Capricio of some obstinate
Preaching-Ministers, who hindered him from embracing the Religion of his
Predecessors.

Besides these humane Motives, God, who is never wanting to those who seek him
with In fine, God touches him, and he is converted.
submission, cleared his understanding with his holy Lights, and rendered him
capable to receive the saving instructions of the Catholic Prelates. This
resolution taken, he immediately gives advice of it to the Deputies of the
League in the Conference of Surene. It cannot be imagined how great was their
astonishment, nor how the Duke of Mayenne was surprised: for they least of all
expected to hear this News.

The Spaniards and the Legate having advice The Spaniards and Legate press the
Estates to choose a King.
that he was about to convert, pressed the Estates more vehemently to elect a
King: and seeing that the French would not accept of any but one of their own
Nation, they proposed that their King should name a French Prince, who should
reign wholly and individually with the Infanta Isabella.

When the Parliament understood this, and Grand arrest of the Parliament at
Paris for the Salique Law.
that the Estates were not averse to this Proposition; that great Body, though
captive and dismembered, remembering its ancient Vigor, ordained, That
Remonstrances should be made to the Duke of Mayenne, that he should maintain
the Fundamental Laws of the Estate, and that he should hinder the Crown, the
Lieutenancy of which was committed to him, from being transferred to Strangers:
moreover, declaring null all Treaties made or that should be made, which should
be contrary to that Law of the Estate.

It was suspected that this Arrest was made by Collusion with the Duke of
Mayenne: but Advantageous testimony of Villeroy in favor of the Parliament.
Villeroy, the greatest Statesman of the Kingdom, gave this Testimony for the
Parliament, that it took the counsel from himself: Having no* other Motives
then those of Honor and Duty, as persons who would choose rather to loose their
lives then be wanting either of the one or the other, by conniving at the
renversement of the Laws of the Realm, of which by their institution they are
Protectors, and obliged to maintain them by the Oath given them at their
Reception. These words are all very memorable.

The Vigor of this Arrest, made all those The King takes Dreux
good Frenchmen which were in Paris, and in the Estates, take heart; and at
the same time the taking of Dreux, which the Kings Army forced, caused a great
astonishment among the most passionate Leaguers. Nevertheless the Spaniards
ceased not to pursue their design. The Duke of Mayenne, thinking to stop their
course, made excessive Demands before any proceed should be made to the
election of a King: but that they might come to their point, they granted him
all; and in the end, they declared that their King The Spaniards propose to the
Estates to elect the Duke of Guise and their Infanta.
would name to the Estates the Duke of Guise, to whom he would give his
Daughter in marriage, and all forces necessary to assure him the Crown, if they
found it convenient to give him their Suffrages, and elect him.

Never was man more astonished then the Duke of Mayenne, when he saw that he
should The Duke of Mayenne enraged, and his Wife more.
be constrained to obey his Nephew, and that his Authority must end. His Wife
yet more impatient then he, could not refrain from making appear her despite
and jealousy; and rather then suffer that they should confer the Crown on this
young Prince, she counseled her Husband to make peace with the King at any
price whatsoever. He was in effect resolved to do all things rather then raise
his Nephew above himself; and therefore he employed all sorts of means to
hinder him; and to this purpose he concluded a Truce with He makes truce with
the King.
the King, notwithstanding the oppositions of the Legate and Spaniards.

In pursuance of this Truce, the King came to St. Denis; where there met many
Prelates and Doctors, by whose care he caused himself to be instructed. An
Historian reports, that the King causing a Conference to be held before him
between the Doctors of the one and the other Church, and hearing a Minister
grant that one might be saved in the Religion of the Catholics, his Majesty
breaking silence, and speaking to the Minister, How! said he, do you agree that
one may be saved in the Religion of these Gentlemen? The Minister answering
that he doubted it not, so that they lived well; the King very judiciously
replied; Prudence His subtle Argument against the Minister.
will that I should be of their Religion, and not of yours; because being of
theirs, I may be saved both according to their opinion and yours; but being of
yours, I can be saved only according to your opinion, but not according to
theirs: Prudence therefore teaches me to follow the most assured. And thus
after long instructions, in which he would amply be cleared in all his Doubts,
he abjured his Error, made profession He abjures his Error, and becomes a
Catholic.
of the Catholic Faith, and received Absolution in the Abby-Church of St.
Denis, in the month of July, by the Ministry of Renaud de Beaune, Archbishop
of Bourges.

That Evening the whole Champaign between Paris and Pointoise was made shine
with fires of Joy; and great number of Parisians, who had flocked to St. Denis
to see this Ceremony, brought back an entire satisfaction, and filled the whole
City with esteem and affection for the King; insomuch that they called him no
longer Bearnois, but absolutely King.

The Estates of Paris sat no long time after. The Duke of Mayenne dismisses
the Estates
The Duke of Mayenne dismissed the Deputies, who the most part returned ill
satisfied into their Provinces; where they served not a little to dispose them
to reduce themselves under the Obedience of their Legitimate Sovereign.

There rested now no other pretext to the League, except that the King had not
received Absolution from St. Peter's Chair; that therefore he was not yet in
the bounds of the Church, and that they could not acknowledge him until he was
entered at the great Gate. He had sent the Duke of Nevers to Rome, to Negotiate
this affair with the Pope; who was The King sends the Duke of Nevers to Rome,
to have absolution of the Pope.
very much incensed, that the Prelates of France had enterprized to absolve
him, though they had not absolved him, but by provision, ad Cautelam only: for
he said, that he alone had authority to restore a relapsed person, as having
the only Sovereign power to bind and to loose; and for this cause, he The Pope
shows him self very difficult
appeared so difficult, nor could ever be bended, till he saw the party of the
League quite overthrown.

Now since the life and actions of the King 1594.
made it appear that his conversion was not feigned, the League having no other
valuable pretext, was dug up, as we may so say, by the very foundation; so that
before the end of The League falls in less then a year.
the year, it fell to the ground, and there remained to it only a very small
number of places in the utmost parts of the Realm, the other Chiefs not being
willing to run to the end the fortune of the Duke of Mayenne. This Prince was
very irresolute, and knew not what he ought to do, as well because of his
natural slowness, as out of the regret he had to quit the Sovereign authority
which he had in his hands, and out of fear likewise not to find safety with the
King.

In the mean time, Vitry desiring to be the Meaux, Aix, Lions, Orleans and
Bourges, surrender to the King.
first should re-enter under his obedience, as he had been the first had
separated from it, brought back the City of Meaux. The Count of Carces
delivered that of Aix in Provence. Lions surrendered of it self; of which the
Duke of Mayenne was in part cause, by having endeavored to make himself master
of that City, and snatch it from the Duke of Nemours, his brother by the
mothers side, who intended to establish a small Sovereignty in that Country.
That he might compass his design, he had by secret contrivances made the
Burgesses rise against that young Prince; so that they having seized of his
person, had made him a prisoner in the Castle of Pierre-Encise. But he found
that in this he more labored for the King then for himself: for the Burgesses,
who had made prisoners the Duke of Nemours, fearing lest the brothers should
agree among themselves to their prejudice, treated secretly with Colonel
Alfonso d' Ornano, Lieutenant General for the King in the Daulphinate, and
being well fortified, took the White-scarfe, and cried, Vive le Roy. The Castle
likewise returned to its duty, with the Cities of Orleans and Bourges. The
reduction of Paris happened on the two Reduction of Paris.
and twentieth day of March. The Parliament, the Provost of the Merchants, and
the Sheriffs, having disposed this great City, received the King, maugre the
vain endeavors of some remnant of the faction of the Sixteen. The Duke of
Mayenne was gone into Picardy; and Brissac, to whom he had confided the
Government of Paris for some months past, having taken it from the Count of
Belin, broke his faith with him; believing he ought it rather to the King then
him.

The King had a little before caused himself The King anointed at Chartres.
to be anointed at Chartres, with the Cruse of St. Martin of Tours. The City of
Reims was yet in the hands of the League; but he would not longer defer his
Coronation, because he knew that that Ceremony was absolutely necessary, to
confirm to him the affection and respect of his people.

It was almost a miracle, how that there It was almost a wonder how he became
master of Paris.
being four or five thousand Spaniards Engarisoned in Paris, and ten or twelve
thousand factious persons remaining of the Cabal of the Sixteen, who all
cruelly hated the King, he could nevertheless render himself master of it,
without striking stroke, or without shedding blood, except that of five or six
Mutineers, who came into the streets to cry to Arms. His Troops having by
intelligence seized on the gates, ramparts, and public places, he entered
triumphantly into the City by the new gate, by which Henry the third had
unhappily fled six years before, and went directly to Nostredame, to hear Mass,
and cause Te Deum to be sung: afterward he returned to the Lo^vre, where he
found his Officers, and his Dinner ready; as if he had always remained there.

After Dinner he gave the Spanish Garrison a sa^e-Conduct, and a good Convoy, to
conduct them as far as the tree of Guise in all security: for so those had
desired, who brought them into the City. The Garrison departed about three a
Clock, the same day of his entrance, with twenty or thirty of the most
obstinate Leaguers; who chose rather to follow strangers, then obey their
Natural Prince. He would needs see them depart, He sees the Spanish Garrison
depart; and what he says to them.
and regarded them passing from a window by St. Denis gate: they all saluted
him with their hats very low, and with a profound inclination: he returned the
salutes to their Chiefs with great courtesy; adding these words, Recommend me
to your Master; go in a good hour, but return no more.

The same day that he entered into Paris, the Cardinal de Pelleve Archbishop of
Sens, a passionate Leaguer, expired in his Palace of Sens. The Cardinal of
Placentia, Legate from the Pope, had Safe Conduct to retire home; but he died by
the way. Brissac, for recompense had the Staff of Marshal, and a place of
Honorable Counselor to the Parliament: a favor very rare in that time. D' O
was re-placed in his government of Paris, which he had had under Henry the
third: but he enjoyed it not long, dying Parliament at Tours recalled to Paris.
soon after. That part of the Parliament which was at Tours was recalled, and
that which was at Paris re-enabled (for it had been interdicted) and both
reunited to serve conjoyntly the King.

By noon of that day on which our Henry The City rejoice, and are peaceable.
entered Paris, the City was every where peaceable; the Burgesses in a moment
grew familiar with the Soldiers, the Artificers worked in their shops: In a
word, the Calm was so profound, that nothing interrupted it, but the Ringing
of the bells, the Bonfires* and the Dances which were made through all the
streets, even till midnight. It is certain, that that which caused this joy and
wonderful tranquillity, was the great opinion which the people had conceived of
the generous goodness of this Prince, and the Commands he gave for the orderly
government of his Soldiers.

There were two actions which he did the Two worthy actions of the King.
same day he entered Paris, worthy observation, proceeding from an admirable
Justice, Goodness, and Policy.

The first was, that he suffered the Baggage The one of Justice.
of la Noue, one of his principal Chiefs, to be Arrested at his entering into
Paris, by the Sergeants, for the debts of his Father contracted in his service:
and when la Noue went to complain to him of this insolence, he answered
publicly: La Noue, you must pay his debts, for I pay likewise those of mine.
But after that, he took him apart, and gave him some precious stones, to engage
to his creditors, in stead of the Baggage which they had seized. Was there ever
a more wonderful goodness, or more exact Justice?

The second is, that the same evening he The other of Policy.
played at Cards with the Duchess of Montpensier, who was of the house of
Guise, and the most vehement Leaguess of the Party. What could be seen of more
Policy?

After this reduction of Paris, the other Cities and their Governors hastened
likewise Reduction of Rouen, Abbeville, Troyes, Sens, etc.
to conclude their Treaties. Villars made his for Rouen; so gaining to himself
the Government in chief of this City and Bailiwick, and that of the Country of
Caux, with the charge of Admiral, which he was to take out of the hands of
Byron, for that of Marshal of France, twelve hundred thousand Livres of present
money, and sixty thousand Livres of pension. At the same time, or little after,
Montreuil and Abbeville in Picardy, Troyes in Champagne, Sens and Riom in
Auvergne, Again, Marmande, and Villeneuve d' Agenois rendered themselves
obedient; and their Governors had all they could demand of the King. The City
of Poictiers, and the Country thereabouts, treated likewise by means of its
principal Magistrates; and the Marquis of Elbeuf, Governor for the League,
seeing he could not hinder the Revolution, permitted himself to be drawn in
with them, and composed with the King, who left him the Government of that
Province.

In the mean time, the Count Mansfield entered La Capelle taken by Mansfield,
and Laon by the King.
into Picardy, to endeavor to sustain the League, which was in a very low
condition, and took la Capelle. The King in revenge laid siege to Laon, and
took it by capitulation, notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Duke of
Mayenne to relieve it.

Balagny with his City of Cambray, renounced Balagny turns to the Kings party
with his City of Cambray.
likewise the League, and promised service to the King. He had called himself
Sovereign of this City, and had held it from the time that Henry the thirds
brother, (the Duke of Alenzon) had usurped it from the Baron of Inchi, who in
the great Rebellion of the Low Countries, had quitted the obedience of Spain,
to embrace his party. In like Reduction of Amiens, Beauvais, and Peronne.
manner, the Cities of Beauvais and Peronne renounced the League, as did
likewise that of Amiens, shaking off the yoke of the Duke of Aumale: There
resting to that party in all Picardy, only Soissons, la Fere and Ham. And The
Duke of Guise compounds with the King.
which was much more, the Duke of Guise shook off the Duke of Mayenne, and
brought the Cities of Reims, Vitry, and Mezieres under the Kings obedience; who
in recompense of it, gave him the Government of Provence, from which he was
obliged to withdraw the Duke of Espernon, because the People, the Parliament,
and the Nobility, had taken Arms against him.

The Duke of Lorrain likewise, who negotiated And likewise the Duke of Lorrain.
his peace by the intermission of Bassompierre, concluded it the twenty sixth
of November. But neither the example of this Duke, chief of the house of
Lorrain, nor the general revolution of that party, could The Duke of Mayenne
remains alone, and retires into Bourgongne.
oblige the Duke of Mayenne to withdraw himself from that danger, wherein he
was ready to be overwhelmed: he could not abandon that fair title of
Lieutenant General of the Crown, but flattered himself with the hopes that the
assistance of Spain might again give his affairs the upper hand. He was retired
into his Government of Bourgongne, because that remained yet most entire to
him; though to keep to himself Dijon, he was forced to make use of an odious
cruelty, in cutting off the head of the Mayor, and another, who labored to
reduce it to the Kings service.

Now since it was the Spaniards who maintained 1595.
him in his obstinacy, and who made The King declares war against the Spaniards.
War against the King in his name; it was proposed and agreed in the Council,
to assault them with an open War; to the end that being employed at their own
homes, they might lose the desire and leisure of coming to disquiet the King in
his. For they not only assaulted him by force of Arms, and by practices which
encouraged the people in Rebellion; but moreover they would have had his life,
and endeavored to murder him, by base and execrable ways. They contrived or
favored many conspiracies against his Sacred person, Two artempts on his
person.
which were well discovered. Those two which made most noise, was that of one
Peter Barriere, and that of John Castle.

The first was a Soldier aged about twenty Of Peter Barriere,
seven years, who being discovered at Melun, in the year one thousand five
hundred ninety three, as he sought the execution of his detestable blow, was
condemned to have his right hand burned, holding the Knife with which he should
have struck the King; after to have his flesh torn off with burning Pinsers,
and to be broken on the wheel alive.

The second was a young Scholar aged about and of John Castle.
eighteen years, son of a Merchant-Draper of Paris, keeping Shop before the
Palace: this villain about the end of the year fifteen hundred ninety four,
having thrust himself with the Courtiers into the Chamber of the fair
Gabriella, where the King was, would have struck him with a Knife into the
belly; but by good fortune the King then bowing to salute some one, the blow
chanced on his face only, piercing his upper lip, and breaking a Tooth. It was
not known for the present who had struck it: but the Count of Soissons seeing
this young man affrighted, stopped him by the arm. He impudently confessed that
he had given the blow, and maintained that he ought to do it. The Parliament
condemned him to have his right hand burned, his flesh torn off with red-hot
Pinsers, and after to be torn in pieces by four horses: This detestable
Parricide not showing any sign of pain; so much had they imprinted in his
spirit, that he would offer a Sacrifice acceptable to God, by taking out of the
world a Prince relapsed and Excommunicate. The Father of this miserable villain
was banished, his house before the Palace demolished, and a Pyramide erected in
its place.

The Jesuits under whom this Miscreant Jesuits exiled the kingdom.
had studied, were likewise accused for having instructed him with this
pernicious Doctrine; and they having many enemies, the Parliament banished the
whole Society out of the Kingdom by the same Arrest of their Scholar. Yet these
Fathers were not wanting, notwithstanding that the times were contrary to them,
to labor to sustain their honor; but writ many things to justify themselves
against their charge. And truly those who were not their enemies, did not at
all believe the Society culpable: so that some years after the King revoked the
decree of Parliament, and recalled them, as we shall mention hereafter.

The success of the War declared against Spain, was much different from that
which the King maintained against the League; and made it apparent, That it is
another thing to assault a stranger equal in puissance, over whom nothing is to
be gained but by force of Arms, then to have to do with rebellious Subjects,
and in ones proper Country, where intrigues and intelligences make more then
one half of the enterprises. Reduct on of Beaune, Auxerre, and Dijon* etc.


This year the Cities of Beaune, of Auton, and of Aussonne reduced themselves
under the Kings obedience. Those of Mascon and Auxerre were returned the year
before. The City of Dijon followed their example, and fortified it self against
the Castle which Byron went to besiege. But in the mean time the Constable of
Castile descended with a great Army of Millanois into Bourgongne by the French
County, and passed the Saone at Gray with the Duke of Mayenne.

The King who was gone into that Country, The King goes into Bourgongne against
the Spanish Army.
had the assurance to advance as far as Fountain-Franzoise: it was there that
with only fifteen hundred men, he made head against that great Army, and did an
exploit of War scarce imaginable. Villars-Oudan and Sanson, two of the
Principal Chiefs of Battle of Fountain-Franzoise,
the enemies Army, charged furiously on his Troops: Villars charged a body
commanded by the Marshal of Byron, and Sanson another on the side of it: they
made them both give ground and retreat, flying within sight of that of the
King. It was reported that Villars knowing he was there, so puissant is the
name of a King, durst not assault him, but retired on the left hand: but Sanson
where the King shows his valor; but is in danger of his life.
was not so happy; for the King having with him but one hundred horse, but all
chosen Gentlemen of note, and mounted to advantage, with his sword in his hand
mingled amongst them and cut them in pieces. Sanson endeavoring to rally his
people lost his life, by acquitting no small honor.

The King was in so great danger in this fight, that he said himself, That in
other occasions wherein he had been engaged, he had fought for Victory, but
that in this he had fought for his Life.

Having therefore made the Constable by The Spanish Army retire.
this occasion see in what manner he was to act, he so much abashed his
courage, that he durst enterprise nothing; but a little after, retired. The
Duke of Mayenne likewise despairing at The Duke of Mayenne despairing, would
retire into Savoy.
such ill success, and not knowing longer where to hide his head, had resolved
to retire to Sommerive in Savoy; from whence he would send to demand
safe conduct into Spain, to give an account of his Actions to King Philip the
second. But the goodness of the King The King has pity of him, and offers him
an accommodation, and place of retreat.
took care to divert him from this Precipice, and to lay open to him ways of
accommodation. He to this effect sent to seek Lignerac his Confident;
entertained him of the good will he always had for that Duke; testified to him,
that he pitied him; and assured him, that he would be always disposed to
receive him into his favor; permitting him to retire in all safety to Chalons
on the Saone, till they could finish a Treaty of Accord.

The Duke accepts this favor; and having understood that the Pope was disposed
to receive the King into the Church, he demanded a general Truce for the rest
of his party.

The greatest part of the Kings Council, who considered the Delays and
Artifices which he had for six years used, having begun fifty Treaties without
ever concluding any, advised that the King should grant him no intermission,
but pursue him to the utmost. But the prudence and goodness of the King
conformed not with this Sentiment, because he was not ignorant of two Maxims,
which are most true ones: the one, That Kings may always when they please
reduce the most rebellious to their duty; the other, That it is very dangerous
to make great persons despair, especially persons of the quality of the Duke of
Mayenne. And for these Reasons, of his proper motion, contrary He grants him a
truce
to the advice of his Council, he grantted him a Truce. That which followed
after, demonstrated well that this sage Prince had more knowledge then all his
Ministers; and how prejudicial it would have been to his interests to do the
contrary.

In the mean time, of those three Cities La Fere and Ham delivered to the
Spaniards;
which we have said remained to the League in Picardy, to wit, la Fere, Ham and
Soissons, the Governor of the first, named Colas, had delivered it to the
Spaniards; and d'Orvilliers had done the same with Ham. However, this last
remained not theirs: Humieres, one of the bravest Gentlemen of those times,
came; and at the same hour so hotly assaulted it, that after a long and bloody
defense, they were who are cut in pieces at Ham. Humieres killed. Many Leaguers
despairing, cast themselves into the Spaniards arms: Amongst others, Rosny, who
causes the taking of Dourlens.
hewn in pieces: but Humieres was killed* and more then two hundred brave
Gentlemen with him.

This loss did in such manner excite the indignation of the Loyal French
against* the Leaguers, that the greatest part of them despairing, fled into the
Low Countries, and into Spain, where they found at first a favorable
Reception, and good Employments; by which they did very great mischief to
France. Amongst others was a valiant Captain named Rosny; who, imagining that
they would extend their utmost rigor upon such, who not being Governors, had
no places to buy their peace with, resolved to make the War so well, that the
Spaniards should have cause to recompense him, or the King to redeem him.

This was he who inspired the Count of Fuentes with the design to besiege
Cambray after he had forced Cattelet, and who persuaded him to facilitate this
great Enterprise to take Dourlens first, to the end the French might not bring
an Army to relieve it. It was likewise by his counsel that Fuentes went to meet
the Duke of Nevers, the Marshal of Bouillon, and the Admiral Villars, who came
to the relief Battle of Dourlens.
of Dourlens: that he fought them, and defeated them with a great slaughter of
the of the French Nobility, and caused Villars to Villars slain
be slain in cold blood; one of the bravest men of his time. Afterward
returning to Cambray, Cambray taken by the Spaniards.
he took it by Famine, and despoiled Balagny of his pretended Principality.

But News most important and long time expected, comforted the King for these
two great losses of Dourlens and Cambray: which was, that he received advice,
that the The Pope absolves the King.
holy Father, passing by all those difficulties which the Spaniards formed, had
granted his Absolution on the sixteenth of September, by the Negotiation and
pursuits of d'Ossat and du Perron, his Procurers in the Court of Rome; who were
afterward, upon his Recommendation, honored with Cardinal Caps. The Duke of
Mayenne in the end makes his Treaty with King.


After this, the Duke of Mayenne, having no more Excuses, nor more Hopes longer
to subsist, resolved to treat. It was very late; and he could not well expect
other then an utmost rigor, if the Generosity of the King had not been greater
then his obstinacy. It is most true, that the fair Gabriella, very officious to
those who sued for his favor, and being at present in hopes to create her self
friends and supports to come to the marriage of the King, to which she aspired,
did not a little assist to obtain a most favorable Accommodation. Certainly
the terms of the Edict which the King granted him, and the Conditions, are so
Has advantageous Conditions
honorable, that never Subject had greater Advantages from any King of France:
but they had been greater, if that before his party had been so much ruined, he
had treated for those great Cities who yet held him as their Chief, and whom by
this means he might still have kept firm to his interests.

Some time after, he came to Monceaux to He comes to Monceaux to salute the
King.
salute the King; who seeing him coming along an Alley where he was walking,
advanced some paces toward him with all Alacrity and good Countenance
possible; and thrice straightly embracing him, assured him, that he esteemed him
so absolute a man of Honor, that he doubted not of his word; treating him with
as much freedom, as if he had always been his most faithful servant. The Duke
surprised with his goodness, said at his departure, That it was now only that
the King had completely vanquished him. And he ever after as well remained in
the duty of a most faithful Subject, as the King showed himself a good Prince,
and exact Observer of his word.

At the same time that this Duke had concluded his Treaty, and obtained an
Edict from the King which confirmed it; the Duke of Nemours The Duke of Nemours
reconciled likewise.
his Brother by the Mothers side, and who was called Marquess of St. Sorlin
whilst the brave Duke of Nemours his elder Brother was living, by the means of
his Mother, reconciled himself likewise to the King, and brought under his
Obedience some little places which he yet held in Lyonnois and in Forez. His
elder Brother died of a strange disease.


His elder Brother, one of the most noble and generous Courages was ever known,
died the year before of a strange malady, which made him vomit through the
mouth, and through all his pores, even to the last drop of his blood. Were it
that this malady happened to him out of his extreme grief when he was shut up
in the Castle of Pierre-Encise, to hear of the surrendry of Vienne, which was
his surest retreat; or were it caused by a sharp and scalding poison, reported
to be given him by those who feared his resentment; he died without being
married; and his younger Brother, of whom we speak, was Father to those
Messieurs de Nemours, whose deaths we beheld in the years last past.

The Duke of Joyeuse, who after the death 1596.
of his younger Brother slain in the Battle of The Duke of Joyeuse makes his
Treaty with the King.
Villemur near Mountauban, had quitted his habit of Capuchin to make himself
chief of the League in Languedoc, and had maintained the City of Tolouse and
the Neighboring Countries on his party, took likewise this time to make his
Accommodation, and obtained very favorable Conditions, by the means of
Cardinal de Joyeuse his other Brother: among other things, he had the Staff of
Marshal of France. The Lord of Boisdaufin had the same And the Lord of
Boisdaufia.
recompense, though he had no more then two little places in Main and Anjou;
to wit, Sable and Castle-Gontier: the King granting him this good Treatment,
rather in Consideration of his Person then his Places.

There were now no more to reduce, besides Reduction of Marseilles
the Duke of Merceur and Marseilles. This City was governed by Charles de
Casaux Consul* and by Lewis d' Aix the Viguier or Judge. As these two men were
upon the point to deliver it to the Spaniards, a Burgess named Libertat, with a
Band of his friends, caused the Inhabitants to rise against them; and having
killed Casaux, and driven out Lewis d' Aix, put it in full Liberty under the
Obedience of the King.

As for the Duke of Merceur, the King The King grants a truce to the Duke of
Merceur.
granted him a prolongation of the Truce, because he was not in capacity at
present to go so soon to dispossess him of the rest of Brittany, being much
hindered by the Siege of la Fere, where he was in person, and where he had made
little progress in three or four months. Archduke Albert takes Calais.
Moreover, it happened when he least thought of it, that the Archduke Albert,
who commanded the Spanish Army, incited by the counsels of that Rosny of whom
we have spoke, came to fall upon Calais; and that Rosny, who was a great
Captain, having at first took the Forts of Risban and Nieule, the Spaniards
forced the place on the 24 of April, and put Taking of la Fere by the King.
all to the sword. A little after, the King took la Fere, which surrendered for
want of Victuals. The Spaniards having made the Treaty, would have no Hostages
from him; saying, That they knew he was a generous Prince, and of good credit:
a Testimony so much the more glorious for him, because coming from the mouth of
his enemies.

The grief which he had for the loss of Calais, The Archduke takes likewise
Guines and Ardres.
was redoubled by that of the Cities of Guines and Ardres; which were likewise
taken by the industry and valor of Rosny, who had done many such other
exploits, if some months after he had not been killed, happily for France at
the Siege of H^lst near to Gaunt.

Now the noise of these four or five great losses received one upon another,
cast some terror into the hearts of the people; and the Emissaries of Spain
excited as much as they could new seeds of division in their spirits; serving
themselves to that purpose of all sorts of pretexts, but above all, of that of
the oppression of the people. Truly it was great; but it was caused by the
pillages of War, and by the necessity of Affairs, rather then the Kings fault;
who had no greater desire then to procure the ease of his Subjects, as we shall
see.

This cast him into a great affliction and trouble, because he had no Treasure
to continue the War; and he foresaw by the murmurs already excited, that if he
crushed the people more, he should raise against himself a new tempest. In this
trouble, he had recourse to that great Remedy accustomed to be practiced when
France is in danger; which is, the Convocation of the Estates: but because the
pressing The King to have money, calls an assembly of the Chiefs to Rouen.
necessity gave him not time to assemble them in a full body, he called only
the chiefs of the Peers of his Estate, of the Prelates, and of the Nobility,
with the Officers of Justice, and of the Revenues.

He desired that the Assembly should be held The manner of their sitting.
at Rouen, in the great Hall of the Abbey of St. Oven: in the midst of which, he
was seated in a Chair elevated in form of a Throne, with a Cloth and Canopy of
Estate. On his sides, were the Prelates and Lords; behind, the four
Secretaries of Estate; beneath him, the first Presidents of the sovereign
Courts, and the Deputies of the Officers of Justice, and of the Revenues. He
made his Overtures to them by a Speech worthy a true King; who ought to believe
that his Greatness and Authority consists not only in an absolute power, but
in the good of his Estate, and the safety of his people.

If I should account it a glory (said he to them) His Speech
to pass for an excellent Orator, I should have brought hither rather good
words then good will: but my ambition tends to something higher then
well-speaking; I aspire to those glorious Titles of Redeemer and Restorer of
France. Already, by the favors of Heaven, by the counsels of my faithful
Servants, and by the sword of my brave and generous Nobility, (from which I
distinguish not my Princes, the Quality of Gentleman being the fairest Title we
passess) I have delivered it from Slavery and Ruin. I desire at present to
restore it to its former force, and to its ancient splendor. Participate, my
Subjects, in this second glory, as you have participated in the first. I have
not called you hither as my Predecessors have done, to oblige you blindly to
approve my will: I have caused you to be assembled to receive your counsels, to
believe them, to follow them; and, in a word, to put my self in Guardianship
under your hands. This is a desire which seldom possesses Kings grey-hair'd
and victorious like my self: but the love I bear my Subjects, and the extreme
desire I have to conserve my Estate, makes me find all things facile and
honorable.

The Assembly, moved even to the bottom The Assembly grant money for the War.
of their hearts by such tender words, labored with affection to find
wherewith to continue the War: and to this effect they ordained should be
gathered one years payment of all Officers Salaries; and that for two years
only there should be be imposed one Sol per livre on all which entered into
walled Cities, except only for Corn, which is the nourishment of the poor.
This last means caused much trouble in the Provinces beyond the Loire. But
Rosny, whom the King had some months before made Superintendant, no less able
then faithful, as we shall speak otherwhere, joined to this stock a great sum
of money which the Receivers had diverted, and which he made return to the
Kings Coffers.

In the mean time, the King of Spain finding King of Spain desires the peace.
the forces both of his body and mind to diminish by a languor, which after
degenerated into a horrible malady, feared lest his weakness should cause
Revolts in his Countries so distant one from the other. Moreover, he had
expended his Revenues, and passionately desired to give the Low Countries to
his dearest Daughter Isabella: and for these Reasons had made known to the holy
Father, that he desired peace; and his Holiness had sent the General of the
Cordeliers to dispose him more particularly to it.

But now when some progress was made in Surprizal of Amiens by the Spaniards,
retards the peace.
it, there happened an accident, which retarded it for more then a year.
Hernand* Teillo Governor of Dourlens for the Spaniard, being advertized of the
evil order which the Burgesses of Amiens kept in the Guard of their City,
surprised it one morning about nine of the Clock when they were at Sermon, it
being Lent-time, having caused the Gate to be pestred with a Cart laden with
Nuts, of which a sack was purposely spilt, to amuse the Soldiers of the Guard.
So troublesome news astonished the King so much the more, because he was at
present rejoicing and divertizing himself at Paris. He had given order that all
important packets should be brought directly to him, and not to others; and
that they should bring him them at what hours soever: so that being in a
profound sleep after dancing a Ball, a Currier came to waken him, to tell him
this accident.

He immediately leapt out of bed, and sent for three or four of his greatest
confidents, to consult with them. They all judged that it arrived in a very
unhappy conjuncture, because the Duke of Merceur was powerful in Brittany, the
rest of the factions being yet concealed under their ashes, the Hugonots making
Cabals or secret Councels; the consternation of Paris being very great, 1597.
which beheld it self by this means become a Frontier. But this Heroic courage
whom so many perils could not affright, was not startled by this; on the
contrary, he resolved The King resolves to besiege Amiens.
to encounter it at first, and go immediately to invest Amiens, before the
Spaniards were longer settled in it.

His greatest Captains were not of this advice: but notwithstanding that, he,
who had greater knowledge and more constancy then them all, enterprized it
courageously; not so much, said he, out of opinion of humane means, as out of
the confidence he had in God, who had always done him the grace to assist him.
And in truth it may be said, that he assisted him more visibly in this occasion
then he had ever done.

For he discovered many conspiracies against Many conspiracies discovered.
his person, amongst the rest, of one under Religious orders, whom an agent of
the King of Spain, as it was said, would have induced to kill him; and very
dangerous Cabals which the money of the same King upheld at Paris, which
observed all his motions, and had designed one day to seize his person at his
Castle of St. German in Lay.

Moreover, his people answered as they The people contribute willingly, and the
Leaguers serve him well.
ought, to his Paternal affection, not denying him any thing that he demanded
to hasten the fiege; and all the Leaguers desiring to testify to him their
resentments for all his goodnesses, served him so faithfully and vigorously in
this occasion, whilst others wavered, and kept their stations, that he was
obliged to say, that he acknowledged that the greatest part of that people
hated not his person, but only the Hugonot Religion.

The siege was long difficult and doubtful; and if the King of Spain would have
employed all his power, the King could never have succeeded in it: but he was
become very Melancholy; he desired only repose, and cared no more for
Conquests; so that he gave not any of those assistances which the Archduke The
Archduke comes to relieve Amiens.
demanded. The Archduke ceased not however to use the greatest endeavor he
could to raise the siege. He presented himself before the Quarter of Long-Pre
with very great forces, on a day when he was not expected; His arrival and
assaults put the Kings Army in disorder.
which put the French into so great a fear and disorder, that had he known how
to serve himself of the occasion, and had not lost time in consultation, he had
put those three thousand men into the City, which he had destined for it.

The King returning from Hunting, whither he was gone, found a general fear
throughout his Army, and likewise some of his principal Chiefs quite daunted.
In so great a danger, neither his heart nor his head failed him; he dissembled
his fear, gave orders without passion, and showed himself every where with a
cheerful countenance, and with discourses The King re-assures them.
as resolute as after a victory. He made his forces nimbly draw into the field
of battle, which he had chosen three days before, eight hundred paces from
the lines. From this place having considered the excellent order of the Spanish
Army, the little assurance of his, and the weakness of his Posts, where he had
not had leisure to fortify himself, he was a little moved, and doubted of the
success of the day. When leaning on the Pummel of his Saddle, with his hat in
his hand, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he uttered these words with a loud
voice: Oh! Lord, if it be to day thou will punish me as my sins Words worthy a
good and Christian King*
deserve, I offer my head to thy Justice; spare not the Culpable: but Lord, for
thy holy mercies sake, take pity of the poor Kingdom; and smite not the flock
for the offense of the shepherd.

It cannot be expressed of what efficacy these words were: they were in a
moment carried through the whole Army, and it seemed as if some virtue from
heaven had given courage to the French.

The Archduke therefore finding them The Archduke retires to Flanders.
resolved, and in good Countenance, durst not pass farther. Some other attempts
he afterward made, which did not succeed; and he retired by night into the
Country of Artois, where he dismissed his Army. In fine, Hernand Teillo being
slain by a Musket Shot, the besieged capitulated, and the King established
Governor in the City the Seigneur The King retakes Amiens.
de Vic, a man of great order and exact discipline, who by his command began to
build a Citadel there.

At his departure from Amiens, the King The King marches to the gates of Arras,
and dares the Spaniards.
led his Army to the very Gates of Arras to visit the Archduke; he remained
three days in battalia, and saluted the City with some Volleys of Cannon.
Afterward seeing that nothing appeared, he retired toward France ill
satisfied, said he gallantly, with the courtesy of the Spaniards, who would
not advance so much as one pace to receive him, but had with an ill grace
refused the honor he did them.

The Marshal of Byron served him extraordinarily at this siege: and the King,
when he was returned to Paris, and that those of the City gave him a reception
truly Royal, he told them, showing them the Marshal; Gentlemen, see there the
Marshal de Byron, whom I do willingly present both to my friends and to my
enemies.

There rested now no appearance of the League in France, but only the Duke of
Merceur, yet keeping a corner of Brittany. The King had often granted him
Truces, and offered him great Conditions; but he was so intoxicated with an
ambition to make himself The Duke of Merceur daily delays concluding his Treaty.
Duke of that Country, that he found out daily new fancies to delay the
concluding one; imagining that time might afford him some favorable
revolution, and flattering himself with I know not what prophecies, which
assured him that the King should dye in two years.

In fine, the King wearied with so many The King goes into Brittany, resolved
to chastise him.
protractions, turns his head that way, resolving to chastise his obstinacy as
it deserved. He had been lost without remedy, if he had not been advised to
save himself, by offering his only daughter to the eldest son of the Fair
Gabriella Duchess of Beaufort; who is at this day Duke of Vendosme.

His Deputies could at first obtain nothing else, but that he should
immediately depart out of Brittany, and deliver those places which he held;
which done, his Majesty would grant him oblivion for all past, and receive him
into his favor. But the King being of a tender heart, and desiring to advance
his natural son by so rich and noble a He gives his daughter to the Kings
natural son, and by this means makes his agreement.
marriage, granted him a very advantageous Edict, which was verified in the
Parliament, as all those of the Chiefs of the League were. This accommodation
was made at Angiers, the Contract of marriage passed at Chasteau, and the
affiances celebrated with the same Magnificence, as if he had been a Legitimate
son of France. He was four years old, and the Virgin six.

The King made gift to him of the Duchy By reason of this marriage, the King
gives his son the Dukedom of Vendosme.
of Vendosme, by the same right that other Dukes hold them: which the
Parliament verified, not without great repugnancy; and with this condition,
that it should be no president for the other goods of the Kings patrimony,
which by the Laws of the Realm were esteemed reunited to the Crown from the
time of his coming to it.

From Angiers the King would pass into 1598.
He goes to Nantes and Rennes.
Brittany. He stayed some time at Nantes; from thence he went to Rennes, where
the Estates were held: he passed about two months in this City in feasts, joys,
and divertisements; but yet ceasing not seriously to employ himself to hasten
the expedition of many affairs. For it is to be observed, that this great
Prince employed himself all the mornings in serious things, and dedicated the
rest of the day to his divertisements; yet not in such manner, that he would
not readily quit his greatest pleasures, when there was any thing of importance
to be acted; and he still gave express order, not to defer the advertizing him
of such things. He puts good order in the Province.


He took away a great many superfluous Garrisons in this Country, suppressed
many imposts, which the Tyranny of many particular persons had introduced
during the War; disbanded all those pilfering Troops, which laid waste the
plain Country; sent forth the Provosts into the Campaign, against the thieves
which were in great number; restored Justice to its authority, which License
had weakened; and gathered four Millions, of which the Estates of the Country,
of their own free will, levied eight hundred thousand crowns. So he labored
profitably for these two ends, which he ought most to intend, to wit, the ease
of his people, and the increase of his treasures. Two things which are
incompatible when a Prince is not Just and a good manager, or lets his money be
managed by others without taking diligent care of his accounts.

Thus was a calm of Peace restored to France within it self, after ten years
Civil Wars, by a particular grace of God on this Kingdom; by the labor,
diligence, goodness, and valor of the best King that ever Endeavors for a
general peace, and the two Kings wish it.
was. And in the mean time a peace was seriously endeavored between the two
Crowns of France and Spain. The two Kings equally wished it: our Henry, because
he passionately desired to ease his people, and to let them regain their
forces, after so many bloody and violent agitations; and Philip, because he
found himself incline to the end of his days, and that his Son Philip the third
was not able to sustain the burden of a War against so great a King.

The Deputies of one part and the other The Deputies met at Vervin.
had been assembled for three months in the little City of Vervins, with the
Popes Nuntio. Those of France, were Pompone of Believre, and Nicholas Bruslard,
both Counselors of State, and the last likewise President of the Parliament;
who acting agreeably, and without jealousies, determined on the most difficult
Articles in very little time; and according to the order they received from the
King, signed the peace on the second of May. The 12. of the same month it was
published at Vervin.

It would be too long to insert here all the Substance of the Treaty of Vervin.
Articles of the Treaty: I shall say only, that it was agreed, that the
Spaniards should surrender all the places they had taken in Picardy, and Blavet
which they yet held in Brittany: That the Duke of Savoy should be comprehended
in this Treaty; provided he delivered to the King the City of Berry, which he
held in Provence. And for the Marquesate of Saluces, which that Duke had taken
from France, toward the latter end of the Reign of Henry the third, that it
should be remitted to the judgment of the holy Father, who was to decide that
controversy in a year.

The Publication of the Peace was made on the same day through all the Cities
of The peace published.
France, and the Low Countries, with those rejoycings, whose rumor spread to
the utmost bounds of Christendom: but none so truly resented a joy for it, as
our Henry, who was accustomed to say, That it being a thing Barbarous, and
contrary to the laws of Nature and Christianity, to make War for the love of
War, a Christian Prince ought never refuse peace, if it were not absolutely
disadvantagious to him.

The Third PART OF THE LIFE OF Henry the Great.
Briefly containing what he did after the Peace of Vervin, made in the year
1598. unto his death, which happened in the year 1610.

HItherto we have followed the 1598.
Fortune of our Henry through The third part of the Life of Henry the great,
more calm and more peaceable then the others.
ways craggy and intricate, over Rocks and Precipices, during times very
troublesome and full of storms and tempests: at present we are about to trace
it through paths more easy and fair, in the sweetnesses of calm and quiet
peace; where however his Virtue slept not in his repose, but appeared always
active; where his great Soul was employed without ceasing in the true functions
of Royalty; and where, in fine, among his Divertisements, he made his most
necessary and most important employs, his principal pleasures.

In the two first parts of his Life which we He was a Soldier by constraint,
but a Politician by inclinaon.
have seen, he was by constraint a Man of War and of the Field; in this last, a
Man of Counsel and a great Politician: but in both, invincible and
indefatigable.

The true duty of a Sovereign, consists principally in protecting his Subjects:
he must both defend them against Strangers, and repress the Factions and
Attempts of Rebels. It is for this purpose that he has the power of It is
necessary a King should know War; but besides that, there are other functions
of Royalty. What those functions are.
Arms in his hands, and that it is advantageous to him perfectly to understand
the mystery of War. But that comprehends but a part of his Functions; and we
may truly say, that it is neither the most necessary nor the most
satisfactory. For besides that he may manage his Wars by his Lieutenants, who
doubts him to be the most happy Prince, that governs his* Affairs in such a
manner, that he has no need of his Sword, but is powerful enough to distribute
Justice, punish the wicked, and to honor and reward deserving men? to confer
graces and recompenses, to keep good order, and conserve the Laws? to maintain
his Provinces in tranquillity, sustain his Reputation and greatness by his good
Conduct, inform himself often and diligently of all that passes, make himself
to be feared by his Enemies, and esteemed by his Allies; and, like a Sovereign,
himself preside in his Councils, receive Ambassadors, and answer them;
dispatch great Affairs by Treaties and Negotiations; prevent all ill, and
deprive wicked persons and enemies of their power to hurt; encourage Traffic
and the Studies of Sciences and Noble Arts; to make his Kingdom rich,
flourishing and abundant; to fetch wealth from all the corners of the earth;
but above all, to procure the glory and service of God, so that his Kingdom
may be as a Paradise of Delights, and a Harbor of Felicity. These are, in my
opinion, Employs worthy a potent King, a Christian and wise King; who, being
the Shepherd of his people, (as Homer often calls the great King Agamemnon)
ought not only know how to drive away the Wolves, I mean, make War; but
likewise understand how to manage his Flock, preserve them from Diseases,
fatten and multiply them.

The Peace being published with an incredible The Peace sworn by the King and
Archduke Albertus.
joy of the French, Flemins and Spaniards, it was solemnly sworn by the King on
the one and twentieth of June, in the Church of Nostre-Dame, on the Cross and
the holy Evangelists, in the presence of the Duke of Arscot and the Admiral of
Arragon, Ambassasadors from the King of Spain for that purpose: and afterward
Cardinal-Arch-Duke Albert, Governor of the Low Countries for that King, swore
it on the six and twentieth of the same month, in the City of Bruxels, the
Marshal of Byron assisting; whom our Henry Byron made Duke and Peer, goes to
swear the peace in the Netherlands.
had newly honored with the Quality of Duke and Peer, confirmed in Parliament,
as well to give more splendor to that Embassy, as to recompense those great
services that Lord had rendered him in his Wars.

In this Voyage the Spaniards spared neither The Spaniards possess him with
pride and presumption.
Caresses nor Prayers to this new Duke, to inspire him with Pride and Vanity,
and intoxicated him in such manner with a good opinion of himself, that it put
a fancy in his head, that the King ought him more then he would ever know how
to give him; and that if his virtue were not sufficiently honored in France,
he would find other places where it should be set at a higher price. That
which afterward produced very ill effects.

Many among the French, who knew not What the French and what the Spaniards
said of the peace.
truly the pitiful estate wherein the King of Spain and his Affairs were,
could not comprehend why this Prince should buy the peace at so dear a rate as
the surrendry of six or seven strong places; and amongst others, Calais and
Blavet, which might be called the Keys of France. On the contrary, the
Spaniards, who beheld their King as it were dying, his Treasury wasted, the
Low Countries shattered in pieces, Portugal and his Lands in Italy on the point
to revolt, the Son which he left a good Prince in truth, but who loved repose,
were astonished that the French, having so bravely re-taken Amiens, and
reunited all their Forces after the Treaty of the Duke of Merceur, had not
pressed farther into the Low Countries, seeing that in all appearance they
might either have carried them, or at least sorely shaken them. The King
answered, Why the King desired peace. Excellent words.
That if he had desired peace, it was not because he was weary of the
incommodities of War, but to give leave to afflicted Christendom to breath.
That he knew well that from the Conjuncture wherein things were, he might have
drawn great advantages; but that God often overturns Princes in their greatest
Prosperities; and that a wife man ought never, out of the opinion of some
favorable event, be averse to a good accord, nor trust himself too much on the
appearance of his present happiness, which may change by a thousand unexpected
Accidents: it having often happened, that a man thrown down and wounded, has
killed him who would make him demand his life.

It was known in a little time, that King Philip Strange sickness and death of
Philip 2. of Spain.
the second had more need of the peace then France; for his sickness was more
then redoubled: he had for twenty six days continually a perpetual flux of
blood through all the conduits of his body: and a little before his death, he
had four Aposthumes broke in his Groin; from whence there tumbled a continual
multitude of Vermin, which all the diligence of his Officers could not drain.

In this strange sickness, his constancy was wonderful; nor did he ever abandon
the reins of his Estate, until the last gasp of his Life: for he took care
before his death to treat of the Before his death, he takes care to marry his
son and daughter.
marriage of his Son with Margaret Daughter to the Archduke of Grats; and that
of his dear Daughter Isabella, with the Cardinal-Arch-Duke Albert, of the same
blood with her; and gave him for Dowry the Low Countries, and County of
Bourgongne, on Condition of its Reversion if she died without issue.

He had already signed the Articles of the His sickness hinders his swearing to
the peace.
peace: but this mortal sickness permitted him not to give Oath to it with the
same solemnities as the King and Archduke had done. Philip the third his Son
and Successor acquitted His son Philip the 2. does it after his death.
himself of this Obligation on the one and twentieth of May, in the year 1601.
in the City of Vallidolid, and presence of the Count of Rochepot Ambassodour of
France.

The license of the War having for many years permitted mischiefs with
impunity, there were yet found a great number of Vagabonds, who believed it
still permitted them to take the Goods of others at pleasure: and others there
were, who thought they had right to do themselves justice by their arms, not
acknowledging any Laws but force. This obliged our wise King to begin the
Reformation of the Estate by the Re-establishment of public Security. To this
effect, he forbad all carrying The King forbids the carrying of arms.
of Firearms to all persons of what quality soever, upon pain of the
Confiscation of their Arms and Horses, and a Fine of two hundred Crowns for the
first fault, and of Life without remission for the second: permitting all the
world to arrest any who carried them, except his light-horsemen, his Gens d'
Arms, and the Guards of his body, which might bear them only when they were in
service.

To the same purpose, and to ease the Country He dismisses his Troops.
of the multitudes of his Soldiers, he dismissed not only the greatest part
of his new Troops, but likewise reduced the one half of his old. He reduced the
Companies of the Ordinance to a very little number, and took off the Guards of
the Governors of the Provinces, and Lieutenants of the King; not willing to
suffer any whatsoever besides himself to have that glorious mark of Sovereignty
about their persons.

The Wars had spoiled all Commerce, reduced Cities into Villages, Villages to
small Cots, and Lands to Deserts: nevertheless the Receivers constrained the
poor Husbandmen to pay Taxes for those Fruits they had never gathered. The
Cries of these miserable people who had nothing but their Tongues to lament
with, touched in such manner the very Entrails of so just and so good a King,
that he made an Edict, by which he released them of He remits the arrears of
Taxes.
all they owed him for the time past, and gave them hopes to ease them more for
the future.

Moreover, having understood that during the Troubles there were made a great
quantity of false Nobles, who were exempted from the Tax, he commanded that
they should be He commands the false Nobles to be sought out, and taxes
reimposed on them.
sought forth: nor did he confirm their Usurpation for a piece of money, as has
been sometimes done, to the great prejudice of other taxed people; but he would
that the Tax should be re-imposed upon them, to the end that by this means they
might assist the poor people to bear a good part of the burden, as being the
richer.

He desired with much affection to do good to his true Nobility, and repay them
those Expenses they had been at in his service; but his Coffers were empty: and
moreover, all the Gold in Peru had not been sufficient to satisfy the Appetite
and Luxury of so many people. For King Henry the third had by his example, and
that of his Minions, raised expenses so high, that Lords lived like Princes,
and Gentlemen like Lords: for which purposes they were forced to alienate the
Possessions of their Ancestors, and change those old Castles, the illustrious
marks of their Nobility, into Silver-lace, Gilt-coaches, train and horses.
Afterward, when they were indebted beyond their credit, they fell either upon
the Kings Coffers, demanding Pensions; or on the backs He retrenches theluxury
of the Nobility, and sends them all to their houses in the Country.
of the people, oppressing them with a thousand Thieveries. The King, willing
to remedy this disorder, declared very resolvedly to his Nobility, That he
would they should accustom themselves to live every man on his Estate; and to
this effect he should be well content that to enjoy themselves of the peace,
they should go see their Country houses, and give order for the improvement of
their Lands. Thus he eased them of the great expenses of the Court; and made
them understand, that the best treasure they could have, was that of good
management. Moreover, knowing that the French Nobility would He shows them by
his example the modesty of his habits.
strive to imitate the King in all things, he showed them by his own example,
how to abridge their superfluity in Clothing. For he ordinarily wore gray
Cloth, with a Doublet of Satin or Taffata, without slashing, Lace, or
Embroydery. He praised those who were clad in this sort, and chid the others,
who carried, said he, their Mills, and their Woods and Forests on their backs.

About the end of the year, he was seized He falls dangerously sick.
with a sudden and violent sickness at Monceaux; of which it was thought he
would die. All France was affrighted; and the rumors which ran of it, seemed
to re-kindle some factions: but in ten or twelve days, he was on foot again; as
if God had only sent him this sickness to discover to him what ill wills there
were yet in the Kingdom, and to give him the satisfaction to feel by the
sorrows of his people, the pleasures of being loved.

In the strength of his Disease, he spoke to Words of a good King.
his friends these excellent words: I do not at all fear death; I have
affronted it in the greatest dangers: but I avow that I should unwillingly
leave this Life, till I have put this Kingdom into that splendor I have
proposed to my self; and till I have testified to my people, by governing them
well, and easing them of their many Taxes, that I love them as if they were my
Children.

After his recovery, continuing in his praiseworthy He gives the Estates an
account of his expenses.
designs of putting his Affairs in order, he came to St. Germain in Laya, to
resolve the Estates of the expense as well of his House, as for the Guard of
Frontiers and Garrisons, entertainment of Forces, Artillery, Sea-Affairs, and
many other Charges. He had then in his Council (as we may say we have at
present) very great men, and most experienced in all sorts of Matters; but he
still showed himself more able and more understanding then they. He examined
and discussed all the particulars of his expense with a judgment and with a
clearness of spirit truly admirable; retrenched and cut off all that was
possible, allowing only what was necessary. Amongst Cuts off the superfluous
expenses of his Tables.
other things, he abridged the superfluous expenses of the Tables in his house;
not so much that he might spare himself, as to oblige his subjects to moderate
their liquorish prodigality, and hinder them from ruining their whole houses by
keeping too great Kitchins. In sum, by the example of the King, which has
always more force then Laws, or then Correction, Luxury was soon converted into
a Frugality very necessary for the State.

He had chosen for his Council very able and Who were his Counselors and
Ministers.
faithful Ministers; as, Chiverny, Bellievre, Sillery, Sancy, Janin, Villeroy
and Rosny. I speak not here at all of his gallant Men for War, as the Marshal
of Byron, Lesdiguieres Governor of the Daulphinate, the Duke of Mayenne, the
Constable of Montmorency, the Marshal de la Chastre, the Marshal d' Aumont,
Guitry, la Noue, and many others; of whom he served not himself in the
Administration of State Affairs, though he often entertained himself with them;
and for their honor sometimes communicated to them things of consequence,
demanding their advice.

The Chancellor of Chiverny, who had been Chiverny.
raised to this charge under the reign of Henry the third, was a man cold,
dissembled, and considerate: but, as his Enemies said, he was a much better
Pleader then Counselor of State.

He died the year following; and in his place the King constituted Pompone de
Bellievre, a Bellievre.
man perfectly accomplished in the knowledge of the Rights and Interests of
France, and a most expert Negotiator, as he well showed in the Treaty of
Vervin. He was old when the King gave him this Charge; and therefore said
himself, That he only entered into it, to go out of it. He counseled the King
to make a severe Act against Duels: He established a very good Order in the
Council; and ordained, That none should be received Master of the Requests, but
who had been ten whole years in one of the Sovereign Companies, or sixteen in
other of the Subalternate Seats.

Nicholas Bruslard de Sillery, President of the Sillery.
Cap to the Parliament of Paris, who was his Son-in-law, and who had been his
Companion at Vervin, was of a spirit sweet, facile and circumspect. It has
been said, that the Public never beheld any passion either in his Countenance
or Discourse.

Harlay-Sancy was a man free, bold and Sancy.
dauntless, who feared no person when he acted for the service of the King: but
he was a little rugged, and spoke to him too freely; witness what he said
concerning Madam Gabriella, who knew how to return it to him.

As for Janin President of the Parliament of Bourgongne, and Villeroy chief
Secretary of State, they had both taken part with the League; and yet very
profitably served both the King and France, having in what they acted
endeavored only for the defense of the Catholic Religion, and not been moved
out of a spirit of faction. They had hindered the Spaniards from planting
themselves in this Realm, and the Duke of Mayenne from absolutely casting
himself upon them, as his despair had often persuaded him to do. They agreed
both in this point, that they loved the Estate and Royalty with passion, and
that they had great judgment: but for the rest of their humors, they were
very much different.

Janin was an old Gaul, who would manage Janin.
his Affairs by the ancient forms, according to the Laws and Ordinances; a good
Lawyer, firm and resolute, who went directly toward his end, and who knew no
subtle turnings and windings, but entirely loved the public good.

Villeroy was one of the wisest and most exact Villeroy.
Courtiers that was ever seen: he had a spirit clear and neat, which would
unravel with an incredible facility the most embroyled Affairs; explain them so
agreeably and intelligibly as nothing more, and who turned them as himself
pleased. He was wonderfully active withal, and most excellent at finding
Expedients; taking his business by so sure hold, that it was difficult to
escape him.

The King often conferred with these Counselors: The King confers often with
his Counselors, and how.
for they were now so called, and not Ministers, as they had been for above
thirty years before. He spoke to them of his Affairs, sometimes to be
instructed, and sometimes to instruct them; which he did either in the
Council Chamger, or walking in the Gardens of the Tuilleries, Monceaux, St.
Germain, and Fontainbleau. He discoursed often with them apart, calling them
one after another; and he did so, either to oblige them to speak to him with
more liberty, or not to tell them all together what he would only tell to some
particularly; or for some other reason which he without doubt deduced from good
policy. He said, That he found none amongst them who satisfied him like
Villeroy; and that he could dispatch more business with him in an hour, then
with the others in a whole day.

As for Maximilian de Bethune Baron of Rosny, after Duke of Sully.
Rosny, and after Duke of Sully, he had been bred up with the King in the
Hugonot Religion, and the King had known his capacity and affection in diverse
affairs of consequence; but above all, that his genius carried him to the good
management of Revenues, and that he had all qualities requisite for that
purpose. In effect, he was a man of good order, exact, a good husband, a keeper
of his word; not prodigal nor proud, nor carried away by vain follies or
expenses, or play, or women, or any other things not convenient for a man
entrusted with such an Employment. Moreover, he was vigilant, laborious,
expeditious, and one who dedicated almost his whole time to his affairs, and
little to his pleasure: and withal, he had the gift of piercing into the very
bottom of matters, and unravelling those twistings and knots with which
Treasurers, when they are not trusty and faithful, endeavor to conceal their
deceits.

We have already said how the King desired After the death of Francis d' O, he
commits his Revenues to five or six, who acquit themselves ill.
above all things to provide for a good Government in his Revenues; and the
reasons for which he had been obliged to leave Francis d' O, in the charge of
Superintendant. After this man was dead, he gave that charge to five or six
persons, whom he believed both capable and honest men: he was persuaded that he
should be better served by them, then by one alone, imagining that they would
serve as checks and controulers to one another. But the quite contrary
happened: every one discharged himself on his Companion, nothing was advanced;
and if any would act, the others were not wanting to cross him by their
jealousies: so that they only agreed in this point, that every one looked that
his Salary was well paid him; which cost the King six times more, then if he
had had only one Superintendent, whilst he drew no profit from this multitude.

Knowing then that so many people did Seeing that, he makes Sancy alone
Superintendent:
only imbroil his Revenues, he returned them again into the hands of one, and
this was Sancy. But a short time after, finding him more proper for other
Employments then that, he gave him Rosny for a Companion, And very little time
after, Rosny,
and after made Rosny alone Superintendent.

Rosny before he entered into this Charge, who knows perfectly the Revenues.
was provided with all necessary knowledges to acquit himself well of it; he
knew perfectly all the Revenues of the Kingdom, and all the expenses which were
necessary. He communicated Which the King knows also so well, that he could not
be cheated.
all he knew to the King, who on his part had likewise studied all these
things, so that an hundred Crowns could not be laid out, but he would know
whether it were well or ill employed. As it is the advantage of an unfaithful
Steward that his Master be ignorant, and make no inspection into his affairs:
so it is of a true and faithful Servant, that he be well instructed, and that
he clearly see them, to the end he may know how worthily to esteem his Services.

For the rest of his humor, it agreed perfectly He desires Rosny to take no
Presents without advertising him.
well with that of the Kings. When he trusted him with his Revenues, he desired
him that he would never take a bottle of wine, or any the least present without
advertising him. And when Rosny did advertise him of it, he consented presently
to it: and likewise was so willing that in serving him well he might find his
benefit, that oftentimes he added gifts of his own, to give him courage to
serve him still better and better. But Rosny never received them till they were
duly ratified in the Chamber of Accounts: to the end all the world might know
the liberality of his Prince toward him, and that he might not be reproached
that he made use of his favor to load his own Coffers.

Under the Administration of this Superintendent, He begins to establish a
constant order in the Revenues.
the first Law which the King made concerning affairs of this nature, was the
immutable constancy of their ordering; which was never to alter, after it was
once agreed and concluded on. For as the most desperate things are by good
order redressed under a firm and constant Conduct: so the best established and
most assured become dispersed under a light head, which does, undoes, and
redoes without ceasing; and Effects of this good management of Rosny.
which on the morrow revokes, what it to day commanded.

Rosny soon gave indubitable proofs of his capacity: for having visited only
four A general place for receipt of Revenues, whereof* there be 20. in France,
viz. Paris, Rouen, Caen, Nantes, Tours, Bourges, Poictiers, Again, Toulouse,
Montpellier, Aix, Grenoble, Lions, Dijon, Chaalons, Amiens, Orleans, Limoges,
Soissons and Moulin.
Generalities, he in little time got in a Million and half of money, which was
in Arrear. And after the Surprizal of Amiens by the Spaniards, he readily found
moneys to raise a great Army, and furnish the expen^e of the siege: so that he
was one of the Principal instruments in the Recovery of that great City.

It is convenient, since it may prove necessary Expedients to hinder those of
the Council to share with the Farmers
in all times, to take notice of an Expedient which amongst others he found to
hinder the cousenages of the Tax-gatherers. He knew that there were some
persons in the Kings Council, who held part with the Renters and Farmers, and
who caused them to be adjudged to the Council at a low price, and often made be
given great Diminutions. To hinder therefore these people from eating the Cake
amongst them, he stopped the hands of the general Farmers, forbidding the
under-Farmers longer to pay them any thing, but themselves to bring the money of
their under-Farms into the Exchequer. He doubled by this means the Revenues of
the King: for the under-Farms and under-Rents were found to surmount almost two
thirds the The Collectors exclaim against Rosny, but he derides them.
General Rents and Farms.

Those of the Council and the Collectors at first exclaimed highly against his
Conduct; they laid snares every where for him, and begat him a thousand
troubles; but with time he brought them to reason. Likewise all those who had
no right to demand any thing of him, and who ceased not to importune him, when
they could get nothing from him, stormed against his hardness: but he cared not
for their fury; he regarded only legally to pay the debts of the King, and
readily to pay what was ordained for good ends: for he knew not how to let that
be an hundred times demanded, which was truly due.

We have stayed somewhat the longer on this point of the Revenues, because it
is the most important of all; that by which all things are done, and without
which nothing can be done; on which depends either the ease or the oppression
of the people, and the good or ill success of all designs or enterprises. 1599.


Our Henry much desired at the same time The King cannot yet provide for the
Reformation of the Clergy.
to take care for the Reformation of the Clergy, which in truth was in great
disorder, as well in temporals, its goods having been usurped during the Wars
by the Hugonots and wicked Catholics; as in spirituals, the greatest part of
both Prelates and Pastors being as ignorant as depraved: but he could not yet
apply convenient remedies. The necessity to which he was driven to recompense
those who had well served him, constraining him to tolerate abuses, and
likewise to commit His abuse of Benefices.
them, disposing Benefices as formerly Charles Martell had done. For he gave
them to people incapable, to Married men, to men of the Sword, to Children, and
likewise to Women, to recompense the loss of their husbands killed or ruined in
his Service.

I have not attempted to excuse this fault; for there can never be any lawful
reason given for the prostitution of the goods of the Sanctuary to profane
uses, or employing the treasures of the Cross in other Services then that of
the Altar. I know well that many Ecclesiastics themselves act otherwise; but
who doubts these people to be worse then those Jews, who played at Dice upon
the holy Robe of Jesus Christ?

About the end of this year, the general Remonstrance of the general Assembly
of the Clergy to the King.
Assembly of the Clergy was held at Paris, who drew up a Remonstrance to the
King; by which the Prelates prayed him to cause the Council of Trent to be
published in France: Not to charge his conscience with the nomination of
Bishops, Abbots, and other Benefices having the charge of souls; not to give
any persons of the Layty Pensions over Benefices; not to permit Churches and
holy places to be profaned as they then were; but to take some order for their
reparation, and the re-establishment of Divine Service.

For what concerned the Council of Trent, it is to be understood that it was
received in France, as to those Articles concerned the Faith; but not generally
for those which concerned Policy and Discipline, because it seemed to many,
that these last were for the most part contrary to the liberty of the Gallick
Church, and the rights of the King. For which reasons, whatever endeavors the
zealous have used, they could never compass its reception, the Parliaments
having always strongly opposed it. The Kings answer.


To the Harangue of the Clergy, the King eloquently answered, but in few words:
That he acknowledged what they had said concerning the nomination of Benefices
was true; but that he was not the author of that abuse. That being come to the
Crown during the flames of a Civil War, he had ran where ever he had beheld the
greatest fire to extinguish it. That now he had peace, he would endeavor again
to raise up those two Pillars of France, to wit, Piety and Justice. That God
willing he would restore the Church to as good an Estate as it was in the time
of Lewis xii. But, said he, contribute I pray you on your side; let your good
Examples as much incite the people to do good, as they have been heretofore
diverted: you have exhorted me to my duty, and I exhort you to yours; let us
act in this with envy one to another. My Predecessors have given you fair
words, but I with my Gray Jacket will give you He had need of great Prudence to
conduct himself with the Pope and with the Hugonots.
good effects. I am all Gray without, but you shall find me Gold within. I will
see your desires, and answer them the most favorably I can possible.

All his Prudence and all his Address were not too much to teach him to govern
himself so that both the Catholics and Pope might be content with his Conduct,
and the Hugonots have no cause to be alarmed, or cantonize themselves. His Duty
and his Conscience carried him to the assistance of the first; but Reason of
State, and the great Obligations he had to the last, permitted him not to make
them despair. To keep therefore a necessary temperature, he granted them an
Edict more ample then the precedent. It was called, The Edict of Nantes,
because it was concluded the Edict of Nantes granted to the Hugonots.
year before in that City whilst he was there: by this he granted them all
liberty for the exercise of their Religion; and likewise license to be admitted
to Charges, to Hospitals, to Colleges, and to have Schools in certain places,
and preaching every where; and many other things, of which they are since
deprived, by reason of their Rebellions and diverse Enterprises.

The Parliament strongly opposed it for The Parliament with great difficulty
confirm it.
more then a year: but in the end, when they were made understand that not to
accord that security to the Hugonots, who were both powerful and quarrelsome,
were to rekindle new War in the Kingdom, they confirmed it.

On the other side, to sweeten the Pope, The King shows all respect ^o the Pope.
who might be troubled at this Edict, the King showed him all possible manner
of respect, and strenuously embraced his interests, as appeared in the action
of Ferrara, in the years 1597. and 1598.

This Duchy is a Fief Male of the holy Seat, Cause of the Duchy of Ferrara.
of which the Popes had formerly invested the Lords of the house of Est, in
charge of its reversion in default of legitimate Males. Alphonso d' Est, second
of that name, and last Duke, died in the year 1597. without Children, and had
left great Treasures to Caesar Caesar bastard of Ferrara, would maintain it.
d' Est, Bastard to Alphonso the first his Kinsman. He had done what possibly
he could to obtain the Investiture of the Duchy on this Bastard; who not able
to obtain it, yet ceased not to take possession of it after the death of
Alphonso the second; resolving to maintain it by force of Arms. Clement the
eighth was obliged to The Pope makes war against him.
make War against him, to dispossess him: the Princes of Italy took part in the
Quarrel; and the Dukes of Guise and Nemours were upon the point to undertake
the defense of Caesar, whose near Kinsmen they were, being the issues of Anne
d' Est, Daughter of Hercules the second, Duke of Ferrara, and of Madam Renee de
France: for that Anne in her first marriage had espoused Francis Duke of Guise;
and in her second, James Duke of Nemours. The King of Spain likewise favored
him underhand, not desiring that the Pope should grow greater in Italy by the
reunion of that Duchy. But Henry the great was not wanting to The King offers
his sword to the Pope. Caesar quits Ferrara, and remains Duke of Modena.
take this occasion to offer his Sword and his Forces to the holy Father. The
Allies knowing it, were extremely disheartened, and he constrained to treat with
the Pope, to whom he surrendered all the Duchy of Ferrara. There remained to
him only the Cities of Modena and Regia, which the Emperor maintained to be
Fief of the Empire, and of which he gave him the Investiture. From whence came
the present Dukes of Modena.

If the heat which the King testified in this occasion for the interests of the
holy Seat, sensibly obliged the Pope; that care which he made daily appear to
bring back the Hugonots into the bosom of the Church, was no less agreeable to
him. He acted to this purpose in Many Hugonots converts.
such a manner, that from day to day many of the most understanding and of the
best quality were converted. But that which was more important, was, his taking
the young Prince The King takes the young Prince of Conde from the Hugonots,
and causes him to be instructed in the Catholic Religion.
of Conde from the hands of the Hugonots, who had kept him diligently at St.
John d' Angely ever since the death of his Father, which happened in the year
1587. and brought him up in the false Religion, with great hope to make him one
day their Chief and Protector. The King, considering how it would be both
prejudicial to the safety of the young Prince, and to his own interests, to
leave him longer there, knew so well how to gain the principal of the party,
that they suffered him to be brought to Court; and he gave him for Governor
John, Marquess of Pisani, a Lord of a rare merit, and of a wisdom without
reproach, who forgot not to instruct him well in the Catholic Religion, and in
the truest sentiments of Honor and Virtue. He was yet but seven or eight years
old: when he came to nine, the King gave him the Government of Guyenne; loving
him tenderly, and cherishing him as his presumptive Successor.

During this calm of the peace, nothing was spoken of but rejoycings, feasts
and marriages. Marriage of the Infanta of Spain, and Ratherine sister to the
King.
That of the Infanta of Spain, Isabella-Clara-Eugenia, and of the Archduke
Albert, was solemnized in the Low Countries: and that of Madam Katherine,
sister of the King, with Henry Duke of Bar, eldest son to Charles the second
Duke of Lorrain at Paris. Qualities of Katherine, and why the King married her
to the Duke of Bar.


Katherine was forty years of age; more agreeable then fair, having one Leg a
little short. She was very spiritual, loved Learning, and knew much for a
woman; but was an obstinate Hugonot. The King feared lest she should marry some
Protestant Prince, who by this means might become Protector of the Hugonots,
and be like another King in France: by reason of which, he gave her to the Duke
of Bar; thinking moreover to gain more belief among the Catholics, by allying
himself with the house of Lorrain. Before this, he had used all possible means
to convert her, even to the employing of threats: but not being able to do it,
he said one day to the Duke of Bar, My Brother, it is you must vanquish her.

There was some difficulty about the place and the Ceremony of Celebration of
this marriage: the Duke would have it done at the Church, and the Princess by a
Hugonot-Minister. The King found a mean: he caused it The marriage made in the
Kings Closet.
to be done in his Closet, whither he led his Sister by the hand; and commanded
his natural Brother, who had for about two years been Archbishop of Rouen, to
marry them. This new Archbishop at first made some refusal of it; alleging the
Canons: but the King representing to him that his Closet was a consecrated
place, and that his presence supplied the default of all solemnities, the poor
Archbishop had no longer power to resist him.

This Marriage being made for the good of the Catholic Religion, it seemed
that the Pope should have been content. Nevertheless, not willing to suffer an
ill that a good The Pope troubled at the Duke of Bar for this marriage.
might come of it, he declared that the Duke of Bar had incurred
Excommunication, for having without the dispensation of the Church contracted
with an Heretic: nor ever could the Duke, what submission soever he made,
obtain Absolution. It was necessary for God to lend his hand. This Princess
died three Death of the Duchess of Bar.
years after with sadness and melancholy to see her self live in a discontented
manner with her Husband, who daily pressed her to turn Catholic.

Besides the solemnities of these Marriages, many other things entertained the
Court. Two notable Changes, one of the Duke of Joyeuse, the other of the
Marchioness of Bel' Isle, caused its astonishment.

The Duke of Joyeuse, who had quitted the The Duke of Joyeuse re-takes the
habit of Capuchin.
habit of Capuchin to become chief of the League in Languedoc, on a fair day,
without saying any thing to any body, went and cast himself into his Convent at
Paris, and re-took the habit. Few days after, there was much astonishment to
see him with that habit of penitence preach in the Pulpit, whom they had seen
the week before dancing of Balls, as one of the most Gallant. It was said, that
the holy Exhortations of his Mother, who from time to time put him in
remembrance of his Vow, and some ambiguous words which the King had thrown out
in converse with him, made him think that he could no longer live in the world
either with safety of Conscience, or with Honor.

The Marchioness of Bell' Isle, sister to the The Marchioness of Bell' Isle
turns Feuillantine.
Duke of Longueville, and Widow of the Marquess of Bell' Isle, eldest son of
the Marshal de Retz, having received some secret displeasure, renounced
likewise the world, and went and shut her self up in the Convent of the
Feuillantines at Tolouse, where she took the veil, and finished her days. Duel
of de Crequy, and Phillipin bastard of Savoy.


After this, came News to the Court, that Phillipin, Bastard to the Duke of
Savoy, was killed in a Duel by the Seigneur de Crequy: of whom it might be
without flattery said, That he was one of the most gallant and bravest men of
his time. The History of this Combat may be found written in so many places,
and is yet so firm in the memory of all that wear swords, that it would be
superfluous to recount the particularities.

The Chase was now the Kings ordinary divertisement. It is recounted, that
Hunting in the Forest of Fountain-bleau, accompanied by many Lords, he heard a
great noise of Horns, Hunters and Dogs, which seemed to be a great way distant;
but all of an instant approached them. Some of his company who The Apparition
of the great Hunter to the King hunting at Fountainbleau.
were twenty paces before him, saw a great black man among the Bushes, who
affrighted them in such manner, that they could not tell what became of him:
but they heard him cry out to them with a rank and affrightful voice, M'
attendez-vous, or m' entendez-vous, or amendez-vous: that is, Do you hear me;
or, Do you understand me; or else, Amend your selves. The Wood-men and
Country People thereabouts, said, That it was no extraordinary thing: for they
had often seen this black man, whom they named the Great Hunter, with a pack of
Hounds which hunted at full cry; but never did harm to any.

Infinite account is made in all Countries in the world of like illusions in
Hunting. If we may give any credit to them, we may believe What these fantasms
may be.
them either to be the tricks of Sorcerers, or of some evil spirits, to whom
God gives permission to convince the incredulous, and make them see that there
are substances separated, and a being above man.

Now if Prodigies are signs, as some have said of some great and dire Events,
it may be believed that this presaged the strange death of the fair Gabriella,
which happened some days after. The love which the King had for her, instead of
being extinguished by enjoyment, was come to such a point, that she had dared
to demand of him, that he should acknowledge The fair Gabriella demands the
King to espouse her, and legitimate his Children. He feeds her with hope.
his fault, and legitimate his Children by a subsequent marriage: nor durst he
absolutely refuse her this grace, but entertained her still with hopes.

Those who love the glory of this great King, can difficultly believe that he
would have done such an action which had without doubt begot a low opinion of
him, and again thrown him under his peoples hatred. However, it was to be
feared that the allurements of this woman, who had found his weakness, with the
flattery of the Courtiers whom she had almost all gained, either by presents or
kindnesses, might engage this poor Prince to a dishonor. And without
dissembling, he had his soul too tender toward Ladies. He was Master of all
his other passions, but he was a Slave to this: nor can his memory be justified
from this reproach: for though he were admirable in all other parts of his
life, he ought not to be imitated in this. She in the end obliges the King to
demand Commissioners of the Pope to judge of the divorce of Margaret.


In the mean time, Gabriella, flattering her self with a hope to be ere long
his Wife, deduced from those hopes himself had given her, acted so well, that
she obliged him to demand of the Pope Commissioners to judge of the Divorce
between him and Queen Margaret. And the King, that he might find favor with
the holy Father, and render him more facile to his intentions, caused to be
said underhand, that he would marry Maria de Medices his Niece, Sister to the
Duke of Florence: for whom nevertheless it was believed that he had not then
any desire.

And the Pope, were it that he distrusted his intention, or that he saw that
Queen Margaret lent not her hand to it, protracted the business, and returned
only ambiguous Answers. It was likewise said, that being one day much pressed
by the Cardinal d'Ossat and by Sillery to give content to their Master, for
want of which, said they, he may pass further, and espouse the Duchess; he was
so astonished at this discourse, that he immediately remitted the conduct of
this Affair to the hand of God, commanded a Fast through all the City of Rome,
and went himself to Prayers, to demand of God to inspire him with what should
be best for his glory. That at the end of his Prayer he cried out as if he had
been revived from an Ecstasy, God has provided; and that in few days after,
there arrived a Courrier at Rome, bringing News of the death of the Duchess.

In the mean time the King grew impatient at these delays; and it was to be
feared lest a disdain to be neglected should cast him into the same
inconveniences it had formerly done Henry the eighth, King of England; or by
the counsel of some flatterers, forcing the goodness of his nature, be
persuaded to rid himself of Queen Margaret in any manner soever. The King
remains at Fontainbleau to do his Easter-devotions, and sends the fair
Gabriella to Paris.


Gabriella was at present great with her fourth Child, when the feast of
Easter approaching, the King desiring to do his Devotions for that holy time
far from all object of scandal, sent her to Paris, accompanying her just half
way. She with no small grief parted from him, recommending to him her Children
with tears in her eyes, as if she had some secret presentiment; telling him
that she should never more see him.

Being at Paris, lodged in the house of Zamet, that famous Treasurer, after
having dined with him, and heard A service in the Roman Church used three days
before Easter, which are called, Les t^ois Jours de tenebres
Tenebres at little St. Anthonies, (being holy Thursday) as she returned to her
Lodging, and being walking in the Garden, she felt her self struck with an
Apoplexy in the brain. The first fury of it being passed, she would no longer
stay in that house, but caused her self to be carried to that of Madam de
Sourdis her Aunt, near St. Germain of the Auxerrois. And all the rest of that
day, and the morrow, she was perplexed with She dies in a strange manner.
Swoondings and Convulsions, of which she died on the Saturday-morning.

The causes of her death were diversely spoken of: but however, it was a
happiness to France, since it deprived the King of an object for which he was
about to loose both himself and his Estate. His grief was as great as his love
had been: yet he, not being of those feeble The King comforts himself, and
conserves an extreme tenderness for her Children.
souls who please themselves in perpetuating their sorrows, and in bathing
themselves in their tears, received not only those comforts he sought, but
still conserved for the Children, and particularly for the Duke of Vendosm,
that affection he had born the Mother.

All good Frenchmen passionately desired that so good a King might leave
legitimate Children. They durst not press him to take a Wife capable to bring
him forth such, so long as Gabriella lived, for fear lest he should espouse
her: and out of the same fear, Queen Margaret would not give her consent to
dissolve his marriage. But when Gabriella was dead, she willingly lent her hand
to it; and her self addressed a Request to the holy Father Queen Margaret
presents a request to the Pope to dissolve her marriage.
to demand the dissolution, founding it principally on two causes of nullity.
The first was the want of consent: for she alleged she had been forced to it
by King Charles the ix. her Brother. The second, the Proximity of Kindred found
between them in the third degree: for which she said there had never been any
valuable Dispensation.

In like manner the Lords of the Kingdom The Lords and Parliament beseech the
King to take a wife.
and the Parliament besought his Majesty by solemn Deputations, that he would
think of taking a Wife: representing to him the inconveniences and the danger
wherein France would be found, if he should die without Children. These
Deputations will not seem strange to those who know our ancient History; where
it may be seen, that neither the King nor his Children married but by the
advice of his Barons: and this passed in that time for almost a Fundamental Law
of the Estate.

The King touched with these just supplications of his subjects, addressed his
request to He presents his request to the Pope, as well as Queen Margaret.
the Pope, containing the same reasons as that of Queen Margaret; and charged
the Cardinal d'Ossat, and Sillery his extraordinal Ambassador, whom he had
sent to Rome, to pursue the judgment of the Pope concerning the restitution of
the Marquisate of Saluces, to solicit instantly this Affair.

The cause reported to the Consistory, the The Pope appoints Commissioners, who
pronounce the dissolution of the marriage.
Pope gave Commission to the Prelates to judge it on the place, according to
the rights of that Crown; which suffers not Frenchmen to be transported for
Affairs of the like nature beyond the Mountains, whither it would be almost
impossible to bring the necessary proofs and witnesses. These Prelates were the
Cardinal of Joyeuse, the Popes Nuntio, and the Archbishop of Arles; who having
examined both Parties, seen the Proofs produced on one and the other, and the
Request of the three Estates of the Kingdom, declared this marriage null, and
permitted them to marry whom they should think fit.

Queen Margaret, who for many years had After which, Queen Margaret comes to
Paris.
deserted the King, and voluntarily shut her self up in the strong Castle of
Usson in Auvergne, had now permission to come to Paris, money given her to pay
her debts, great Pensions, the possession of the Duchy of Valois, with some
other Lands, and right to bear still the Title of Queen. She lived yet fifteen
years, and built a Palace *near du Pre-aux-Clercs: which was after sold to pay
his debts, and demolished to build other houses. She loved Her inclination.
extremely good Musicians, having a delicate Ear, and knowing and eloquent Men,
because she was of a spirit clear and very agreeable in her discourse. For the
rest, she was liberal even to prodigality; pompous and magnificent; but she
knew not what it was to pay her debts. Which is without doubt the greatest of
all a Princes fault, because there is nothing so much against Justice, of which
he ought to be the Protector and Defender.

This marriage being dissolved, Bellievre and 1600.
Villeroy, fearing lest the King should engage himself in new loves, and be
taken in some of those snares which the fairest of the Court stretched out for
him, persuaded him by many great Reasons of State to fix his thoughts on Maria
de Medicis, who was daughter to Maria de Medicis demanded for Hen. 4.
Francis, and Niece to Ferdinand, great Dukes of Toscany.

The Cardinal d' Ossat and Sillery made known his intention to the great Duke
Ferdinand her Uncle: and Alincour, son to Villeroy, whom he had sent to thank
the holy Father for his good and brief Justice touching the aforesaid
dissolution of his marriage, had order to testify to him, that the King having
cast his eyes on all the Daughters of the Sovereign Houses of Christendom, had
found no Princess more agreeable to him. The business was managed with so much
activeness and vigilance by the diligence of those which had enterprized it,
that the King found himself absolutely engaged. The contract of the marriage
was The contract of the marriage at Florence, and the Nuptials Solemnized by
Proxy.
signed at Florence by his Ambassadors the fourth of April, in the year one
thousand six hundred. And Alincour in seven days brought him the news to
Fountain-bleau. He assisted at present at that famous Conference or Dispute
between James David du Perron Bishop of Eureux, afterward Cardinal, and Philip
du Plessis Mornay; where truth nobly triumphed over falsehood.

There are particular relations of the solemnities made at Florence, the
Magnificences of the great Duke, the Ceremonies of the Affiancing and Marriage
of this Queen, of her Imbarking, her being convoyed by the Galleys of Malta and
Florence, and her reception at Marseilles, at Avignon, and at Lions, and
therefore I shall speak nothing of it.

Whilst the Marriage of Florence was treating, The King falls into the snares
of Madam d'Entragues afterward March ioness of Verneuil.
the King having a heart which could for no long time keep his liberty, became
enslaved to a new object.

It is to be understood that* Mary Touchet, who had been Mistress to Charles
the ninth, from whom came Issue the Count d' Auvergne, had been Married to the
Lord d' Entragues, and had by him many children, amongst the rest a very fair
daughter named Henrietta, who by consequent was sister by the mothers side to
the Count of Auvergne. This Count was about the age of thirty years, and she
about eighteen.

It is but too well known, that Flatterers and wicked Sycophants ruin all in
the Courts of great Men, and corrupt likewise their persons. These are they
which sweeten A good reflection concerning flatterers.
the poison, which embolden the Prince to do ill, which make him familiar with
vice, which seek and facilitate occasions for it; and who act, as we may say,
the mystery of Satan and of the Tempter. It is impossible to purge Courts from
these plagues; they insinuate, maugre the utmost endeavors, into the Palaces
of great ones; they render themselves agreeable by new divertisements; gain the
ear by flattering praises, by pleasant and well-devised Fables and Stories: and
when they have gained their entrance, they make their venom slide into the
heart, and impoison the souls of the most innocent.

Our Henry, though so great a Prince as he was, had these people near him, who
knowing his weakness as to women, in stead of fortifying him against it, and
restraining him like true friends, they spurred him (as it were) forward in his
wickedness, and made their fortunes from his faults. It was these, who by
commending the Beauties, the Carriage, the Spirit, and the divertizing and
pleasant discourse of Mademoiselle d' Entragues, made him first have a desire
to see and to love her. They could never have done a worse Service for their
Master then this. She had certainly many Charms, nor had she less spirit and
cunning. Her refusals and modesty did more and more provoke the Kings Passion.
Though The King gives an hundred thousand crowns to Mademoiselle d' Entragues.
he was not prodigal, he caused an hundred thousand crowns to be carried her at
once. She refused them not, and reciprocally testified much love and impatience
for so great a King: but she cunningly caused her Father and Mother to observe
her so near, that she could not give him a full convenience to speak to her.

Hereupon she let him understand, that she even dispaired that she could not
keep her word with him; that it was necessary to have the consent of her Father
and Mother, for which on her part she would labor. Afterward, after many
delays and put offs, she told him, that they could not be brought to so
delicate a point, except, were it only to secure their consciences toward
God, and their honor toward the world, his Majesty would make her a promise
of Marriage: That she had no desire to serve her self of such a Her cunning to
bring him to her designs.
writing; and that if she would do it, she knew well there was no Officer who
durst cite a Man who had fifty thousand men of war at his command: but that
these good people desired it should be so; and that he need make no difficulty
to please their fancy, since he did but give her a little bit of paper in
Exchange of the most precious thing she had in the world. In fine, she knew so
well how She gets a promise of marriage from him.
to work his spirit, that he gave her a promise under his hand, by which he
obliged himself to espouse her in a year, so that in that time she brought
forth a Male-child.

All this intrigue may be seen in the Memoires Sully tears it, but the King
makes another.
of Sully, where he says, that the King having led him alone into the first
Gallery of Fountain-bleau, showed him this promise written under his hand, and
demanded his advice: That in stead of formally answering him concerning it, he
tore it in two pieces: That the King remained quite astonished, and speaking
angerly, How! now I believe that you are a fool: and that he answered, It is
true Sir that I am a fool, and could wish I were more so, so that I alone in
France were one. That at his departing from the Gallery, the King entered into
his Closet, and demanded a pen and ink, and that he believed it was to write
another. However it were, this promise caused much trouble afterward: for the
Lady would have made it valid, as we shall speak.

At the same time that the King pusued the He pursues at Rome the decision of
the Marquisate of Saluces.
dissolution of his first marriage at Rome, he made likewise instance to the
holy Father, that he would decide the difference concerning the restitution of
the Marquisate of Saluces, the Decision of which had been referred to him by
the Treaty of Vervin.

To understand this well, it must be known How that Marquisate appertained to
him.
that this Marquisate was a Fief dependant of the Daulphinate, of which King
Francis the first had seized himself by right of reversion, for default of
heirs Males in the Succession of the Lords that held it. Now in 1588. during
the Estates of Blois, the Duke of Savoy having advice that the League became
very strong in France, and that apparently How the Duke of Savoy seized it.
that Monarchy would dismember, snatched this Marquisate, without having any
subject of quarrel: he cloaked only this unjust usurpation with this fair
pretext, that he seized it out of fear lest Lesdiguieres should possess himself
of it, and by this means establish Hugonotism in the midst of his Territories.

Seven years after, to wit, in the year 1595. the King being gone to Lions,
after the battle of Fountain-franzoise, the Duke, who foresaw An accommodation
spoke of.
well he would again have this Marquisate, proposed to him some accommodation
for it. The King offered to give it to one of his Sons, He offers it to be held
at faith and homage.
to hold it at faith and homage, with some other conditions; but the Duke
demanded it without any dependence, and so this Negotiation was broken.

Our Ambassadors treating the general By the Treaty of Vervin the business is
remitted to the Popes Arbitration
peace at Vervin, were not wanting instantly to demand the restitution of that
Fief. Those of the Duke who assisted, alleged in favor of their Master, that
piece appertained to him as being a Fief dependant of Savoy, and that he had
more essential titles to prove that dependancy, which it was necessary to see,
to decide the difference with knowledge of the cause. Now it would have taken
up too much time to cause them to come from Savoy: And the Popes Nuntio pressed
the peace, for fear lest during these delays some accident might happen to
break it quite: so that not to retard it, it was judged convenient to refer to
the Pope the decision of this affair, on condition that he should terminate it
in a year.

The French during that time solicited strongly at Rome to have it decided.
The Savoyards defended it only at extremity, and that for fear to lose their
cause by default. Both the one and the other produced their Titles: Those of
the French were the best, and moreover, they had had a peaceable possession of
more then sixty years, which was more then sufficient to gain prescription. The
year being expired, the Pope demands of the King the prolongation of two
months, to give in his sentence of Arbitration, and that in the mean time the
Marquisate should be sequestered in his hands. The King willingly consents: The
Pope refuses farther meddling with the Arbitration, and why.
but the Duke enters into a mistrust that the Pope would have it for one of his
Nephews: so that his Ambassador having testified this mistrust, the Pope
refuses to meddle any farther, either with the Gage or with the Arbitration.

The Duke imagined that his best way was The Duke of Savoy strives to gain time.
to use delays, since it might happen that either the French King would grow
weary of following of this business, or that some other more important affair
might divert his thoughts otherwhere. Moreover, knowing that there were many
melancholy spirits, who could not be recovered out of that opinion that the
King was still in his heart a Hugonot, and with them many concealed and
dangerous enemies, so that no year passed but with many conspiracies against
his person, he hoped that in the end some of them might succeed. In effect,
that year there had been three discovered, of which that which made most noise
was of a woman, who offered to the Count of Soissons to poison him; but the
Count discovered it, and she was buried alive in the Greve.

To the end therefore to gain time, he desired He would come to France to
confer with the King.
to come himself into France, having so good an* opinion of his own cunning and
slights, that he assured himself he should obtain of the King the gift of this
Marquisate; or at least he pretended to make such propositions, and to employ
so many artifices, that there should pass more then a year before he should
untangle them. He said that his Ambassador had sent him word, that he had heard
the King say, that if they were together, they would decide this difference
like friends; and that it was this good word had set him on his voyage. But
many suspected, and that with some appearance, that he had a design to gain
some people in the Kings Council, to sound the affections, and observe and
watch the discontented; to cast abroad seeds of corruption and division, and*
renew that intelligence might be useful to him at Court. Others imagined that
he was discontented with Spain, because Philip the second having given the What
might be the motives of his voyage.
Low Countries in Dower to his youngest Daughter, he had left to the eldest,
wife of this Duke, only a Crucifix and an Image of our Lady. Moreover, he had
indeed received some displeasures from the Ministers of Spain; and he spread a
report abroad, were it true or not, that he had undertaken this voyage without
communicating any thing to Philip the third his Brother-in-law. In fine, every
one judged according to his fancy; and possibly none divined the secrets of his
thoughts, there being never any Prince more close or less penetrable then he.
And some said his Heart was covered with mountains, as well as his Country;
that is, because that he was Hulch-back't, as Savoy was mountainous.

He brought with him a Train which well His Train.
set forth his degree: for he had with him twelve hundred horse: but all his
Officers were clad in mourning, by reason of the death of his Wife; which many
took as an ill presage. The King causes him to be well received every where. He
passes Lions.
The King desiring to receive him according to his dignity, commanded all the
Cities and the Governors to render him the same honor as if he were there in
person.

He came to Lions by the River of Roan, and was received by la Guiche Governor
of that City. But the Chapter of St. John would not give him the place of
Canon and Count of that Church, because he no longer possessed the County of
Villars, by virtue of which the Counts of Savoy had been at other times
received. Adding to this, that he had not his Titles, nor would give time to
make proof of his Nobility; of which the Chapter dispences not with any
whatsoever beside our Kings.

From Lions he came to Roanna, descended Arrives at Fontainbleau where the King
is
by water to Orleans, and after came post to Fontain-bleau, where the King was.
He arrived the twentieth of December, accompanied with seventy horse: and
presently to acquist His address to gain confidence with the King,
confidence with him, he lamented highly against the Spaniards; discovered, or
feigned to discover to him his most secret thoughts, and a design he had to
drive them out of Italy. He told him his friends, his ways, and his
intelligences for that: he would make him believe that he would open his heart
to him; that he was an absolute Frenchman, and desired to fix himself to the
interests of France without reserve. The King hearkened to him who is as sub^ile
as himself;
with attention, and thanked him for his good thoughts: but after all, he
finished with this: I am of opinion that we should decide first those affairs
between us, and then talk of others. Three days after, the King went to Paris,
and carries him to Paris.
where they were to discourse more amply on the subject had brought him into
France.

Now was the beginning of the last year of Overture of the Centenary Jubilee at
Rome.
the fifteenth Age, which is counted the One thousand six hundredth, celebrated
for the Centenary Jubilee, which was opened at Rome. There were found there
four and twenty thousand French; some moved by devotion, others by curiosity:
among which, there was a good number of Hugonots, who went to see the great
Ceremony. They might do it with all security: for during the great Jubilee, the
Inquisition ceases at Rome; where at other times it is much less rigo^ous then
in Spain. The Duke of Bar was in a concealed habit at this Jubilee: he went to
demand absolution of the holy Father; but his submission, how great soever,
could not obtain it; nor had he it till the death of Madam Katherine his Wife.

The beginning of this year beheld the King Great Demonstrations of friendship
between the King and Duke.
and the Duke of Savoy live with so much familiarity, and so many proofs of
friendship, that it was believed that they had both but the same heart. The
French Courtesy and Civility obliged the King to give the Duke all sorts of
good Treatments; and the desire which the Duke had to obtain from him the
Marquisate, moved him to a great Complacency, and to seek all means to render
himself agreeable to so great a King. The Court of France avowed it had never
seen a more perfect Courtier; the Ladies, a more pleasing Gallant; and the
Officers of the King and the great ones, a Prince more liberal. He knew how to
govern himself in such manner with the How the Duke lived in the Kings Court.
King, that he neither acted his Companion nor his Servant: and if he would
appear inferior to him in Grandeur, he endeavored to be superior to him in
Generosity and Liberality: he gave with full hands, especially to the principal
men of the Court. The King permitted them to accept his presents, and on his
side gave very great ones to the Duke: he treated him, and made the Chiefs of
the Court treat him; every day showing him some new subject of divertisement.
Among other things, he desired that he should see his Parliament; The King
shows him his Parliament.
which our Kings have usually shown to strange Princes, as a Compendium of
their greatness, and the place where their Majesty sits with the greatest
splendor. They went together into the A place I suppose so called, which
looked into the Parliament House, and where they might see and not be seen.
Lantern of the great Chamber, where they with great delight heard pleaded a
very singular Cause, chosen of purpose; and the sentence or agreement
pronounced by Harlay first President; a Personage so grave and so eloquent,
that all which came from his mouth seemed to come from that of Justice her self.

There was no Civility or Courtesy which the King showed not to the Duke: but
after all, he released not to him the Marquisate. Yet the King releases not to
him the Marquisate
The Duke tried the business all ways possible: sometimes he offered to hold it
in homage from the Crown; sometimes he proposed to the King his great Designs
on the Milanois, and on the Empire; sometimes he laid before him the platform
of a puissant League to destroy the Spaniard in Italy. But the King was too
wise The French has it, Prendre le Change, which is taken for flying out at a
wrong Deer like hounds of Riot.
to be gulled by gilded shadows: he answered, That he had no ambition to
conquer the Estate of another, but only to recover his own: That he would not
speak of this Affair to the Duke, but that they ought refer that to their
Council. In effect, they named some persons, who conferred together: but those
of the King insisting daily on its restitution, and the Duke endeavoring to
free it to himself, nothing was concluded.

Yet though all hopes were wanting to the Duke of obtaining any thing, he lost
not at all his Courage, but trusted to the secret intelligences he had renewed
with some great ones of the Court, and particularly with the Duke of Byron.
Many believe that he began now The Duke not succeeding, it is believed he
endeavored to debauch Byron by the means of Laffin.
to debauch him; and that to this effect he served himself of one named Laffin,
a Gentleman of Bourgongne, of the house of Beauvais la Nocle; but the most
pernicious and most traiterous Fellow that could be found in France; he making
a Trade of carrying Tales from one to another. The King knew him well; and
often seeing him very familiar with Byron, he had the goodness to tell the
Marshall more then once, Let not that man approach you; he is a plague; be will
ruin you.

The Duke knew that Byron loved the King, because he had raised him to the
greatest Dignities of his Realm; and that the Prince likewise honored him with
his Good Will. It was therefore necessary to make him loose this affection, to
render him capable of any evil design.

Byron was without doubt brave and valiant to the utmost; but so puffed up with
his Gallantry, The vanities of Byron become insupportable
that he could not suffer any person to equal him. After the peace of Vervin,
not having any thing more to do, he continually boasted of his great Actions:
according to his own words, he had done all: and he intoxicated himself in such
manner with his own praise, that he raised his own Valor above He esteems
himself more then the King,
the Kings. He believed that he ought him his Crown, that he could refuse him
nothing, and that he should govern him absolutely. These Bravadoe's pleased not
the King; he was troubled who takes disgust at it.
that his Subject should think that he equalled him in Valor; but much more,
that he should have the presumption to hope to govern him, who had ten times
more brains and good judgment then the Marshal.

It is certainly a noble Ambition, and not A good and important Reflection.
only well placed, but absolutely necessary for a King, to believe none of his
Subjects more worthy then himself. When he has not this good opinion of
himself, he lets himself be governed by him whom he believes a more able man
then himself; and by this means soon falls into Captivity: therefore though he
may be deceived, he ought still to esteem himself the most capable person to
govern in his whole Realm. I may say rather, that he cannot deceive himself in
this, because there is no person more proper then himself, however ignorant he
be to rule his Estate, God having destined this Function to him, and not to
others; and the people being always disposed to receive Commands when they come
out of a sacred Mouth.

Henry the Great had therefore taken some disgust against the Marshal of Byron
by reason of his vanity; so that the Duke of Savoy, praising one day the Noble
Actions and great Services of Byron, both Father and Son, the King answered,
That it was true, they had served him well, but that he had taken great pains
to moderate the drunkenness of the Father, and the violent passions of the Son.
The Duke remembered these words, and caused The Duke causes to be carried to
Byron some disadvantagious words of the Kings.
them to be carried by Laffin to Byron, who, touched in his most sensible part,
was transported to a thousand extravagancies; and having lost all respect, lost
likewise that affection he had left for the King. It has been suspected that
he at present abandoned himself to all manner of wicked designs, and that he
promised to enter into a League which the Savoyard was to make with the King of
Spain, on condition that he gave him his Daughter in marriage, and assisted him
to make himself Duke of Bourgongne.

After that the Duke of Savoy had remained more then two months in the Court
of France, showing, as the Proverb says, A merry Countenance at an ill game;
and shadowing his discontent with an apparent joy, but not knowing how to
return without shame, nor how to stay longer without any fruit: The King, who
would not give him subject to say that he had treated him with the utmost
rigor, gave him to understand, that if the The King proposes to the Duke the
exchange of the Marquisate for la Bresse.
Marquisate was so commodious to him, and that he could not restore it without
a notable inconveniency, he would be content to take la Bresse in exchange.
This Condition seemed no less hard to the Duke then that of the restitution of
the Marquisate: however, that he might have some pretext to retire with honor,
he seemed not averse to it; and there The Duke seems not a verse, but takes
three months to consider.
were some Articles drawn up, which he professed were not disagreeable to him:
But he demanded time to consider of the Alternative of the Restitution or
Change, and to take advice of the Grandees of his Estate on so important a
thing. There were granted him to this purpose three entire months, which was
to the end of February in the year sixteen hundred.

A little after he took leave of the King, who He takes leave of the King, who
accompanies him to Charenton.
conducted him to Pont de Charenton; and gave order to the Baron of Lux, and to
Praslin, to accompany him to the Frontier. He returned by Champagne and
Bourgongne, from which he entered la Bresse, and went to the Bourg. They had
great joy to see him arrived, because they feared lest he should be arrested in
France. Indeed some there were would have Some had counseled the King to
arrest him. The Kings noble Answer.
counseled the King to have kept him till such time as he should restore the
Marquisate: but the King, much offended at this Proposition, answered in anger,
That they studied to dishonor him; but that he should choose rather to loose
his Crown, then to incur the least suspicion of having falsified his Faith,
even to the greatest of his enemies.

The three months being expired, and the The three months expired, the King
presses the Duke to choose either the change or the restitution.
Duke not having satisfied his promise, the King was troubled, and pressed him
to resolve either on the one or the other interchange. The Duke finds new
delays, but promises him daily that he will satisfy him. In the mean time he
remonstrates to the Council of Spain the danger in which he was; that the loss
of the Marquisate would put him in such an estate, The Duke presses the Council
of Spain to help him.
that he should not have the power to serve the Spaniards: that it would open a
door to the French to go trouble Italy; and that this tempest, after having
laid waste his Country, would fall upon Milain. The Council of Spain
apprehended well the importance; but acting very slowly, were a long time
before The Count of Fuentes comes to this purpose to Milain, but too late
they resolved. In fine, the Count of Fuentes, Governor of Milain, had order,
but two months later then was necessary puissantly to assist this Prince. He
came to this effect to Milain, but too late; where, with two Millions of Gold
which were ready, he begins to make great preparations.

After that the Duke had by diverse Artifices drawn out the Negotiation almost
two months longer, the King, wearied with these delays, prepared himself to
bind this Proteus, who changed himself into all sorts of forms; and to force
him to give a certain answer. He advanced to Lions, whither he had before sent
his Council. The Duke, knowing The King again presses the Duke to choose the
change or restitution
that he approached, had recourse to other cunnings: he sent to him three
Ambassadors, who conjoyntly proposed an Act, by which they declared that their
Master was ready to accomplish the Treaty made at Paris; and that he promised
to restore the Marquisate: but he of the three who had the secret, refused to
sign the Articles till first the Duke had showed them to his Council, and
signed them. By this trick the Duke yet gained seven or eight days time: but
the King resolved to press him to a conclusion, still followed his He promises
positively to surrender the Marquisate.
trace, discovered his deceits, and left him no further subterfuge: he was
forced therefore to answer positively; and he promised to surrender the
Marquisate by the sixteenth of August.

Upon this assurance, the King caused to advance But when the King sends his
forces, he takes off his mask, and refuses
le Bourg-l' Espinasse, an old Colonel of Infantry, with the Troops of the
Suisses, to take possession of the Marquisate. As he approached, the Duke took
off his Mask, and answered clearly, That according to the Conditions proposed,
War was less sharp to him then Peace. Wherefore the King was obliged to come to
that point to which he had long foreseen he should come, to wit, an open War:
he declared it therefore on the The King declares war against him.
eleventh of the month of August; but with these express terms, That he did it
only for the Marquisate, and without prejudice to the Treaty of Vervin, which
he desired to observe inviolably.

At the same time he gave advice of this He gives advice of it to the
neighboring Princes
rupture to all the neighboring Princes, and made them understand the just
reasons he had. This great King knew well, that among Christians the breach of
peace is extremely odious; and that without reasons, which strongly convince
our spirits, we ought never to trouble the public tranquillity.

He was at present at Grenoble, where he had to begin this War only three or
four Companies of Ordinance. Some proposed to him, to cause his Regiment of
Guards to advance: he answered, that he would not send them from him; that they
were the tenth Legion, which never fought without Julius Caesar would never let
the tenth Legion fight but with him.
Caesar. But in a little time the French Nobility and the Adventurers flocked
to him on all sides, as as if they had come to a Marriage or a Ball.

The Marshal of Byron, though already disgusted, Byron conquers all la Bresse.
having gathered some Troops, spoiled the Country of Bresse in many places:
with his Canon he forced the City of Bourg; but the Citadel defended it self
better, and proved indeed the only difficulty in this War. Crequy entering into
Savoy, gained the City of Montmelian about midnight, but not the Castle.

The Pope Alarmed by the first sparkles of The Pope Alarmed at this War sends
to the King.
this fire, and fearing lest it should inflame all Italy* employed himself
immediately to extinguish it: he dispatched a Prelate, who bore the title of
Patriarch of Constantinople, to remonstrate unto him the inconveniences of this
rupture, and to conjure him in the name of God not to pass farther. The King
assured him that he had no design to trouble The Kings good and Christian
answer.
the peace of Italy; that he was a Christian and just Prince; that God had
given him a Kingdom sufficient to content him, but that he desired to have what
belonged to his Crown; that if he had had other more vast designs, he had made
greater preparations.

Few days after he departed, and entered The King enters Savoy.
himself into Savoy. His presence so much astonished the City of Chamberry,
that they made the Garrison depart by a quick Capitulation. He made himself
after master of Tarentaise and la Morienne, by taking in two or three days the
City of Conflans, and that of la Charbonniere; which till then had passed for
impregnable.

Yet the Duke of Savoy moved not: he Yet the Duke stirs not.
was so little concerned, that he Hunted and Danced whilst his Provinces were
despoiling: he seemed not to be the adversary but the spectator: his subjects
likewise seemed not much astonished at the Kings Progress; they said, that if
he took any places in Savoy, their Duke would take others in France. It could
not be divined from whence this great security proceeded: some believed that
the Duke He trusts some vain predictions of Astrologers.
assured himself on I know not what Prognostications of Astrologers, who had
foretold, that in the month of August there should be no King in France: that
which happened to be very true, for at that time he was victorious in the midst
of Savoy. Others believed or to Byron, much incensed against the King.
that the Duke yet trusted to the intelligences he had with the Marshal of
Biron, whose fidelity much shaken by his artifices while he was in France, was
now near entirely debauched by those grand Subjects of discontent this Marshal
had received since this War. For the King testified, that he put not so much
trust in him, nor treated him with the same freedom he had done before; and he
committed the principal direction of this Conquest to Lesdiguieres, who indeed
better knew the Country, and the manner of making War in those Mountains then
he. This Preference furiously incensed such a high spirit, who believed nothing
either could or ought to be done without him. Afterward the refusals of the
King to give him the Government of the City of Bourg, put him quite out of his
senses. From this time he had none but extravagant and criminal thoughts, and
began, as it was said, to treat a League with the Savoyard, for the re-kindling
a new Civil War in France. I cannot relate the particulars of this design,
because they were never well known.

The Duke of Savoy believed his Fortresses of Montmelian in Savoy, and of Bourg
in Bresse impregnable, reposing the security of his Country upon them. He was
much surprised to understand that the Marquis of Brandis Governor of the
first, had capitulated to surrender it in a certain time. Upon it, he put
himself in the field, and used In fine, the Duke takes the field, but does
nothing.
all his endeavors to get into an estate to relieve it. He had recourse to the
assistance of the Spaniards; but the Count of Fuentes, who desired to engage
affairs farther, refused him forces in his need, and in the mean time the term
of the capitulation being finished, he lost Montmelian, to the great
astonishment The Citadel of Montmelian taken,
of his Subjects, and no less shame to Brandis. Want of Victuals and
Ammunition, made him likewise in some weeks lose the Citadel of Bourg, which
the Governor and that of Bourg,
held out to the last extremity.

The King passing by the side of Geneva, submitted the Country of the Chablais
and the Faussigni. The inhabitants of Geneva took and fort St. Katherine.
the Fort of St. Katherine, which the Savoyards had built to annoy them, and
demolished it. After the taking of this, the King would The King visits Geneva.
visit Geneva, so famous for being one of the Ramparts of the Protestant
Religion. Theodorus Beza the chief as well in age as in Doctrine of all the
Hugonot Ministers, made him a Speech in few words. The Marshal de Biron having
considered the place which the inhabitants had been forty years fortifying,
with great care and expense, whether to make himself esteemed a great Captain,
or to show the great zeal he had for the Catholic Religion, boasted he could
take it in twenty days. A speech the King was not pleased with, because France
had taken it under its Protection, since the Reign of Francis the first; and
was obliged to defend it against the Duke of Savoy, who pretended that Seignory
belonged to him.

In the meantime, the Pope desiring above The Pope endeavors a peace, and
sends to that purpose his Nephew Legate.
all things to extinguish the fire of this War, had dispatched toward the King
and toward the Duke, his Nephew the Cardinal Aldobrandin, who incessantly
labored to make a peace. His greatest difficulty was to find knots strong and
sure enough to hold the Duke of Savoy; for those of his promises and his faith*
were so uncertain and so slippery, that he could not trust them. The King comes
to Lions, where his Queen expected him.


At the same time the King, whose thoughts of his marriage the War had not
interrupted, imbarqued on the Rhone, and went down to Lions; where the Queen
his new Spouse was arrived, and expected him.

The Legate would not discontinue the Treaty The Legate likewise comes, and the
Ambassadors of Savoy.
of peace, he followed him to Lions for that purpose; where he made his
entrance fifteen days after the Queen. The Ambassadors of Savoy followed him:
but their power was given in such terms, that the Duke might find ways to
disavow it. However, when they saw the Citadel of Bourg reduced to extremity,
they instantly solicited the Legate to renew the first earnests of the Treaty.
But he would do nothing till they had given it him in writing, that they
besought it for the good of their Masters affairs.

When the Articles were drawn up and agreed, 1610.
they were signed on the one part and The peace agreed, signed and published at
Lions.
the other; and the peace was published at Lions the seventeenth of January
1601. by which the Duke yielded to the King, and to his Successors Kings of
France, the Country and Seignories of Bresse, Bugey, and Veromey, and generally
all that appertained to him lying along the River Rhone, from the egress of
Geneva; as likewise the Bailiwick and Barony of Gex: and that in exchange of
the Marquisate of Saluces, which the King absolutely left to him, both for
himself and his. The Treaty agreed likewise, that all the places taken by the
King from the Duke of Savoy, should be restored; but all the Kings pretended
rights against the said Duke, should be reserved to him; according as was
contained in the Treaties of Cateau in Cambresis, and of Vervin.

By this exchange, both the one and the other They both gain by the exchange.
equally gained. The King for a Marquisate of little extent, distant from all
his Territories, and encompassed by those of Savoy, and which he could not keep
but by great Garrisons, which would consume twice more then the Revenue it
yielded; gained a Country of more then twenty five Leagues extent, which was
bounding upon his, which enlarged his Frontier, in which he had eight hundred
Gentlemen, and which was very fertile and abundant, principally in pastures to
nourish Cattle. The Duke appropriating to himself the Marquisate, took a
troublesome Thorn out of his foot, or rather a Sword which pierced through his
body; and put himself in security. For whilst the French held it, he durst not
go out of Turin but with three or four hundred horse for his Convoy; and he was
forced to maintain great Garrisons in the middle of his Country.

The Treaty being signed, the King departed from Lions by Post, to return to
Paris; After, the King goes to Paris followed by the Queen. He carries her to
see his buildings.
whither the Queen followed him by little journies. Some time after her
arrival, he led her to see his buildings of St. Germain in Lay. This was one
of his delights, and certainly a very innocent one, and which agrees well with
a powerful Prince, after he has paid his great debts, and eased his people of
their heavy load of oppressive Impositions. For by raising these proud
Edifices, he leaves the fair marks of his greatness and riches to posterity; he
embellishes his Kingdom, attracts the admiration of his people, makes strangers
know that his Coffers swell with Treasure, gives life and bread to a great
number of poor handycrafts-men, labors profitably for his own convenience and
for that of his Successors; and in fine, makes Architecture, Sculpture, and
painting flourish, which have ever been infinitely esteemed by all the most
Polite nations of the world.

Our Henry took not this divertisement, but He divertised, but never employed
himself about buildings. An excellent reflection.
to recreate his spirit after labors, and not to employ it. For he had his
soul too great, and his genius too elevated, to dedicate it self wholly to such
mean things, much less to fix it on vain amusements. It is true, that he built,
that he hunted, that he was merry; but this was without diverting himself too
much from his affairs, without abandoning the helm of his estate, which he
held as firmly and diligently during the Calm, as during the Tempest.

Moreover, he had a care not to grow sleepy whilst it was fair weather, which
is often deceitful: for besides that a good King ought to labor within his
Estate during peace, as well as without during war; he knew that the Spaniard
and the Savoyard still grumbled, and contrived in their hearts some enterprise
against him. The Count of Fuentes having raised a great army to assist the
Savoyard, was troubled that the peace had deprived him of the occasion to
employ them. Some places he had taken in Picardy during the War between the two
Crowns, had created a vanity in him, and made him believe that he should
always gain the advantage over the French. At the same time the King of Spain
had put to sea a Naval Army, commanded by one Doria; which had without doubt
some design on Count Fuentes would surprise Marseilles to break the peace.
Provence, if the peace had not been made. And though it was concluded, Fuentes
ceased not to make an attempt of an enterprise upon Marseilles, to cause a
rupture. Those with whom he held intelligence to this purpose* offered the King
to draw fix or seven hundred men into the snare, and keep them prisoners, His
people might be intrapped by counter-intelligence; but the King will not.
or cut them in pieces. But the King judged not so little advantage to
countervail the giving subject to the enemies to break the peace, and to
re-enter into a War; which might have proved very dangerous, they being so
powerfully Armed. Moreover, he feared lest there were still in his Estate some
fire concealed under the embers; which on the noise of a War, might more
facilely make their attempts upon his person. For to tell the truth, he had
more reason to fear their Knives and Daggers then their Swords. He therefore
wisely dissembled this enterprise, and answered the Marseillians: That he knew
not how to steal a victory; that ambuscadoes were not honest, but only during
War; and that it was necessary for his honor to take hee^ that he did not in
any manner contribute to that rupture, the enemies had a design to make. The
Spaniards turn their Arms against the Infidels.


In fine, the Spaniards having found that this wise Argus had too many eyes,
and too much vigilance to be surprised on any side; resolved to employ their
Arms in pious and honorable enterprises. A part of their Land-Army passed into
Hungary, which was at that present assaulted by the Turks. The Duke The Duke of
Merceur commands the Empero^rs forces and dies.
of Merceur being gone to seek in that Country a juster glory, then in the
Civil-wars of France, commanded the Emperors forces. He made known to the
Infidels, by many gallant exploits, particularly by the memorable retreat of
Canise, that the French valor was chosen by God to sustain the Christian
Religion. Nor was there any doubt made, but that he would have quite chased
them out of that Kingdom, of which they had invaded more then one half, if he
had not died the year following of a burning Feavour, which seized him at
Nurembourg, as he was about to go pay his devotions at the Shrine of the Lady
of Loretto.

There arrived some time after an accident by which the King took occasion to
let the Spaniards know, that he could not suffer any thing against his honor,
nor against the dignity of his estate. Rochepot was his Ambassador Gentlemen of
the Ambassador of France in Spain, kill some Spaniards.
in Spain. Some Gentlemen of his train, of which one was his Nephew, washing in
the River chanced to have a quarrel with some Spaniards; and killing two, saved
themselves in the Ambassadors house. The friends of the slain so much excited
the people, that they besieged the house, and were ready to The Magistrate
violates the freedom of the Ambassadors house, and takes them out.
put fire to it. The Magistrate, to prevent the Tragic effects of this fury,
was constrained to do an injustice, and to violate the freedom of the
Ambassadors house; for he seized by force, and led the accused to prison. The
King of Spain being troubled that he had violated the right of Nations, sent
him to demand pardon of the Ambassador; yet the French men still remained
prisoners.

There were made many discourses and writings concerning the rights and
privileges Discourse of the freedom of Ambassadors Palaces.
of Ambassadors. It is true, said they, that an Ambassador has alone right of
Sovereign Justice in his Palace; but the people of his train are subject to the
Justice of the estate in which they are, for those faults they commit out of
his Palace; and so if they be taken out of it, their Process may be made: and
though it be known that this rigor is not generally observed, and that the
respect born to the Ambassadors person, extends to all those that follow him;
yet however this is a courtesy, and not a right. But notwithstanding it is not
permitted to go seek the Criminal in the Palace of the Ambassador, which is a
sacred place, and a certain Sanctuary for his people; yet ought it not however
to be abused, or made a retreat for wicked persons, nor give Sanctuary to the
Subjects of a Prince against the Laws and Justice of his Realm: for in such
cases, on complaint to his Master, he is obliged to do reason. The King being
offended, recals his Ambassador.


Now the King being offended, as he ought to be, at the injury done to France
in the person of his Ambassador, and not judging the satisfaction the
Magistrate had given him sufficient; commands him immediately to return; which
he did, without taking leave of the King of Spain. He forbade likewise at the
same time, all Commerce with Spaniards: and foreseeing that in these beginnings
of the rupture, they might enterprise somewhat on the Towns of Picardy, he with
great diligence And goes in haste to Calais to visit his Frontier.
departed from Paris to visit that Frontier, and came to Calais.

The people, who began to taste the sweetness of repose, and to Till their
lands with patience, trembled for fear lest a new War should expose them once
more to the License of the Soldiers. But God had pity The Pope undertakes to
accommodate the difference, and does it.
of these poor people: The Pope becoming mediator to remedy those mischiefs
which threatened Christendom, happily accommodated the difference. The Spaniard
remitted the Process and the Prisoners; whom his Holiness consigned some days
after into the hands of the Count of Bethune, Ambassador for France at Rome;
and the King afterward sent an Ambassador into Spain, which was the Count of
Barraut.

Whilst the King was at Calais, whither as The Archduke besieging Ostend,
sends to complement the King.
we have said he went, the Archduke who was before Ostend, where he continued
that Siege This siege lasted three years, three months, and three days.
the most famous that ever was since that of Troy, feared with some reason,
lest the Kings approach should retard the progress of his enterprise, in which
he had already lost so many men, so much time spent, so many Cannot shot, so
much money, and such stores of Ammunition: he sent therefore to complement him,
promising him on the part of Spain satisfaction for the violence done to the
Lodgings of his Ambassador; but entreating him, that the besieged might not
prevail themselves of this Conjuncture. The King who never let himself be
overcome by Courtesy no more then by Arms, The King returns the civility to
the Archduke.
sent the Duke of Aiguillon, eldest Son of the Duke of Mayenne, to assure him
that he desired to maintain the peace; that he was not advanced on the
Frontiers but to dissipate some designs which were contriving, and that he
hoped in the equity of the King of Spain, which he doubted not would do him
reason.

Whilst he was at Calais, Queen Elizabeth The Queen of England sends likewise
to complement him: and he answers it by Byron.
sent likewise to visit him, by my Lord Edmonds her principal Confident. For
answer to which obliging civility, he caused the Marshal of Byron to pass into
England, accompanied by the Count d' Auvergne, and the choice of all the
Nobility of the Court, to represent to her the displeasure the King had,
finding himself so near her, that he could not enjoy the sight of her.

This Queen endeavored by all means possible, to make known to the French her
greatness and power. One day holding To whom she shows the Earl of Essex head
Byron by the hand, she showed him a great number of heads planted on the Tower
of London, telling him that in that manner they punished Rebels in England, and
recounting to him the reasons she had to put to death the Earl of Essex, whom
she had once so tenderly loved. Those who heard the discourse, remembered it
afterward, when they saw the Marshal Byron fallen into the same misfortune,
and lose his head, after having lost the favor of his King.

We must not forget, how that before the King made his voyage to Calais, he
had led the Queen with him to enjoy the Jubilee in The King and Queen enjoy the
Jubilee at Orleans.
the City of Orleans, where the holy Father had ordained the Stations for
France to begin. His piety which was sincere and unfeigned, gave a fair Example
to his people, who see him go to Processions with great devotion, and pray to
God with no less attention; his heart agreeing with his lips. He laid the first
stone to the foundation of the Church of the holy Cross at Orleans, which the
Hugonots had miserably thrown down, forty years before; and gave a considerable
sum of money to rebuild it.

All France during this holy Jubilee, had instantly demanded of Heaven that it
would be pleased to give them a Daulphine, to deliver them from those
misfortunes wherein they should be plunged, if the King should die The Queen
brought to bed of a Daulphine, who is named Lewis, after surnamed The Just.
without Male-children. Their vows were heard, and the Queen happily brought to
bed of a Son at Fontainbleau, on the day of St. Cosmo, being the twenty seventh
of September. They gave him at his Baptism the Name of Lewis, so sweet and dear
to France for the memory of the great St. Lewis, and of the good King Lewis
xii. Father of the people. Afterward was appropriated to him the surname of
Just; and we at present believe his having been the Father of Lewis the wise
and victorious, none of the least worthy of his Titles. His Birth was preceded
by a great Earthquake, which happened some days before. The Birth was very
hard, and the infant labored till he was all of a purple-colour; which
possibly ruined within the principal Organs of Health and good Constitution.
The King invoking on him the Benediction of Heaven, The King gives him his
blessing, and puts his sword in his hand.
gave him likewise his, and put his Sword in his hand, praying to God, That he
would give him the grace to use it only for his glory, and for the defense of
the people. The Princes of the Blood which were with him in the Chamber of the
Queen, all of them saluted the Daulphine one after another. I omit how express
Curriers carried this News into all the Provinces, the public rejoycings
throughout the whole Kingdom, particularly in the great City of Paris, who as
much loved Henry the great, as they had hated his Predecessor; the Complements
the King received on his part from all the Potentates of Europe; and the
accustomed Present of the holy Father in like occasions, to wit, the blessed
swathling bands, which he sent by Seigneur Barbarino, who was afterward
Cardinal and Pope, named Urban the viii.

Five days before, the Queen of Spain was Birth of the Infanta of Spain, named
Anne; who after espoused King Lewis xiii.
brought to bed of her first Child, which was a Daughter, whom at the Font of
Baptism they named Anne. The Spaniards rejoiced no less then if it had been a
Son: for in that Country the Females succeed to the Crown. Those amongst the
French who penetrated farthest into things to come, took likewise part in this
joy, but for another reason, which was, that this Princess being of the same
age with the Daulphine, it seemed that Heaven had made the one be born for the
other, and that she ought one day be his Spouse; as in effect Lewis xiii. had
this happiness, and France still possesses it; admiring in all occasions the
rare Wisdom, the exemplary Piety, and heroic Constancy of this great Princess.

In acknowledgement of the grace which The King makes diverse Orders for the
good of the Estate.
God had done to the King in giving him a Daulphine, which was the sum of his
wishes, he redoubled his care and diligence to acquit himself well of what he
ought to his Estate, to better, as he said, the succession of his Son. We will
here recount some Establishments and Orders he made to that purpose.

Need of moneys having obliged him during He suppresses the Triennial Officers
for Revenues.
the Siege of Amiens to create Triennial Officers in his Revenues; when it was
passed, he knew that there was no need of so many people to rifle his purse;
and that it was impossible but some little should every day remain in the hands
of every one of these: and therefore he suppressed these new Officers, and
commanded that the ancient and Alternative ones should re-imburse the
Triennial. From this suppression were excepted the Treasurers of the Exchequer,
and those of casual Forfeitures or Fines.

Rosny had so well bridled both the Gatherers and the Farmers, that they could
no longer devour those great Morsels they did heretofore. But this was not yet
enough: they were in such manner gorged before he was Superintendent, that the
King with infinite He establishes a Chamber of Justice to call Treasurers and
Collectors to account.
justice ordained a Tribunal, composed of a certain number of Judges chosen out
of the Sovereign Courts, and called it, The Chamber-Royal; whom he charged to
make an exact search of the misdemeanors of those who had managed the Kings
moneys. This Chamber made a great many disembogue: however, a great part found
the means to escape them; some out of a Consideration of their Alliances,
others by force of money, gaining those who were near the King, principally his
Mistr^sses, and corrupting the Judges themselves. So much is it true that Gold
pierces every where, and that nothing is proof against this pernicious Metal.
We need not then wonder if those people filled their Coffers as full as they
could, since the fuller they heaped them, the more facile was their
justification.

I have already said it, and I say it again, (for it cannot be too often nor
too much observed) that there is no remedy to hinder this disorder, The only
remedy against their thefts.
which is the greatest of all disorders in the Estate, and the cause of all
others, save only the vigilance and exactness of the King. He must himself
hold the strings of his purse, have his eye still upon his Coffers, know
punctually what is in them, what comes out of them; what ways his moneys
accrue, to what uses they are employed, who are they that manage them: and
above all, he must make them give a good account, as our Henry did, that if
they be honest men, they cannot be corrupted; and if they are knaves, not have
the means to act their knavery.

He was made to know, that there were two other disorders in his Realm which
extremely impoverished it, and drew from it all the Gold and Silver. The one
was the transportation of it to strange Countries, into Italy, Germany, and
Switzerland, where the little Potentates melted it, and made money of a ^aser
Alloy. The other, was the Luxury which consumed likewise a great quantity in
Embroyderies, Silver and Gold Lace on Clothes, and no less in the gilding of
Wainscots and Chimnies, and diverse Movables.

He made two severe Edicts, which prohibited The King prohibites the transport
of gold or silver out of his Kingdom,
these two abuses. For the first, he renewed the ancient Orders concerning the
transport of Gold and Silver; adding the punishment of the Halter to the
Transgressors; and commanding all Governors to watch diligently the
Observation of these his Prohibitions, and not to give any Pass-ports to the
contrary; otherwise he declared them partakers in such Transports.

By the second, he prohibited under the penalty and wearing gold and silver
lace, or gildings.
of great Fines for the first time, and of imprisonment for the second, the
wearing of Gold and Silver upon Clothes, or employing it in Gildings. This
Edict was rigorously observed, because it excepted no person; the King himself
submitting to the Law he made, and having looked with an ill Countenance on a
Prince of the Blood who obeyed not this Reformation.

There was likewise expended a prodigious quantity of money in Silks; by the
buying of which, all our money was gotten into strangers hands. The King seeing
that, and considering Introduces the manufacture of silk into France.
that the use of these Stuffs was very good and commodious, thought it best to
introduce the Manufacture into France; to the end the French might gain what
was now gained by the strangers. To this purpose he gave order for the planting
of a great number of white Mulberry-trees in those Countries where they would
best thrive, and particularly in Touraine, to nourish Silkworms; and that
people should be provided who understood how to prepare the Webs, and put to
work the labor of these pretio^^ Caterpillars.

If care had been taken ^^ter his death to maintain this Order, and to extend
it to other Provinces, it might have spared France more then five Millions,
which it every year sends out to provide silk Stuffs: besides, a Million of
persons, useless for other labors, as are old people, Maids and Children,
might have gained a living by it, and the Employers more easily have afforded
to pay the Imposts and Taxes out of the profit they had made of their industry.

There was yet a much greater mischief, which, as we may say, dried up the very
Intrails of the Kingdom; this was the excessive The usury excessive in France,
which caused
Usury. The ill Husbands, that is to say, the greatest part of the Nobility,
borrowed money at ten or twelve in the hundred. In which there was two great
inconveniences. The first, That the Interests undermining by little and little
in seven or eight years, dug up the ruin of the best families,
the foundations of the richest and most ancient Houses, which are, as we may
say, the Props and Pillars that uphold the State. The second, That the
Merchants finding this convenience and the Merchants to abandon all traffic.
of laying out their money to so great profit, and without any hazard,
absolutely abandoned all Commerce; the streams of which once dried up, there
must needs follow a famine of Gold and Silver in the Kingdom: for France has
no other Mines then its Traffic, and the distribution of its Merchandises.

These Considerations obliged the King not The King reduces interests to six in
the hundred.
only to prohibit all Usuries, but lay a penalty of the Confiscation of the
sum lent, and great Fines beside. Afterward the Parliament deputed some
Counselors in all Provinces to make inquisition after Usurers, and to reduce
all Interests or Hypothecated Rents to six and a half in the hundred. They were
before at ten or twelve, as we have said. The reason of which was, because when
they were constituted, money was much more scarce: now since it was extremely
multiplied, since the discovery of the Indies, it was just to abate its
interests: And it was for this reason that it was afterward put at six, and
may possibly one day be reduced lower.

Out of the same design to enrich his people, His great care to enrich his
Kingdom.
and to bring abundance and plenty into his Kingdom, the King continually
received all Proposals which might serve to enlarge Commerce, to bring
Commodity to his people, and to till and make fruitful the most sterile places.
He endeavored as much as was possible to make Rivers Navigable. He caused to
be repaired all Bridges and Causways, and the great Roads to be paved; knowing
that whilst they are not well kept, Carriages find but a difficult passage, and
Commerce is by that means interrupted. From whence happen the same disorders in
the economy of an Estate, as does in that of a man's* body, when it finds
Obstructions, and when the passage of the blood and spirits are not free.

When he passed through the Countries, he curiously regarded all things, took
notice of the necessities and disorders, and immediately remedied all with a
great diligence. Under his favor and protection were established in He favors
the establishment of manufactures. After his example, all labor* for their
benefit.
many places of the Kingdom Manufactures of Linen and Woollen Cloths, Laces,
Iron-ware, and many other things.

After his example, the Burgesses repaired their houses which the War had
ruined. The Gentlemen having laid by their Arms with only a switch in their
hand, dedicated themselves to manage their Estates, and augment their Revenues.
All the people were attentive to their work: and it was a wonder to see this
Kingdom, which five or six years before had been, as we may say, a Den of
Serpents and venomous Beasts, being filled with Thieves, Robbers, Vagrants,
Rake-hells and Beggars, changed by the diligence of the King into a Hive of
innocent Bees; who strove, as it were, with envy to each other, to give proofs
of their industry, and to gather Wax and Honey. Idleness was a shame, and a
kind of Crime; and indeed it is, as the Proverb says, the Mother of all Vices.
That spirit which takes no care to employ it self seriously in something, is
unprofitable to it self, and pernicious to the public. And for these Reasons
did the Provosts in that Idleness punished.
time make diligent search after Loyterers, Vagabonds, and idle persons, and
sent them to serve the King in his Galleys, to oblige them perforce to work.

There is no happiness so stable and assured, 1602.
but it may be easily troubled: there arrived The King remedies two things
capable to overthrow France.
this year two things which might have overturned all France, had not the King
in a good hour subverted them.

The Assembly of the Notables or Chiefs at Rouen, which was held in the year
1596. to raise money for the King to continue the War and pay his debts, had
granted him, as we have said, the imposition of a Sol pour livre on all
Merchandises carried into walled Cities. The Estate (says Tacitus, the greatest
Politician among Historians) cannot be maintained without Forces, nor the
Forces without Payment, nor they paid without Impositions: by consequence
therefore they are necessary; and it is just that every one should contribute
to the expenses of an Estate of which he makes a part, as well as partake of
those Conveniences and that protection it enjoys. But these impositions ought
to be moderate, proportionate to the power of every one; and every one ought to
bear his part. Moreover, it should be easy to perceive that the expense of
raising them exceed not the principal; that they be not laid so, as to appear
odious, as on Merchandises which nourish the poor: and that, in fine, they be
blood drawn gently from the veins, and not marrow forced from the bones. Now
the imposition of a Sol pour livre was of this nature. It was very oppressive:
The tax of a Sol pour livre burdensome.
for in every City they searched the Merchants Goods, opened their Bales, and
saw what every one brought: so that liberty was quite lost in the Kingdom.
Moreover, it was excessive: for any Merchandise being ten or twelve times sold,
it was found that it paid as much Impost as it was worth. Moreover, there was
great expense in the sale of it: for men were forced to employ as many Factors
as would have composed an Army; who desiring all to make themselves rich as
well as their Masters, were so vexatious to the Merchants, that they became
desperate. And that was most strange, was, that there were in the Kings Council
Pensioners to these Farmers, who supported them in their violences, and upheld
them against all Complaints made of their misdemeanors.

The people are always subject to this Criminal It causes commotions in the
Provinces.
Error, That when Justice is denied them, they may do it themselves; and have
recourse to force, when their prayers cannot prevail. This is the cause of
almost all seditions; and this is it which made all those beyond the Loire,
incensed at this imposition, drive away the Factors, and, which is more, kill
some of them. The Farmers on the other side sharpened the mischief by their
furious threats, that they would dismantle the rebellious Cities, that they
would build Citadels to keep them in awe. And I believe that these Gentlemen
did desire it should be so, not out of love to the Kings Authority, which they
had still in their mouths, but for their proper revenge, and particular
advantage.

The King having advice of these Commotions, The King to appease them, goes to
Poictiers.
fearing left they were raised by the Emissaries of the faction of the Duke of
Byron, which he had then newly discovered, a little after Easter departed from
Fontainblean, came from Blois, and from thence to Poictiers. There he
favorably hearkened to the complaints His wise and just remonstance to the
Deputies of Guyenne*
of his people, and remonstrated to the Deputies of the Cities of Guyenne, That
the Imposts raised were not to enrich his Ministers and Favorites, as his
Predecessor had done; but to support the necessary charges of his Estate: That
if his demeans had been sufficient for it, be would not have taken any thing
out of his Subjects purses; but since he had first employed all his He had sold
the Lands of his Patrimony.
own, it was just they should contribute some of theirs: That he passionately
desired the ease of his Subjects; and that none of his Predecessors* had so
much desired their prayers to God as he, to bless the increase of his Realm:
That those Alarms given them that he had a design to build Castles in the
Cities, were false and seditious; for he desired to have no other Forts then in
the hearts of his Subjects.

By these sweet Remonstrances, he calmed He calms the seditions, and revokes
the Sol pour livre.
all the seditions, without having need of chastising them, save only that the
Consuls of Limoges were deposed, and the Pancarte (for so it was they called
the Sol pour livre) established. But this was only for the honor of the Royal
Authority: for soon after, this Prince, the most just and best that ever was,
knowing the extreme Vexations it caused, revoked and utterly abolished it.

The second thing which gave him yet more trouble, and which was capable to
overthrow his Kingdom if it were not remedied, was, The Conspiracy of Marshal
Byron. It is to be Conspiracy of the Marshal Byron.
understood, that Laffin had been the principal Instrument of intelligence
between the Marshal and the Duke of Savoy: he had carried and re-carried
Letters, and had had some Conferences with the Duke and with the Count of
Fuentes; so that he understood the whole intrigue. But seeing that there was no
assurance in the words of the Savoyard, and that Byron began to shake, he
resolved to discover the Laffin discovers it to the King.
whole plot to the King; were it that he feared lest if he should too long
delay it, it might be discovered other ways; or that he hoped by this service
to gain a great recompense, and restore himself to the Kings favor, with whom
he stood on very ill terms.

Having laid this design, he employed the Vidame is a Lord who holds his
Lordship in Fief of a Bishop.
Vidame of Chartres his Nephew, to obtain from the King his Grace and Oblivion
of all passed, on condition that he discovered to him the Accomplices of the
Conspiracy, and furnished him with proofs. He had preserved several Letters
committed to his keeping; but they said not enough, nor spoke so clearly as to
make a Conviction. But to pass an absolute one, see what he did.

Byron had some Notes written with his own How he got the Notes written with
Byron's own hand.
hand, wherein the Conspiracy was laid down in Articles. Laffin remonstrated to
him, that it was an imprudence to keep them, and to communicate them, because
his writing was too well known: that it would be more secure to make a Copy,
and burn the Original. Byron approving his counsel, gives them him to
transcribe. He indeed transcribes them whilst Byron lay on his Bed: afterward
giving him the Copy, and ruffling up the Original, he makes show of casting it
into the fire; but by a premeditated cunning, he casts in some other Papers,
and keeps them. A thing of this importance deserved well the care of Byron
himself in its burning: but he not taking it, because God so permitted, that
negligence cost him his life, as we shall see.

After this, Laffin continuing still his devices to endeavor yet to gather
some more particular secrets, he went disguised to Milan, and conferred with
the Count Fuentes: but this close and able Spaniard, finding well that he would
betray them, showed himself more reserved. It has been reported, that Laffin
having knowledge of this distrust, was fearful lest he should make him away,
and therefore returned by the unusual and unfrequented ways: of which the Duke
of Savoy being advertized The Duke of Savoy keeps Renaze Laffins Secretary.
by Fuentes, kept prisoner the Secretary of Laffin named Renaze, for fear lest
he should go serve as a witness against Byron.

In their Conferences they had proposed to dismember the Kingdom of France:
That the Propositions betwixt Byron, the Duke of Savoy, and the Count Fuentes.
Duke of Savoy should have Provence and the Daulphinate; Byron, Bourgongne and
la Bresse, with the third Daughter of the Duke in marriage, and fifty thousand
Crowns for Dower: some others should be Lords of other Provinces, with the
quality of Peers: That all these little Sovereigns should hold their right from
the King of Spain: That to compass this design, the Spaniards should with a
puissant Army enter the Kingdom, and the Savoyard with another: That they
should cause the Hugonots to stir, and at the same time revive many discontents
in several places, and animate the people, already much incensed by the
Pancarte, or Tax of a Sol pour livre.

All these propositions, say some, were made Byron had demanded pardon of the
King, but after fell again.
in the time of the war against Savoy; and the Marshal of Byron grown
outrageous, at the Kings refusal to give him the Citadel of Bourg, had not only
lent his ear, but had engaged himself very far in these damnable designs.
However, he seemed to have repented himself: for he had confessed them to the
King walking with him in the Cloister of the Cordiliers at Lions, and had
demanded pardon of him; but he had neglected to take an abolition or script of
indemnity, contrary to the advice of the Duke d' Espernon, who was more wise
and considerate then he.

But a little after, repenting himself for having repented, he was returned to
his first fault, and yet entertained correspondence with strangers. Moreover,
he spoke of the He speaks ill of the King, and boasts excessively of himself.
King with little respect, abasing the splendour of his worthy actions,
glorifying his own, and boasting that he had put the Crown on his head, and
preserved France. In fine, all his discourses were only Bravadoes,
Rhodomontadoes, and Threats.

All this was reported to the King: It was told him that he undervalued his
great acts, extolled the power of the King of Spain, praised the wisdom of
that Princes Council, his liberality in recompencing all good services, and his
zeal to defend the true Religion. The King answered plainly and prudently to
those that made him these reports: That he knew the heart of Byron, that it was
faithful and affectionate: that in truth his tongue was intemperate; but that
in favor of those good actions he had done, he could pardon his ill discourses.

Now two things completed his loss, and obliged Two things complete his loss.
the King to search into the very bottom of his wicked designs. The first was
the too great number of his friends, and the affection of the Soldiery, which
he made boast of, as if they had been absolute dependants on his Command, and
capable to do whatever he would. The second, the most particular friendship he
had with the Count d' Auvergne, brother by the Mothers side to Mademoiselle d'
Entragues, who was called the Marchioness of Verneuil. For by the one he begat
a jealousy in the King, and made himself be feared; and by the other he
rendered himself odious to the Queen, who imagined, and possibly not without
cause, that he would make a party in the Kingdom to maintain that Rival and her
Children, to her prejudice.

Now the King desiring to search the farthest Laffin comes to Court, and
reveals all to the King.
he could into this affair, sends for Laffin, who comes to Fountain-bleau, more
then a month before the King departed toward Poictou. He had at first some
very secret entertainments with him, afterward very public ones; and gave him
great quantities of Papers; amongst other, those Memoires or Notes written by
Byrons own hand, of which we have before spoken. That which Laffin revealed to
the King, begat great inquietudes in his spirit; so that in all the voyage of
Poictiers he was observed extremely pensive; and the Court after his example
was plunged in a sad astonishment; though none could divine the cause of it.

At his return from Poictiers to Fountainbleau, The King sends for Byron to
Court, who at first excuses himself.
he sent for the Duke of Byron to come to him. The Duke at first doubted to go,
and excused himself with many weak reasons. He presses him, and sends to him
some of his Esquires; afterward the President Janin brought him word that he
should receive no harm; which was, provided he put himself into an estate to
receive grace, and aggravated not his crime, by his pride and by his
impenitence.

Byron knew that Laffin had made a voyage to Court; but he was more assured of
that man then of himself. Moreover the Baron of Lux his confident, who was then
there, had told him that Laffin had without doubt kept his Counsel, and not
revealed any thing which might hurt him. De Lux believed so, because the King
after having entertained Laffin, had told him with a merry countenance, I am
glad I have seen this man; he has eased me of many distrusts and suspicions of
spirit.

In the mean time the friends of Byron writ to him, that he should not be such
a fool as to bring his head to the Court; that it would be more secure for him
to justify himself by Attorney then in person. But notwithstanding this advice,
and against biting of his own conscience, after having some time deliberated,
he took post and came to Fountain-bleau, In the end Byron comes.
now when the King no longer expected him, but prepared to go seek him.

The Histories of that time, and many other relations, recount exactly all the
circumstances of the imprisonment, process, and death of that Marshal. I shall
content my self to relate only the chief.

The insolence and blindness of this unhappy man cannot be sufficiently admired
at, nor on the contrary the goodness and clemency of the King be enough
praised, who endeavored to overcome his obstinacy. Confession of a fault is
the first mark of repentance. The King taking him in private, The King conjures
^im the first time to confess the truth.
instantly conjured him to declare all those intelligences and Treaties he had
made with the Duke of Savoy; engaging his faith that he would bury all in an
eternal oblivion: That he knew well enough all the particulars, but desired to
understand them from his mouth; swearing to him, that though his fault should
be greater then the worst of crimes, his confession should be followed by an
absolute pardon. Byron in stead of acknowledging it, or at least excusing
himself with modesty, as speaking to his King who was offended; insolently
answered He insolently vindicates himself.
him, that he was innocent, and that he was not come to justify himself, but
to understand the names of his back-biters, and demand justice, which otherwise
he would do himself. Though this too haughty answer aggravated much his
offense, the King ceased not sweetly to tell him, that he should think farther
of it, and that he hoped he would take better counsel. The King prays the
Count of Soissons to exhort him to confess his crime. But he is more obstinate.


The same day after supper, the Count of Soissons exhorted him likewise, on the
part of the King, to confess the truth; concluding his Remonstrance with that
sentence of the Wiseman; Sir, know that the anger of the King is as the
Messenger of Death. But he answered him with more fierceness then he had done
the King.

On the morrow morning the King walking The King speaks to him the second time,
but in vain.
in his Gardens, conjured him the second time to confess the Conspiracy: but he
could draw nothing from him, but protestations of innocence, and threatenings of
his accusers.

Upon this the King felt himself agitated even at the bottom of his soul with
diverse thoughts, not knowing what he ought to do. The affection he had born him
and his great services, withheld his just anger: on the other side, He is
troubled what to resolve on.
the blackness of his crime, his pride and obstinacy gave reins to his justice,
and obliged him to punish the criminal. Besides that the danger with which both
his Estate and Person were threatened, seemed impossible to be prevented, but by
cutting off the head of a conspiracy, whose bottom was scarce visible.

In this trouble of spirit he retired into his Closet, and falling on his
knees, prayed to God with all his heart to inspire him with a good resolution.
He was accustomed to do thus in all his great affairs; esteeming God as his
surest Counselor, and most faithful assistance. At his coming from prayers,
as he said afterward, he found himself delivered from the trouble wherein he
was, and resolved to cast Byron into the hands of Justice, He resolves to leave
him to Justice.
if his Council found that the proofs they had by writing were so strong, that
there need no doubt be made of his Condemnation. He chose for this purpose four
persons of those which composed it; to wit, Bellievre, Villeroy, Rosny and
Sillery, and showed them the proofs. They all told him with one voice, that
they were more then sufficient.

Yet after this he would make a third trial Yet tries the third time to draw
truth from him.
on this proud heart. He employed this last time Remonstrances, Prayers,
Conjurations, and assurances of pardon, to oblige him to acknowledge his crime:
but he answered still in the same manner; adding, that if he knew his accusers,
he would break their heads.

In fine, the King wearied with his Rhodomontadoes He finds it in vain, and
leaves him.
and obstinacy, left him, giving him these for his last words; Well then, we
must learn the truth in another place. Farewell Baron of Byron. This word was as
lightning, the Vant-Courier of the Thunderbolt he was about to throw: the King
by it degrading him of so many eminent dignities with which he had honored
him, showed that he was about to abase him much more then ever he had raised
him.

At his coming forth of the Queens Chamber, where he played at Primero, Vitry
Captain By on and the Count of Auvergne Arrested prisoners.
of the Kings Lifeguard demanded his Sword, and Arrested him as his prisoner.
Praslin likewise Captain of the Guards secured the Count of Auvergne; and on
the morrow putting them in Boats on the Seine, conducted them with a good
Convoy by water to the Bastille.

Byron had a very great number of friends: His kindred intercede for him.
but on this occasion wherein he was accused to have conspired against the
person of the King, they were all mute and struck dumb. His kindred which were
found at the Court, went to cast themselves on their knees before the King, not
to demand Justice of him, but to implore his mercy. The Lord de la Force,
afterward Marshal of France, spoke for them all. If Byron had at first spoke
with so much humility and submission as they did, he had without doubt obtained
his grace: but it was now too late; there was now no more room for Clemency, it
had given place to Justice. The Parliament make his Process.


The King commanded his Parliament to make his Process, and sent particular
Commission to the chief President, and to the President Potier Blan-Mesnil, and
two Counselors, to draw up the instructions at the request of the
Attorny-General.

The proofs were very strong, and the defense He defends himself weakly.
of Byron very weak. He made it plainly appear in a business wherein he acted
for his Life, that he had less brains then heart. For he presently acknowledged
his writing; which he might have denied, and have gained some time to have made
it be proved. This piece had been written in the time of the War of Savoy. He
pretended that the King being at Lions, had pardoned him all his rebellious
Motions. But the King sent Letters under his Letters of the King revoking the
pardon granted him at Lions.
Great Seal to the Parliament, by which herevoked that grace. And no great
consideration was had upon it: for first, that grace he had granted him, was
but verbal; and in the second place, the Parliament held it for a Maxim, That
there are Crimes the King cannot pardon; as those of Laesae Majestatis, Divine
and Humane; and those which are of a horrible scandal, and great prejudice to
the Public. When they came to the re-examination and confronting of Witnesses,
and presented Laffin to Byron, in stead of reproaching him, as a man whom an
hundred reproaches might have rendered incapable of bearing witness, he
acknowledged him for an honest Man, and a He reproacheth not Laffin.
brave Gentleman: but afterward when he heard his Deposition read, he began to
charge him with injuries, to call him Traitor, Magician, and Devilish Fellow.
But the time was past, nor were his reproaches any more valuable.

He believed that Renaze was still a Prisoner Renaze appears before him, at
which he is much astonished.
in Piedmont: but he had escaped some time before, and was now presented to
him. He believed that he saw a Fantasm or Ghost; he remained astonished and
dumb; and without making any exception against him, heard his Deposition, which
agreed with that of Laffin. They deposed, besides what we have already said,
That he had complotted with the Governor of Fort St. Katherine to kill the
King when he went to receive that place: That Byron was to march a little
before him clad in a certain fashion, to the end he might be known. They said
likewise, that he had another design to take away the King when he should be
hunting, or other where ill accompanied, and carry him into Spain.

The Charge of the Impeachment thus made He is conducted to the Parliament, and
heard.
in the Bastille by four Commissioners, he was conducted to the Palace down the
River, guarded on both sides by the Regiment of Guards. He was heard in
Parliament seated on the Footstool, all the Chambers of the Assemblies, but
the Peers, being present, though they had been likewise called; and afterward
reconducted to the Bastille.

On the morrow, being the last of July, it Sentence of death voted against him.
was put to the Vote: of one hundred and fifty Judges, there was not one who
concluded not of his death. He was declared Attainted and convicted of the
crime of Laesae Majestatis, for the Conspiracies made by him against the person
of the King, Designs upon his Estate, Treasons and Treaties with his Enemies,
being Marshal of the Armies of the said King. And for reparation of his Crimes,
deprived of all his Estates, Honors and Dignities, and condemned to have his
head cut off in the place of the Greve; his Goods, moveable and immovable,
taken and confiscated to the King; his Lands of Byron for ever deprived of the
title of Peerage; and those and all his other Lands reunited to the Demains of
the Crown.

The King under pretext of doing a favor The King removes the execution to the
Bastille.
to his Kindred, but fearing indeed some tumult, because he was much loved of
the Soldiery, and had a great number of friends in Court, removed the place of
his execution, and would have it done in the Bastille. The Chancellor going
with the chief President, caused him to be led to the Chapel, where about ten
of the Clock in the morning he Sentence pronounced.
pronounced his Sentence, which he heard with one Knee on the ground, with a
great deal of patience: only when they came to these words, Conspiracies
against the person of the King, he rise up, and cried out, There is no such
thing; that is false; blot out that. In fine, the Chancellor, according to
form, redemanded of him the Collar of his Order, his Ducal Crown, and his
Marshals Staff. He had not the two last with him, but only the first, which he
drew out of his pocket, and gave.

It will be needless to recount all his Discourses, his Reproaches, his
Passions, his Laments, his Exclamations, and a hundred other Extravagancies,
(for so we may call them) with which he was transported.

About five a Clock that Evening, he was His head cut off.
led to the Scaffold, where he had his head cut off. It was observed that it
bounded three times, forced by the impetuosity of his spirits, which were
transported; and that there issued more blood out of it, then out of the trunk
of his body. He was carried to the Church of St. Paul, where he was buried
without any Ceremony, but with a great concourse of people, who had all tears
in their eyes, and lamented that brave Courage which a detestable Ambition, and
a too boundless Pride, had brought to so unhappy an end.

It is convenient to understand, that this He was very ignorant, but a great
lover of predictions.
Marshal was very ignorant, but extremely curious in the Predictions of
Astrologers, Diviners, Necromancers, and other Deceivers. It was held likewise,
that Laffin had gained his favor by making him believe that he talked with the
Devil, and that he had assured him that he should be a Sovereign. It was said
likewise, that being young, he went one day disguised to see a Teller of
Good-fortune, who foretold that he should be a very great Lord, but that he
should have his head cut off: at which being troubled, he outragiously beat
him. That another Diviner told him he should be King, if a blow of a sword
behind hindered it not. And another, that he should die by the hand of a
Burgonian; and it was found, that the Executioner who cut off his head, was a
Native of Bourgongne.

Diverse others were reported: but to speak the truth, the most of these
Predictions are ordinarily known after the Events; and though they do
effectually precede the event, it must be believed by chance, and not by
knowledge; the Prognosticators telling so many stories, that it is impossible
but some should happen. It is therefore a great wisdom to disabuse our A
reflection very necessary for great men.
spirits of these sorts of curiosities: for besides that they have no
foundation in Reason, we offend God by believing them, and give money to let
our selves be fooled and led by the Noses: nor do ever wise men give any faith
to them, though sometimes they serve to deceive the simple.

Laffin and Renaze had their full pardon. Laffin and Renaze pardoned.
One named Hebert, Secretary to Marshal Byron, suffered the ordinary and That
is, the Rack.
extraordinary Question, without confessing any thing; yet he was condemned to
perpetual imprisonment: but a little after, the King gave him his liberty; yet
the resentment of what he had suffered, having more power over him then the
favor, he fled into Spain, where he finished his days.

The Baron of Lux, Byrons chief Confident, So is the Baron of Lux, and
confirmed in his Charges.
came to Court on the Kings word. He told him all that he knew, and possibly
more: by which means he obtained his pardon in what form he pleased, and was
confirmed in his Charges, and in the Government of the Castle of Dijon, and the
City of Beaune. The King kept the Government of Bourgongne for Monseur le
Dauphine, and gave the Lieutenancy to Bellegarde, who afterward was Governor
in chief.

Montbarot Lord Breston was put into the Bastille upon some suspicions had of
him; but Montbarot imprisoned, and soon released.
being found innocent, the Gates were soon opened to him.

The Baron of Fontanelles, a Gentleman of a very good house, had not the same
fortune: Fontanelles broke on the wheel.
for for having a hand in the conspiracy, and besides that, treating of his own
accord with the Spaniards to deliver to them a little Island on the Coast of
Bretany, he was broke on the Wheel in the Greve, by sentence of the great
Council. The King in consideration of his house, which was very illustrious,
granted to his Kindred that in the sentence he should not be called by his
proper Name: but History could not be silent in it.

The Duke of Bouillon finding himself likewise Duke of Bouillon had a hand in
the conspiracy.
somewhat involved in Byrons business, judged it convenient to retire into his
Viscounty of Turenne; where the King, being advised that he yet plotted
something, sent for The King sends for him to Court; but he presents himself to
the Chamber of Castres.
him to come and justify himself. In stead of coming, he writ to him a very
eloquent Letter, by which he represented to him, That having understood that
his Accusers were both extremely wicked, and very cunning, he entreated him to
dispense with his coming to Court; and think fit, that to satisfy his Majesty,
all France, and his own Honor, his Process should be made at the Chamber of
Castres, by virtue of the privilege he had granted to those of the pretended
Religion; and that he would send thither his Accusers and Accusations. In
pursuance of which, he came to Castres, presented himself to the Chamber, and
took an Act of his appearance. The King was not at all pleased with this
Answer; blamed the Judges of Castres for having given him that Act, and sent to
tell him that there was yet no question of leaving him over to Justice, and
that therefore he should the rather come.

Being advertized by those friends he had at After, he retires to Geneva, and
thence to Heidelberg to the Prince Palatine his Kinsman.
Court of the Kings resolution, who had sent to him the President Commartin to
let him understand his will, he departed from Castres, went to Orange, passed
by Geneva, and so retired to Heidelberg to the Prince Palatine: saying like a
sage Politician, as he was, That he ought neither to Capitulate with his King,
nor yet go near him whilst his anger lasted. This business lay a breeding some
years; we shall see in its place how it terminated.

It must here be acknowledged, that the favor The favor of Rosny a pretext to
the discontents of the great ones.
of Rosny served in this time for a pretext to almost all the discontents and
all the conspiracies of the great ones. The King had truly raised him by four
or five great Charges, because he believed he could not sufficiently recompense
those services he had rendered him. And in that this Prince merits only praise:
for a good Master cannot do too much for a good and faithful servant. But
though the troublesome and discontented Spirits might complain Yet the King
gave him not too much power;
that the King gave him too many Charges and Employments; yet they could not
lament his giving him too much power, or that he gave it to him alone: for we
may with truth say^, that Rosny had not the liberty to do the least grace of
his own accord. He was forced in all things to address himself directly to the
King; who would himself distribute his favors but keeps it to himself.
and recompenses to those he knew worthy, that they might acknowledge the whole
Obligation and dependence from him. This great Prince knew well, That he who
gives An important truth.
all, may do all; and that he who gives nothing, is nothing, but what it shall
please him who gives all. He had too much Honor, and too much Glory, to suffer
that another should act in the most noble Function of his Royal Authority.
Whatever favor or whatever familiarity any had with him, if they were wanting
to conserve it with a profound respect, or should speak or act with him
otherwise then with their Master and with their King, they would doubtless as
soon fall into disgrace: and this was, as we have observed, one of the causes
of Byron's loss. Judge then, if he who would not that any should in any thing
in the world act the Companion with him, would have endured that they should
act the Sovereign. Judge, if he would have been contented that his Ministers
should simply have taken his consent in a business, or that they should speak
to him of things in manner of discharge, after having themselves resolved them.
No, without doubt: He would that all Resolutions should come from his own Head,
and from his own Motion: that the choice should be his: that he alone should
have the power to raise and throw down; and that none but himself should be
Arbitrator in the Fortunes of his Subjects. Not but that he considered, as it
was just, the Recommendations of the great ones of his Estate, and of his
Ministers, in the conferring of his Favors, Employments and Charges; but it
was still in such a manner, that he made them to whom he gave them know, that
they ought only to hold them from him: which the following Example well
demonstrates.

The Bishopric of Poictiers becoming vacant, A memorable example, that a King
ought not to yield too much to his Ministers.
Rosny very instantly besought him to consider in this occasion one named
Frenouillet, reputed a knowing man, and a great Preacher. The King
notwithstanding this Recommendation, gives it to the Abbot of Rochepozay; who,
besides his own particular good Qualities, was Son to a Father who had served
him well with his Sword in his Wars, and with his knowledge and spirit in
Embassies. Some time after, the Bishopric of Montpellier became vacant: the
King out of his own proper motion sent to seek Frenouillet, and told him, that
he would give it him; but on this condition, that he should acknowledge no
Obligation but to himself. By which it may be seen, how he in some sort
considered the Recommendation of Rosny: but it may likewise be perceived, that
the power of that Favorite, who caused so much jealousy in the world, was
bounded. I call him Favorite, by reason that he had the most splendent
Employments; though to speak truth he had no pre-eminence over others of the
Council: for Villeroy and Janin were more considered then he in Negotiations
and Foreign Affairs; Bellievre and Sillery for Justice and Policy within the
Kingdom: and it is not to be imagined that those people did in any manner
depend on him. There was only one head in the Estate, which was the King, who
alone made all his Members, and from whom only they received spirits and
vigor. Enterprises of the Duke of Savoy on Geneva.


About the end of this year, the Duke of Savoy thinking to revenge himself, and
repair the loss of his County of Bresse on the City of Geneva, attempted to
take it by storm. The Enterprise was formed by the Counsels of the Lord of
Albigny; and the Duke having passed the Mountains, believed it infallible. D'
Albigny conducted two thousand men for this purpose within half a League of the
City; yet was not so rash as to engage himself, but left the conduct to others.
More then two hundred men mounted the Ladders, gained the Ramparts, and ran
through all the City without being perceived. In the mean time, the Burgesses
were awakened by the cries of some that fled from a Guard, which had discovered
the Enterprizers, and as soon beheld themselves charged by them. The Gunner,
who was to have broken a Gate within, to cause those without to enter, was
unhappily slain: after which, they were weakened on all sides. The greatest part
endeavored to re-gain their Ladders: but the Cannons on the Flankers having
broken them in pieces, they were almost all slain, or broke their necks by
leaping into the Ditch. There was thirteen taken alive, almost all Gentlemen:
amongst the others, Attignac, who had served as second to Don Phillipin bastard
of Savoy. They yielded upon assurance given them, that they should be treated
as prisoners of War: But the furious cries of the common people, who
represented the danger wherein their City was of Massacres, Violation,
universal Destruction, or perpetual Slavery, forced the Council of this little
Republic to condemn them to the infamous death of the Gibbet, like to Thieves.
Thirteen of the Enterprizers ^anged.
Their heads, with fifty four others of those that were killed, were stuck on
Poles, and their bodies cast into the Rhone.

The Duke of Savoy, confused with such ill The Duke of Savoy excuses himself to
the Suisses.
success, and much more with the reproaches of all Christendom, for having
endeavored such an Enterprise in time of absolute peace, repassed the
Mountains in haste, leaving his Troops near to Geneva, and endeavored to excuse
himself to the Suisses, under whose protection that City was, as well as under
that of France, for having attempted to surprise it; saying, That he had not
done it to trouble the repose of the Confederacy, but to hinder Lesdiguieres
from seizing it for the King. From whom the City of Geneva was held.


The Dukes of Savoy have for a long time pretended that this City appertained
to their Sovereignty; and that the Bishops who bore the title of Earls, and
were for some time Lords of it, held it from them: which is however a thing
that the Bishops*never acknowledged; always maintaining, that they depended
immediately on the Empire. The City on their part sustained that it was a free
City, and not subject in temporal things, neither to their Bishops, whom they
quite drove out in the year 1533. when they unhappily renounced the Roman
Catholic Religion; nor to the Duke of Savoy, but only to the Empire: for
which reason they always bore the Eagle planted on their Gates. Both one and
the other have very specious Titles to show their rights: It was an Allie of
the Suisses, and under protection of France.
but for the present the City of Geneva enjoyed full liberty, and had for above
sixty years, being become an Allie of the Cantons of Switzerland. Now the
Suisses were comprehended in the Treaty of Vervin as Allies of France, and by
consequence so was the City of Geneva; and the King had sufficiently declared
it to the Duke of Savoy: notwithstanding which, he ceased not to attempt this
Enterprise; hoping that if it succeeded, the King of Spain and the Pope would
sustain him in it, and that the King for so small a thing would not break the
peace.

The Genevans furiously incensed against The Genevans make War on Savoy.
him, began to make War courageously; entered his Country, and took some little
Towns. They hoped that the King and the Suisses would second these motions of
their resentment; and that all the Princes of Germany would likewise come to
their assistance. But the King desired to keep the peace; and was too wise to
kindle a War in which he could not make Religion and Policy agree; or unite the
Honor and Interests of France, obliged to protect its Allies, with the good
favor of the Pope moved by his duty to the ruin of the Hugonots. He therefore
sent de Vic to assure them of his protection: but with order to let them know,
that Peace was necessary for them, But the King obliges them to peace.
and War ruinous; and that they ought to embrace the one, and shun the other.
And they having little power for so much anger, and not being able to do any
thing without his assistance, were constrained to consent, and enter into a
Treaty with the Savoyard: by which it was said, that they were comprised in the
Treaty of Vervin, and that the Duke could not build any Fortress within four
Leagues of their City.

It happened almost in the same time, that The inhabitants of Mets rise against
Sobole their Governor.
the City of Mets rose against the Governor of that Citadel. He was called
Sobole; who having been made Lieutenant by the Duke of Espernon, to whom Henry
the third had given the Government in chief, had deserted this Duke, I know not
for what consideration, and had taken provision of the King. He had a Brother
who seconded him in the Charge of this Government.

During the last War against Spain, these two Brothers had accused the
principal inhabitants of Mets for having conspired to deliver the City to the
Spaniards. There were many imprisoned, some put to the rack; but none found
culpable: so that all the Burgesses believing with reason that this was a
Calumny, conceived a hatred against these Soboles, and drew up several
Petitions of complaint against them, accusing them of a great number of
Exactions and Cruelties. The Duke d' Espernon, who without doubt sustained
these Burgesses at the Court, was sent by the King to accommodate this
difference. The Soboles who had offended him, no longer trusted him; they would
not permit him to enter into the strongest Citadel, nor let the Garrison go out
to meet him: so that being justly incensed, The Duke d' Espernon kindles the
fire more.
he envenomed the plague instead of healing it, and animated the inhabitants in
such a manner, that they Barricadoed themselves against them. The King who knew
that the least sparkles were capable to kindle a great fire, was not content to
send La Varenne, but went The King goes in person.
himself; being moreover willing to visit that Frontier. Sobole gave the place
into his hands; and he gave it to Arquien, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment
of Guards, with the Quality of Lieutenant of the King, to command in the
absence of the Duke d' Espernon Governor, who had no great power The Jesuits
present their request to the King, for their reestablishment.
so long as the King lived.

The King passed the Feast of Easter at Mets. Whilst he was there, he hearkened
to the request which the Jesuits made for their re-establishment. He referred
the doing them Justice till he should come to Paris; and gave leave to Father
Ignatius Armand, and Father Coton, to come to solicit their cause. They were
not wanting to do it; and Father Coton, being of a sharp and witty discourse,
and a very famous Preacher, gained so soon the favor of all the Court, and
pleased the King so well, that he obtained from his Majesty the recalling of
the Society into the Kingdom, contrary to the opinion and advice of some of his
Council. He then re-established them by an He re-establisheth them gloriously.
Act, which he caused to be confirmed in Parliament; and caused to be thrown
down that Pyramide, which had been erected before the Palace, in the place of
the house of John Castle, where there were many writings in Verse and Prose
very bloody against these Fathers. Thus was their banishment gloriously
repaired; and after all, the King kept with him Father Coton as his Chaplain in
Ordinary, and Confessor and Director of his Conscience. This was not
accomplished till the year 1604.

In these two years of 1602, and 1603. we 1602, and 1603.
have yet three or four important things to observe. The first, that the King
at his departure from Mets went to Nancy to visit his He visits his sister at
Nancy. Renews his alliance with the Suisses and Grisons.
Sister, the Duchess of Bar; who died the year following without Children. The
second, that he renewed the Alliance with the Suisses, and some months after
with the Grisons; notwithstanding those Obstacles by which the Count of Fuentes
endeavored to oppose it. The third was, that in returning to Paris, he
received news of the Death of Hears of the death of Queen Elizabeth of England.
Elizabeth Queen of England, one of the most Illustrious and most Heroic
Princesses that ever Reigned; and who Governed her Estate with more Prudence
and Power, then any of her Predecessors had ever done.

She was Daughter to King Henry the eighth, and to that Anne of Bullen, for
whose love he had left Katherine of Arragon, Aunt to Charles the fifth
Emperor, his first wife. There was nothing wanting to the happiness of her
Kingdom save the Catholic Religion, which she banished out of England. And we
might give her the name of good as well as great, if she had not dealt so
inhumanely as She beheaded Mary Queen of Scots.
she did with her Cousin-German Mary Stuart Queen of Scotland; whom she kept
eighteen years prisoner, and after beheaded; induced to it by some conspiracies
which the Servants and Friends of that poor Princess had made against her
person. James 6. King of Scotland and Son of Mary, succeeded to the Kindom of
England. He was James the first of that name among* the Kings of England.


The Son of that Mary named James the sixth King of Scotland, being the nearest
of the Blood Royal of England, as Grandchild to Margaret of England, Daughter
to King Henry the seventh, and Sister to Henry the eighth, married to James the
fourth King of Scotland, succeeded Elizbeth, who had put his Mother to death.
He caused himself to be called King of Great Britain, to unite under the same
title the two Crowns of England and Scotland; which indeed are but one Island,
formerly called by the Romans Magna Britania.

The Alliance of so powerful a King might make the balance incline to which
side soever it were turned, either of France or Spain: For which reason both
the one and Ambassadors go from France and Spain to desire his friendship.
the other immediately sent Magnificent Ambassadors to salute him, each
endeavoring to draw him to his side. It was Rosny who went on the part of
Henry the Great: he obtained all the favorable Audience he desired, and the
confirmation of the ancient Treaties between France and England. The Ambassador
of Spain found not such facility in his Negotiation; the English appeared
resolute. The Spaniards were forced to yield, that the place of the Treaty
should be appointed in England, and to grant the English free Taffick in all
their Territories, even in the Indies, and Piety yields to Interest.
give them liberty of Conscience in Spain; so that they should not be subject
to the Inquisition, nor obliged to salute the holy Sacrament in the streets,
but only turn from it.

France was in a profound peace, as well without by the renewing of the
Alliances with the Suisses and with England as within, by the discovery of the
Conspiracies which were quite dissipated; the King enjoyed a repose worthy his
labors, and his past travail made his pleasure more sweet. However, he was The
King labors to conserve peace.
not idle, but was seen daily employed: for he endeavored with as much
diligence to conserve peace, that divine daughter of heaven, as he had used
courage and valor in making War.

He was often heard say, That though Excellent speeches of a good King.
he could make the house of France as powerful in Europe, as that of the
Ottomans was in Asia, and conquer in a moment all the Estates of his
neighbors; yet he would not do so great a dishonor to his word, by which he
was obliged to the keeping of the Peace.

His most ordinary divertisements during His divertisements.
this time, were Hunting and Building. He at the same time maintained workmen
at the Church of the holy Cross at Orleans, at St. Germain in Lay, at the
Louvre, and at the Place Royal.

The Nobility of France during this peace, Employs of the Nobility.
could not live out of action: some passed their time in Hunting, others with
Ladies; some in Studies of Learning and the Mathematics, others in traveling
into Foreign Countries; and others continued the Exercise of War under Prince
Maurice in Holland. But the greatest part, whose hands as it were itched, and
who sought to signalize their valor without departing from their Countries,
became punctilious, and for the least word, or for a wry look, put their hands
to their swords. Thus that madness of Duels entered into the Duels too frequent.
hearts of the Gentlemen; and these Combats were so frequent, that the Nobility
shed as much blood in the Meadows with their own hands, as their enemies had
made them lose in Battails.

The King therefore made a second and a The King makes an Edict against this
madness.
most severe Edict, which prohibited Duels, confiscating the bodies and goods
of those who went thus into the field. For the present, this prohibition made
the ardor of the most violent a little relent: but because he often pardoned
this crime, not being able to refuse it to those who had faithfully served him
in his need; it happened that in a little time this mischief regained its
course, almost as strong as before.

His receiving from all persons all advices He makes Acts for working the Gold,
Silver* and Copper Mines.
that might accommodate and in rich his Kingdom, made him understand that there
were in diverse places of France very good Mines both of Gold and Silver, Copper
and Lead; and that if they were wrought, there would be no need to buy of
strangers: That likewise though there should accrue no great profit in digging
them, yet by them many idle persons might be employed; and likewise those
criminals who deserved not death, might be condemned for so many years to work
in them. He made therefore an Act which renewed the ancient orders concerning
the Officers, Directors, and Workers of Mines. And they began to work in the
Pyrenees, where it is most certain that formerly there has been Gold, and that
there still is. In such manner, that had they continued this labor, they might
in all appearance have gained notable advantages; but either through the
negligence of the Overseers, or through the little intelligence, or rather
impatience of the French, who cast by any thing that presently seconds not
their desires, this work was discontinued. An enterprise to join the Seine and
Loire.


Another very great convenience for Paris was enterprized, which was the
joining of the River Loire to the Seine, by the Chanel of Briare. Rosny
labored in this with much expense, employing in it near three hundred thousand
crowns: but the work was interrupted, I know not wherefore. It was renewed
again in the Reign of Lewis the thirteenth, and brought to perfection.

There was proposed likewise another, Another design to join the two Seas.
which was to make a conjunction of the two Seas, the Ocean and the
Mediterranean, by uniting together the Garonne which runs into the Ocean, and
the Aude which falls into the Mediterranean Sea below Narbonne, by Channels
which were to be drawn along little Rivers, which run between these great ones.
The Country of Languedoc offered to contribute; but there were difficulties
found which hindered this enterprise.

Navigation was established by the good order which the King had taken to keep
his Coasts in security, and to punish Pirates severely when they caught them.
Our ships were not content to Traffic to the ordinary places, but enterprized
likewise to go to the new world; which they had almost forgot since the time of
Admiral Coligny. A Gentleman of Xaintonge named du Gas, began with the Kings
Commission the voyage of Navigation to Canada.
Canada, where afterward was established the Commerce of Castors or Beavers,
which are the skins of a certain amphibious creature, much like the Otters of
this Country.

Among all these establishments, we must Establishment of Religious Orders at
Paris.
not forget a great quantity of new Religious Companies, which were made in
Paris. There was first seen the Recollects, which were a branch of the Order of
St. Francis of a new Reformation: Capuchins and Feuillantines; Carmelites, who
were brought from Spain; Barefooted Carmes, who came likewise from that
Country: of the Brothers of Charity, vulgarly called the ignorant brothers, who
came out of Italy; and all had soon built them Convents out of the Alms and
Charity of Devout persons.

In the midst of this fair Calm, at which the King rejoiced, and during all
these fair occupations which were worthy of him, he was not left without
troubles and vexations, which perplexed his Spirit. He had none more piercing,
nor more continual, then those which came on the part of his Wife and his
Mistresses.

We have already said how Mademoiselle The King gives Verneuil to Mademoiselle
d' Entragues.
d' Entragues had engaged him. He had given her the land of Verneuil near
Senlis, and for the love of her had made it a Marquisate. After that he was
married, he ceased not to have the same passion for her, and to carry her with
him in his Progresses, and lodge her at Fontain-bleau. She despises and offends
the Queen.


These scandalous disorders extremely offended the Queen; and the Pride of the
Marchioness more furiously incensed her: for she spoke always of her in terms
either injurious or disdainful; sometimes not forbearing to say, that if she
had Justice she should hold the place of that fat Alluding I suppose to the
Dukes of Florence, who are all Merchants.
Banker.

The Queen likewise on her side was with The Queen on her part troublesome to
the King.
reason transported against her, and made her complaints to all the world. But
this was not the way to gain the spirit of the King: she had done better, had
she wisely dissembled her displeasure, and by her kindnesses made her self
master of that heart, which of right belonged to her. The King loved to be
flattered; he loved sweet and compliant discourse, and was to be gained by
tenderness and affection. The band of love is love it self: this was that she
ought to employ with him, and not grumblings, disdains, and ill countenances,
which serve only more and more to disgust a husband, and make him find more
pleasure in the allurements of a Mistress who takes care to be always
agreeable and always complacent. But in stead of holding this way, she was
always in contention with the King; she exasperated him continually by her
complaints, and by her reproaches: and when he thought to find with her some
sweetness to ease the great labors of his spirit, he encountered nothing but
Gall and Bitterness.

She had belonging to her Chamber a Florentine woman Daughter of her Nurse,
named Leonora Galigay, a creature extreme ugly, but very spiritual, and who
knew so perfectly how to insinuate into her heart, that she had in such manner
seized on it, that she absolutely commanded her. It has been said, that this
woman fearing that the Queen her Mistress would love her less, if she perfectly
loved the King her husband, kept her from it as much as she could, that she
might possess her with more ease. Afterward, to the end she might have a
second in her designs, she Married and Espoused her self to a Florentine
Leonora and Conchini her husband, foster the Queen in ill humors.
a domestic of the Queens, named Conchini, of a little better Extraction then
her self, being grandchild to Baptista Conchini, who had been Secretary to
Cosmo Duke of Florence.

The Common opinion was that these two persons conjoyntly labored so long as
the King lived, to conserve a spleen in the spirit of the Queen, and to make
her always troublesome and humoursome toward him; in such manner, that for
seven or eight years together, if he had one day of peace and quiet with her,
he had ten of discontent and vexation. In this truly the Kings fault was the
greatest, because he gave the occasion of these troubles; and the husband
being, as St. Paul says, the head of the wife, ought to give her example, and
keep a more strict union with her.

We have observed this once for all. But we cannot too often make this
Reflection, 1604.
That sin is the cause of all disorder; and that for a little pleasure it
causes a thousand troubles and a thousand mischiefs, even in this world it
self. The King being now The Kings debaucheries cause the Gout.
but just fifty years of age, began this year to have some small feelings of
the Gout; which possibly were the doleful effects of his excessive
voluptuousness, as well as of his labors.

To return to the Marchioness; it happened The Queen threatens the Marchioness.
one day that the Queen being very much offended at her discourse, threatened
her that she should know how to bridle her wicked tongue. The Marchioness upon
this seemed sad and grieved; shunned the King, and let him understand that she
desired that he Who prays the King to see her no more.
would no more demand any thing of her, because she feared that the
continuation of his favors would be too prejudicial both to her and her
children. Her design was to inflame more his passion, by showing her self more
difficult. But when she saw that her cunning had not all the effect she hoped,
and that the Queens anger was increased to such a point, that indeed there was
some danger for her and hers; she advised her self of another thing. D'
Entragues her Father demanded permission And her Father demands leave to retire
with her out of France.
of the King to carry her out of the Kingdom, to avoid the vengeance of the
Queen. The King granted her demand easier then she thought he would; wherewith
being excessively enraged, her Father and the Count d' Auvergne her Brother by
the Mothers side, began to Treat secretly with the They treat with the
Ambassador of Spain.
Ambassador of Spain, to have some retreat in the Territories of his King,
casting themselves absolutely they and their children into his Arms.

The Ambassador believed that this business would be very advantageous to his
Master, and that in time and place he might serve himself of that promise of
marriage which the King had given to the Marchioness: he therefore easily
granted them all that they demanded, and added all the fair promises with which
weak and feeble spirits might be entoxicated.

The King had granted them permission to retire themselves out of France, but
yet without the Children, out of a belief he had that they would go into
England to the Duke of Lenox and the Earl of Aubigny of the house of the
Stuarts, who were their near kinsmen; but when he understood that they
consulted The King resolves to hinder them. To this end he sends for Auvergne,
who is at Clermont, and refuses to come.
of a retreat into Spain, he resolved to hinder them, but to employ fair means
to do it. He sends therefore for the Count d' Auvergne, who was then at
Clermont, so much beloved in the Province, that he believed he might securely
stay there. He refused to come before he had his Pardon Sealed in good form,
for all that he might have done. This was a kind of new crime, to capitulate
with his King: however he sends it him, but with this Clause, That he should
make his immediate appearance.

His distrust permitted him not to obey on this condition: he stayed still in
the Province, where he kept himself on his Guard, with all precautions
imaginable. Nevertheless he was not so cunning, but the King could entrap him,
and by an Artifice very gross. He being Colonel of the French Cavalry, was
desired to go see a Muster made of a Company of the Duke of Vendosmes. He went
well mounted, keeping himself at a good distance, that he might not be
encompassed: Nevertheless, d' E^^^re Lieutenant of that Company, and Nerestan
approaching him to salute him, mounted on little Hobbies for fear of giving him
suspicion, but with three Soldiers disguised like Lacquies, cast him from his
horse, and made him He is Arrested prisoner, and carried to the Bastille.
prisoner. They led him presently to the Bastille, where he was seized with a
great fear, when he saw himself lodged in the same Chamber where the Marshal of
Byron his great friend had been.

Immediately after the King caused d' Entragues D' Entragues and the
Marchioness likewise Arrested.
to be Arrested, who was carried to the The Common Goal of Paris.
Conciergerie; and the Marchioness, who was left in her lodgings under the
Guard of the Cavalier de Guet. After desiring to make known by public proofs
the ill intention of the Spaniards, who seduced his subjects, and excited and
fomented conspiracies in his Estate, he remitted the prisoners into the hands
of the Parliament; who having convicted them of having complotted with the
Spaniard, declared by a sentence of the first of Sentence of Parliament against
them.
February, the Count of Auvergne, d' Entragues, and an English man named
Morgan, who had been the Agent of this fair Negotiation, guilty of Treason; and
as such, condemned them to have their heads cut off: The Marchioness to be
conducted with a good Guard into the Abbey of Nuns at Beaumont near to Tours, to
be there shut up; and that in the mean time there should be more ample
information made against her, at the request of the Attorny-General.

The Queen spared no solicitations for the giving of this sentence; believing
that the Execution would satisfy her resentment: but the goodness of the King
surpassed her passion* The love which he had for the Marchioness was not so far
extinct, that he could resolve to Sacrifice what he had adored: he would not
permit them to pronounce the Sentence; and two months and a half afterward, to
wit, on the fifteenth of April, he by Letters under his Great Seal changed the
penalty of Death on the Count of Auvergne and the The King pardons them, and
justifies the Marchioness.
Lord d' Entragues, into perpetual Imprisonment. Some time after he had
likewise changed the prison of Entragues into a Confinement to his house of
Malles-herbes in Beausse. He likewise permitted the Marchioness to retire to
Verneuil; and seven months being passed, without the Attorney-Generals
procuring any proof against her, he caused her to be declared absolutely
innocent of the crime whereof she was accused.

There rested only the Count of Auvergne, But the Count of Auvergne remained
at the Bastille, and is despoiled of his County.
who being the most to be feared, was the worst treated: for the King not only
kept him prisoner at the Bastille, where he lay for twelve whole years, but
likewise deprived him of his propriety in the County of Auvergne. He had bore
the title, and enjoyed it by virtue of the Donation of King Henry the third.

Queen Margaret newly come to the Court, sustained that this* Donation could
not be valuable, because the contract of the Marriage of Katherine de Medicis
her Mother, to whom that County appertained, allowing Substitution of her
goods, and that Substitution, said she, extending to Daughters in default of
Males, that County was to come to her after the death of Henry the third, nor
could he give it to her prejudice.

The Parliament having hearkened to her Which is adjudged to Queen Margaret, who
gives her Estates to the Daulphin.
reasons, and seen her proofs, annulled the Donation made by Henry the third,
and adjudged her this County. In recompense of which obligation, and many
others she had received from the King, she made a Donation of all her Estates
after death to the Daulphin, reserving to her self only the fruits of them
during life.

The Count of Auvergne thus despoiled, remained in the Bastille until the year
one thousand six hundred and sixteen; when Queen Mary de Medicis having need of
him during the troubles, delivered him from thence, and caused him to be
justified. She caused likewise the Registers of Parliament and of the Notaries
to be taken off the File, with all informations which might conserve the memory
of his Crime. By this see an example how time causes a mutability in all
things, and how it changes the greatest hatreds into the greatest affections;
and on the contrary, transmutes the strongest affections into mortal hatreds.

By searching into the plot of the Marchioness The designs of the Duke of
Bouillon discovered.
her Father, to deliver her with her Children to the Spaniards, the designs of
the Duke of Bouillon were likewise discovered, who at present was the only
person could give the King any trouble in his own Kingdom. It is most certain,
that this Prince had conferred The King had done him many favors, and he had
as well served the King:
on him very considerable Favors, having given him the Staff of Marshal of
France, and procured him the marriage of the Heiress of Sedan: and this Lord
had likewise very well served him in his greatest necessities. But after he saw
him converted to the Catholic Faith, he diminished much of his affection; and
moved partly by Zeal for his false Religion, and partly by Ambition, he
conceived vast designs of making himself Chief and Protector of the Hugonot
party; and under that pretext, make himself Master of the Provinces beneath the
Loire. It was believed that for this effect he had much assisted to exasperate
the spirit of the Marshal of Byron; and that he had made a Treaty with the
Spaniard, who was to furnish him with what money he desired; but not with
forces, for fear of rendering himself odious to the Protestants.

It was but too visible, that after the conversion But after the Kings
conversion, he excites the Hugonots against him, and would make himself chief
of their party.
of the King, he had instantly labored to beget distrusts and discontents in
the spirits of the Hugonots, and to unite and Rally them together, that they
might make a body: persuading himself, that that body must necessarily have a
head, and that they could choose no other but himself. And for these Reasons, so
many Assemblies were made, and so many particular and general Synods of those
of this Religion held, wherein nothing was heard but complaints and murmurs
against the King, whom they continually wearied with new Requests and Demands.

Moreover, it was found that this Duke had His Emissaries endeavor to form a
party in Guyenne.
Emissaries and Servants in Guyenne, and particularly in Limosin and Quercy,
who held private Councils among the Nobility, distributed money, and took oath
of those who promised him service, and had formed designs against ten or
twelve Catholic Cities.

The King judging that he ought to dig up The King goes to prevent them.
the root of this mischief before it extended farther, and not knowing indeed
to what it might extend, resolved himself to go and remedy it. He departed from
Fontainbleau in the month of December, having sent before Jean-Jacques de
Mesmes, Lord of Rossy, to make process against those that were culpable.

Immediately all this conspiracy flew into All the Conspiracy dissipated.
smoke: The best advised came to the King to cast themselves at his feet. The
chief Agent of the Duke of Bouillon being advertized that there was order given
to arrest him, brought his head to the King, and told him both all he knew
before, and all that he did not know. The others either fled out of the
Kingdom, or else hid themselves. Five or six unfortunate persons being taken,
were beheaded at Limoges, and their heads planted on the tops of the Gates,
their bodies burnt, and the ashes thrown into the Air. Three or four others
suffered the same punishment at Perigord. There were ten or twelve condemned
for Contumacy, and their Effigies hanged up; amongst others, Chappelle-Byron,
and Giversac of the house of Cugnac. But in all these procedures, there were
found no proofs by writing, nor yet by any formal deposition against the Duke
of Bouillon; so cautiously and subtly had he carried his business.

Before these executions, the King having The King returns to Paris.
made his entrance into Limoges, returned to Paris. He passionately wished,
that after this the Duke of Bouillon would acknowledge and He in vain
endeavors to make the Duke of Bouillon humble himself.
humble himself. For if he remained impenitent, he was obliged to prosecute him
to the utmost; and if he did prosecute him, he offended all that great body of
Protestants, which were his faithful Allies. He employed therefore underhand
all means which he could devise, to induce him to have recourse to his
Clemency, rather then to the intercession of strangers; which a Sovereign could
not agree to in the case of his Officer and Subject. The Duke desired as much
as he to draw himself out of this trouble: but he believed he could not find
security at Court, because Rosny, who was not his friend, and who had conceived
some jealousy to see him more authorized then himself in the Hugonot party,
had so great credit with the King. So that after many He resolves to besiege
Sedan.
Treaties and Negotiations, the King resolved to go seek him at Sedan with an
Army.

Rosny labored with great Zeal to make Rosny makes all necessary preparations.
preparation for this Expedition. The King confided much in him; and by
honoring him, desired to testify to the Hugonots, that if he assaulted the
Duke of Bouillon, it was not against their Religion, but the Rebellion he made
War. For this purpose he erected the The King makes him Duke of Sully.
Land of Sully into a Duchy and Peerage; wherefore we shall henceforward call
him Duke of Sully. His thoughts were, that the King should pursue the Duke of
Bouillon to the utmost. Villeroy and the rest of the Council were of a contrary
judgment: they would not have the Siege of Sedan hazarded, because
Inconveniences in the siege of Sedan.
the length of that Enterprise might possibly revive diverse factions in the
other corners of the Kingdom, give time to the Spaniard to assault the
Frontiers of Picaray, to the discontented Savoyard to cast himself with the
Forces of the Milanois on disarmed Provence, and to the Hugonots and
Protestants of Germany to come to the assistance of their friends.

The King well foresaw all these inconveniences; The King chooses rather to
receive the Duke into favor.
and therefore having advanced to Donchery, during the absence of Sully, who
was gone to provide Artillery, he treated with the Duke of Bouillon, and
received him into grace; on condition that he humbled himself before On what
conditions.
his Majesty, and received him into the City of Sedan, and delivered up the
Castle to him, to keep it with what Garrison he should think fit for fo^h years.

These were the public Conditions: but by the secret Articles the King
promised the Duke to stay but five days in Sedan, nor to put but fifty men in
the Castle, which should immediately depart upon humble supplication made by
the Duke. All these things were faithfully executed, and without the least
distrust either on the one side or the other. The Duke came to meet the King at
Donchery, where The Duke demands pardon of of the King, who enters Sedan, and
thence goes to Paris.
he besought his pardon. The King received him as if he had never been faulty;
and five or six days after, entered into Sedan; where he stayed only three
days, and then returned to Paris. The Duke accompanied him as far as Mouson,
passing then no further: but some days after, when he understood that the
Parliament had confirmed his pardon, in which were likewise comprehended his
friends that had been condemned for the default of Limoges, he came to Court,
where he received more Houours and Kindnesses then ever. This was the custom
of that great King: He had A great example of generosity in our Prince.
a heart like a Lion against the Proud, and against Rebels; but he was pleased
to relieve with an unparalleled goodness those he had overcome, when by their
submissions they rendered themselves worthy to receive his grace. And the Duke
of Bouillon, who perfectly knew his Nature, (for they had lived and made War a
long time together) was not wanting in this Conjuncture to comport himself with
all that Prudence and Compliancy which an understanding man, as he was, could
be capable of.

Notwithstanding this great generosity and Notwithstanding which, there are
many conspiracies.
goodness of the King, his Kingdom was no less turmoiled with incredible
infidelities and conspiracies: such were the treason of l' Oste, the attempt on
the City of Marseilles by Merargues, and another on Narbonne and Leucate by the
Luquisses.

L' Oste was Clerk to Villeroy, and his Godson: Treason of l' Oste.
the employment he had under him, was to copy out the dispatches. This
unfortunate man revealed all the secrets of the Kings Affairs to some of the
Council of Spain; who had corrupted him with twelve hundred Crowns of Pension,
which they promised him whilst he was in that Country with the Ambassador
Rochepot. His treachery being discovered, he fled; and as he was pursued by the
Provosts of the Marshal, he drowned himself in the River of Marne, near the
Ferry of Fay. It may easily be judged, that Villeroy, whose fidelity by this
means remained exposed to the Kings just suspicions, and to the calumnies of
his enemies, was sensibly troubled. He had had without doubt some difficulty to
clear himself of this business, if the King, who saw him in an extraordinary
affliction, had not had the goodness to go visit him himself; and by that
honor brought him the comfort of justifying him against all calumnies the
Envious might sow against him.

Merargues was a Provincial Gentleman, of 1605.
a very good House; who having assurance that Treason of Merargues.
he should the following year be Viguier or Sheriff of Marseilles, had promised
to deliver that City to the Spaniard during his Sheriffalty. He was so
imprudent and so foolish as to discover his design to a Slave of the Galleys
of Marseilles; who gave advice of it to the Court, to the end possibly that he
might gain his liberty.

Upon this advice, Merargues, who was He is surprised talking with the Spanish
Ambassadors Secretary.
then at Paris, was watched so diligently, that they found him conferring with
the Secretary of the Ambassador of Spain; and speaking so loud, that almost
all they said was heard. They searched him, and found in the fold of his Garter
a Note containing the model of his Enterprise. He was arrested, and had his His
punishment.
head cut off by sentence of the Parliament of Paris, on the nineteenth of
December. His body was quartered, and his Quarters fixed before the City-gates:
his head carried to Marseilles, to be planted on a Pole on a Tower of one of
the principal Gates. The Secretary The Ambassadors Secretary arrested.
of the Ambassador was arrested as well as he; and had been in great danger,
if the King had been as furious as those counseled him, who desired a rupture
with Spain.

This Rencounter gave subject to the Politicians Several discourses concerning
Ambassadors privileges.
to discourse diversely concerning the Rights of Ambassadors and their people:
but Henry the Great decided himself the Question in this manner: The
Ambassadors (said he) are sacred by the right of Nations: now they first break
them, when they contrive any treason against the State, or against the Prince
to whom their Master sent them; and therefore by consequence this right ought
not secure them from being sought out and punished. Moreover, it is not to be
presumed that they are either Ambassadors, or that they represent the
Sovereign who sends them, when they commit those treacheries and infidelities
which their Masters would neither act nor avow. However, there is more
generosity in not using in this point the utmost rigor, but reserving the
advantage to chastise them without doing it. And to this purpose, being well
read in History, he alleged that example of the Roman Senate, who having
discovered that the Ambassadors of the Allobroges were concerned in the
Conspiracy of Catiline, contented themselves with commanding them to depart the
City. This was his Opinion: and as he always followed the most generous The
King forbids any process against the Secretary.
Maxims, he forbad that any process should be made against the Secretary, to
whom the Judges were about to give the Question.

In the mean time, the Ambassador thinking The Ambassador makes a great
noise, and threatens his Kings resentment.
to cloak this perfidy by his Exclamations, came to complain to him that the
rights of Nations were violated, and in them the Dignity of Ambassadors; and
that the King his Master would have that resentment of it, which became a great
Prince when offended. The King answering him with a wise coldness, represented
unto him what his Secretary had acted with Mirargues. The Ambassador not
willing either to own the Man, or approve his Action, turned the business
another way, and complained that the King had made the first breach of the
peace of Vervin, by assisting the Hollanders both with men and money. The King
replied, that for the men, they went not by his Orders; and that there were
Frenchmen in the service of the Archduke, as well as in the Hollanders: but
for his money, that it was in his power to do with it what he pleased, and to
lend it or give it without offending any. The Ambassador was very hot, and
there past some high words both on one part and the other. In fine, the King
returned him his Secretary, as he had resolved to do before he spoke.

As for the Luquisses, they were two Brothers Treason of the Luquisses.
Genoways by extraction, who had made agreement with the Governor of Perpignan
to deliver to him Narbonne and Lucate. It is certain, that it was not in their
power to execute this design; and that there was more ill will in them, then
danger that the thing should succeed: Nevertheless they were taken, and carried
to Toulouse, where the Parliament sent both the one and the other to the Gibbet.

It seemed that not only the malice of men, but even folly it self conspired
now against France: for the same day that Merargues was A fool makes an attempt
on the Kings person.
executed, an unhappy Fool made an attempt on the sacred person of the King;
throwing himself upon him with a Dagger in his hand, as he passed on horseback
over the Pont-Neuf, returning from hunting. The Footmen of the King running
in, made him loose his aim; and had killed him on the place, if the King had
not forbad it, who caused him to be carried Prisoner to For-l' Evesque. He was
called John de l' Isle, Native of Vineux near Senlis. He was presently examined
by the President Janin, who could get no reasonable answer from him: for he was
indeed quite out of his senses. He believed himself-King of all the world, and
said that Henry the fourth having usurped and taken France from him, he would
chastise him for his temerity. Upon which, the King judging that he was
sufficiently punished by his folly, commanded that he should only be kept in
prison; where he died not* long after.

Those who desired War, lost not the occasion to incense the Kings spirit upon
all these Those who desire war, whet the Kings spirit upon these Conspiracies.
Conspiracies and Enterprises of the Spaniards. They remonstrated to him, That
he ought not to expect other from his perpetual Enemies: That having used all
their endeavors to hinder him from coming to his Crown, they continued daily
to attempt something against his Repose and Life: That their Ambushes were more
to be feared in Peace, then in War: That it were better to break with them,
because they would have less means to hurt him, being no longer in the Entrails
of his Estate: That he had more advantage to act against them by open force,
then to counterplot all their treacherous devices, which they held under the
cloak of Peace and Friendship. They moreover presented to him the ill estate of
the Affairs of Spain; that having expended all their Treasure in the
Low-Country-Wars, they were sain to have recourse to extraordinary ways to
recover it. But above all, they forgot not to lay before him the great and
advantageous Qualities that he had above Philip the third his Adversary, that
he might be the easier induced to assault a man whom they taught him to despise
and esteem feeble.

^ may say to this purpose of this King, that Character of Philip 3. of Spair.
though he had his spirit very clear, and that the diligences of Philip the
second his Father had given him all knowledge necessary to govern; nevertheless
out of a certain timidity and distrust of himself, too ordinary in many great
men, shunning labor and pains, he had absolutely discharged himself of the
Government on the Marquess of Denia, whom he made soon after Duke of Lerma. It
will be difficult to express how this man rendered himself odious, and how the
other was little esteemed so long as he endured: but in fine, God of his grace
opened the eyes of this young Prince: he broke his chains; and he who was
become as it were his Master, believed himself no better able to divert all
those disgraces which might happen, then by becoming a Churchman and a
Cardinal.

We may in passing make some reflection of A good and profitable reflection.
the pitiful estate to which a Sovereign reduces himself, who for not
comporting himself as he ought, necessarily falls into the disdain and aversion
of his Subjects. Without doubt the greatest misfortune can arrive him, is to be
regarded as inferior and subject to another; to have his Ears continually
filled with that voice of his people, crying on all sides, Govern us; and to
permit himself to be guided rather by five or six wicked Flatterers, who make
him believe that he is Master, though he exercises no one Function, then by the
truth or judgment of his whole Kingdom. For if he desire to know whether he
be truly Sovereign or no, he need only regard himself without flattery, If it
be he that gives Charges of his proper motion; if it be he that chooses the
persons; if the Officers about him are of his own making; if he have ever said,
I will have it so, in any affair of importance; if he see himself always
followed and accompanied by Grandees; if those who have business, who seek
employments, and who have need of his favor, are in his Antichamber: in fine,
that none in his Realm has more respect and more assiduity; and then he shall
clearly know who it is that reigns. But it is not enough for him to know who it
is; he must, after the example of Philip the third, of whom we were now
speaking, endeavor to put himself in possession of his Authority. It is in In
what the courage of a Sovereign principally consists.
that the Courage of a Prince principally consists: for in what can he better
make known his Resolution and Valor, then in taking upon him that degree and
power which God has given him? Is there a truer point of honor for a King,
then in maintaining in his person the rights of his Royalty? Without
dissembling, it is more weakness and shame for a Sovereign to submit himself to
him who ought to be submitted to his will, then to flee in the day of battle
before his enemies: for the bravest are sometimes put to the worst; and the
courage of a King consists much less in fighting with his hands, then governing
with his head. What would it be for him to overcome his enemies, if he sees
himself beneath his own subject, who under pretext to serve him, reduces him
and his Estate into fetters; and who dares invest himself with all the glory
and all the advantage of command, making him believe that it is to ease him of
the burden?

Our Henry was not of this temper: his The goodness of Henry the Great.
goodness was extreme, but it was neither weak nor timid: his knowledge and
understanding were not useless, but always laborious and active: nothing was
above him, but God himself; nothing on any side of him, but Justice and
Clemency, his two faithful Counselors. The most hardy of his Ministers
trembled when he but bent his brow: all familiarities immediately ceased, and
none durst be other then silent, when he was pleased to take the tone of Master.

Now this great King conserving still the splendor of his Majesty, we cannot
wonder if he were esteemed above Philip the third; who for the present suffered
himself to be absolutely governed. And therefore because they knew he
understood his fault, they believed that he would be more easily persuaded to
make War against him. Indeed he was sufficiently resolute; and after so many
injuries as he had received from the Spaniard, his resentment had no great need
of a spur. However, before he would engage himself in so great an Enterprise,
he would manage all his Affairs so exactly, gather together so much Money,
Artillery and Ammunitions, fortify so well his Frontiers, take such good order
within his But the King hastens not the War.
Kingdom, assure himself of so many Friends and Allies, raise such powerful
Armies; and in fine, make his Party so strong, that the success should not at
all be doubtful; and that assaulting that ambitious power, he might be assured
to overthrow it: and therefore he judged it not to the purpose too much to
hasten.

In the mean time, he neglected not other means to acquire reputation; not
thinking it less glorious to blazon forth his name by the repute of his wisdom
in Counsels, then by the power of his Arms. By the last, he had been victorious
over the Rebels and the Spaniards; He makes himself Arbitrator of the
differences of Christendom
by the other, he rendered himself Arbitrator of the great differences of
Christendom, and acquired a superiority so much more noble, because given him
without constraint.

Pope Clement viii. being dead about the 1606.
end of the year 1605. he would employ his After the death of Clement 8. he
causes to be chosen Leo xi. who soon dies, and Paul 5. succeeds.
credit to make a Pope of his Friends. The Cardinal of Joyeuse his Ambassador,
and his other Agents, labored so well, that they made the Votes fall on
Alexander de Medicis, who was named the Cardinal of Florence. He took the name
of Leo xi. but he died at the end of sixteen days: so the business was to begin
again. The King would not that they should take pains in the choice of another;
and declared, That France took no other interest then that an honest man should
be chosen. The Conclave in the end chose the Cardinal Bourghese, who was named
Paul 5. A great difference between Paul 5. and the Venetians.


In the first years of his Papacy, there was re-kindled a great difference
which was begun under his Predecessors, which had set on fire all the corners
of Italy, and possibly all Christendom, if our Henry had not taken care to
extinguish it. I am about to tell the subject of it.

The Signory of Venice had formerly made The Venetians had made a law to bound
the Acquisitions of the Clergy.
an Ordinance or Decree, which prohibited the Monks from purchasing Lands in
their Dominions above the value of twenty thousand Ducats; and enjoining every
one that had purchased above that value, to remit it to the Signory, who would
re-imburse them the purchase and the improvements they had made on it. And
following the footsteps of this ancient Decree, they made another, which
forbad the founding or building of new Churches, Convents and Monasteries,
without express permission of the Signory, upon pain of banishment, and
confiscation of such Foundations and Buildings.

It was indeed part of the function and charge of Bishops to hinder this
multiplication of Convents; but either through negligence, or too much
facility, they gave to all as much permission as they demanded: insomuch that
the Commonwealth seeing the default of the Prelates, found themselves
constrained to take notice of it: otherwise it would soon have happened that
all their Cities would have been nothing else but Convents and Churches; and
all their Revenues, which ought to bear the charge of their Estate, and serve
for the nourishment of married people, who furnish it with Soldiers, Merchants
and Laborers, would have been expended only in the maintenance of Nuns and
Friars.

The Senate therefore made another Decree, They make other Decrees.
which prohibited Ecclesiastics from purchasing any immovable Goods, except
by the permission of the Senate. And at the same time it happened that an Abbot
and a Cannon, accused of very horrid Crimes committed in the Territories of the
Signory, were imprisoned by the Authority of the Secular Justice; which passed
for a strange attempt on the other side the Mountains, where the Ecclesiastics
are not at all subject to Secular Justice.

Now Paul the fifth coming to the Pontificial Paul 5. offended at these Decrees.
Chair, not able to pass by, said he, all these attempts of the Secular Estate
on the Ecclesiastics, dispatched at the same time two Briefs to his Nuntio of
Venice: One containing the He sends Briefs to revoke them.
revocation of the Decrees made by the Signory touching the purchasing of
temporal Estates; and the other commanding the sending back the Abbot and the
Canon to the Court of the Church. The Nuntio signified these Briefs to the
Signory; who answered boldly, That their Authority was born with them; That no
person but they had to do with it; and, That they should know how to maintain
it against any would enterprise to oppose it. Both the one and the other
employed the best Pens of the time to defend their Rights, and confute the
Defenses of their Adversaries. There were spread abroad every where great
quantities of Manifesto's and Treaties, full of reasons of Right, passages of
holy Scripture, Authorities of Fathers and Councils, and Examples drawn from
History.

In the mean time the Pope extremely offended He Excommunicates the Senate.
at this answer, thunders out an Excommunication against the Duke and the
Senate, if within four and twenty days they revoked not their Decrees, and
consigned the prisoners into the hands of the Nuntio. The They declare his
sentence of Excommunication null and abusive.
Signory was not at all moved at it, but boldly declared the sentence of
Excommunication Null and abusive; nor was there any Ecclesiastic in their
whole Territories who would attempt the publishing it, or durst observe the
Interdict, or make Divine Service cease. There were only the Capuchins and the
Jesuits, who resolved to depart, and demand leave of the Signory. They granted
it to the Capuchins, with liberty to return when they pleased; and to the
Jesuits, with prohibitions of ever re-entring their Dominions.

Things being thus embroyled to the utmost 1607.
between these two powers, the Spaniards looked out with a sharp eye, to make
their profit of these divisions; and underhand cast oil into the fire, though
openly they made show of extinguishing it. For on the one side they encouraged
the Venetians, and heartned them up to maintain their rights; and on the other,
they commanded their Governors of Naples and Milan to serve the holy Father
with all their powers. Henry the Great more sincere and more dis-interested,
embraced this Henry the great undertakes to accommodate the difference.
occasion, to establish his power in Italy, in a more fair and just manner. He
assured the Pope, that as the true Eldest Son of the Church, he would always
sustain its Interests; and that in case of rupture, he would go himself in
person with an Army of forty thousand men: but he entreated him that before it
came to that, he would grant that he should try all means possible for an
accommodation.

He answered likewise to the Ambassador of Venice, who demanded his assistance,
that he ought it to the holy Father in prejudice of all others: And therefore
he exhorted the Signory to give him content; which that they might do without
wounding their honor or rights, he desired to be Mediator.

Both parties having accepted his Mediation, He sends to this purpose Cardinal
Joyeuse, who concludes an accommodation.
he dispatched the Cardinal Joyeuse into Italy; who, to speak all in two words,
managed this Negotiation with so much Prudence, that in the end he concluded an
accord. The Treaty contained four Principal Articles. 1. That the Signory
should consign the two prisoners into the hands of the Ambassador of France, to
remit them to his Holiness. 2. That they should revoke the Manifesto and
Declaration they had made against the Apostolic Censures. 3. That they should
reestablish all Ecclesiastics in their goods. 4. That the Pope should give
them absolution; and that in requital, they should send to thank him by a Noble
Embassy, and assure him of their fili^l obedience.

On the morrow the Cardinal de Joyeuse The Pope absolves the Signory.
coming to the place assigned by the Senate, the doors being shut, in the
presence of the Duke and five and twenty Senators, and the Ambassador of
France, revoked the Excommunication, and gave Absolution to the Signory. All
these things passed without the Spaniards having the least participation,
though they endeavored to make themselves of the Feast. Thus had both parties
some sort of contentment, by the intermission of Henry the Great.

There was only the business of the Jesuits, There was nothing but the
reestablishment of the Jesuits not obtained.
which for some months retarded the Treaty, and which some thought would have
quite broke it; because the Pope considering that they were driven away for his
sake, absolutely resolved that the Signory should re-establish them in their
houses and in their goods: and they were as obstinate, rather to hazard all
then to consent to it. In fine, the Pope persuaded by the Eloquence of Cardinal
Perron, who was then at Rome, thought it better to release this point, then
hazard the putting Christendom in a flame; so that they remained banished out
of the lands of the Signory. The present Pope, Alexander the seventh, has by
his intercession re-established them.

If the accommodation of the differences between the Pope and the Venetians
added 1608.
much to the renown and reputation of our Henry, reviving the credit of France
beyond the mountains, where it seemed dead, and depressing as much that of the
Spaniards, which before seemed Paramount; the The King endeavors an
accommodation between the Hollander and Spaniard.
Treaty which he managed between the King of Spain and the Estates of the
United Provinces, purchased him no less fame among the Protestants and the
people of the North. I will recount the History in few words.

The United Provinces, vulgarly called Holland, from the name of the most
considerable of the Seven Provinces which compose this body, had some reason to
complain, that the King had made the Treaty at Vervins without their consent;
and that he had obliged himself not to assist them, neither directly nor
indirectly. However he had not ceased He underhand assists the Hollander with
men and money.
to supply them daily with money, and to cause to go to their Service a great
quantity of Nobility and Volunteers, in such manner that there were many entire
French Regiments. So that it was not without apparent reason that the Spaniards
cried out, that he visibly infringed the Treaty at Vervins: but these
reproaches were not just; for they had broke it first by an hundred attempts,
of which we have before mentioned some.

In the mean time, the King who was a Janin sent for this accommodation.
good husband of his money, was weary of furnishing the Hollander with so much,
and did greatly wish them in an Estate that they might not put him to so much
charge. There was only one way to effect it, which was procuring their peace
from the Spaniard. He resolved then to labor in it; and chose the President
Janin, a man of great knowledge, to manage this Negotiation. They come
presently to an eight months truce.


The two parties presently consented to a Treaty of eight months; during which
the Estates, to the end they might Treat with more reputation and security,
prayed the The King makes an offensive and defensive League with the Hollander.
King to grant them an offensive and defensive League. He willingly granted it
them: of which these were the Principal Articles.

He promised them faithfully to assist and ^id them in all he could, to obtain
from the King of Spain a good and assured peace. That if it pleased God they
did obtain it, he would cause it to be observed with all his power; and would
defend them against all who would infringe it; and to this effect he would
maintain in their Service ten thousand Footmen at his own charges, so long as
they should have need of them. Reciprocally the States obliged, that if he were
assaulted in his Kingdom by whosoever it were, they would immediately assist
him with five thousand Footmen at their own Expense: and they would leave it to
the Kings choice, to take this assistance in Soldiers, or in Ships fitted and
furnished at all points to fight at Sea. The Spaniards Alarmed at this League.


The Spaniards were extremely Alarmed at this League. Don Pedro de Toledo, one
of the greatest Lords of Spain, passing through France to go to the
Low Countries, made great complaints to the King: Nevertheless, Don Pedro* de
Toledo makes great complaints to the King.
many imagined that all the ^oyse he made, tended only to oblige him the
rather to prosecute the peace for the Hollanders: for Spain was even to
extremity ^wearied with a war so long, so tiresome and so bloody, with so great
Expenses and so little progress.

This Don Pedro according to the humor of the Spanish Nobility, was of an
austere and grave countenance, high and magnificent in his words, when he spoke
of the honor and glory of his Nation, and the power of his King: but out of
that, courteous and civil, submissive and respectful where ^e should be so,
gallant, witty and spriteful. There passed between the King and him, things
very remarkable, which we must not forget.

The King believing that he brought him Things very curious which passed
betwixt the King and Don Pedro.
threats of War, and knowing that the Spaniards had spread abroad a report that
he was quite l^me with the Gout, and unable to mount on horseback; he would
make him know that his strength and activity was not at all diminished. He
received him in the great Gallery at Fontain-bleau, and made him take twenty or
thirty turns at so great a pace, that he put him out of breath; and after told
him, You see now, Sir, how well I am.

At this first Audience Don Pedro brought his Beads in his hand. He represented
to the King the general interest that all Catholic Princes had in the ruin or
conversion of Heretics, and the great Wars which his Master had made for this
purpose. Afterward changing his discourse, he told him, that the Their
entertainments.
Catholic King earnestly desired to Allie himself more strictly with him, and
to make marriages between their children, Provided that the King would renounce
the Alliance and Protection of the Low Countries. The King freely answered,
that his children were of so good a house as might well be accepted; that he
desired no constrained friendships no^ conditions; that he could not abandon
his friends; but that those who would not be so, might repent them of being his
enemies.

Don Pedro upon this exalted the greatness and power of Spain. The King without
being moved let him know that it was the Statue of Nebuchadnezzar, composed of
several sorts of matters, and which had its feet of Clay. Don Pedro came to
reproaches and threats. The King soon gave him his change, and told him, That
if the King of Spain continued his attempts, Lively and quick replies.
he would carry flames even into the Escurial; and that if he once mounted on
horseback, he would soon be at Madrid. The Spaniard arrogantly answered him,
King Francis was there indeed. It was therefore, replied the King, that I would
go to revenge his injuries, those of France, and my own.

After some words a little high, the King with a more still voice told him: My
Lord Ambassador, you are a Spaniard, and I a Gascon, let not us grow
passionate. They returned then to terms of sweetness and civility.

Another time the King showing him his Buildings at Fontain-bleau, and
demanding of him what he thought of them? he replied, that in his opinion he
had lodged God very narrowly. There was then but two Chapels, which were in
the Court, made in oval, and which were truly very little. The King could not
endure to have his piety accused; and therefore answered him very sharply: You
Spaniards know not how to give God other then Material Temples; we French- men
lodge God not only in stones, we lodge him in our hearts: but though he should
be lodged in yours* I fear it would be in stone still.

From Fontain-bleau they came to Paris, where the King one day showing him his
Gallery of the Louvre, and demanding his opinion of it; The Escurial is much
another thing, said Don Pedro. I believe it, replied the King; but has it a
Paris about it like my Gallery?

One day Don Pedro seeing at the Louvre the Kings Sword in the hands of one of
his followers, advanced to it, and putting one knee on Don Pedro kisses the
Kings Sword.
the ground, kissed it; rendering this honor, said he, to the most glorious
Sword in Christendom.

During the truce of eight months, of which we have spoken, the President Janin
incessantly labored for a Treaty. There were two great difficulties; one, that
the King of Spain would not treat with the United Provinces, Two obstacles in
the Treaty of the Hollanders surmounted by the King.
but as with Subjects; and they would have him acknowledge them to be free and
independent: the other, that the Prince of Orange, whose power and authority
would be extremely weakened by the Peace, opposed it by a thousand Artifices,
being sustained in it by the Province of Zealand, who ever desired War, and by
some Cities of its faction.

These two obstacles were in the end surmounted. The Spaniard yielded to the
first, and acknowledged that he owned the States for Free States, Provinces,
and Countries: and about the second, the King spoke so high to the Prince of
Orange, that he durst not stop the course of the Treaty. It ended no longer The
Treaty ends in a twelve years Truce.
however in a Peace, but only in a Truce of twelve years, which was free and
assured Commerce on one part and on the other.

The renown of this accommodation carried the Kings glory throughout all
Europe. The Duke of Venice told our Ambassador in Great praise given by the
republic of Venice to our Henry.
the Senate, That that Signory entered into new admiration of the prudent
conduct of our King, who never deceived himself in his undertaking, nor never
gave blow in vain: that he was the true upholder of the repose and felicity of
Christendom; and that it had nothing of happiness to desire, but that he might
reign for ever. An Elogie so much the more worthy and glorious, because we may
say with truth, that Venice has still been the Seat of Politic wisdom, and
that the praises which came from that Senate, are as so many Oracles.

The Friendship and Protection of this great All desire his friendship and
protection.
King was sought on all sides; all was referred to his Arbitration, and all
implored his assistance. And as he was equally powerful as wise, feared as
loved; there was none who durst contradict his judgment, or assault those whom
he protected. But he was so just, that he would not enterprise any thing upon
He will not protect Subjects against their Sovereign.
the Rights of another, nor maintain the Rebellions of Subjects against their
Sovereign: A certain proof of which he gave to the Maurisques.

It is known how heretofore the Moors or Sarazins invaded all Spain, toward
the year 725. The Christians with the aid of the French, had regained it from
them by little and little; so that there remained no more then the Kingdom of
Granada, which was little in Extent, but very rich, and extremely populous,
because all the remnants What the Maurisques were.
of that infidel Nation were retired into that little space. Ferdinand King of
Arragon, and Isabella Queen of Castile, finished the Conquest of that Kingdom,
in the year 1492. and so put an end to the Government of the Moors, and to the
Mahumetan Religion in Spain; constraining the Infidels to take Baptism, or to
retire into Africa.

Now as those who had thus professed the Christian Religion had done it
perforce, they for the most part remained Mahumetans in their hearts, or Jews
(for there were many Jews amongst them) and secretly brought up their children
in their incredulity. To which likewise the Spanish Rigor did much contribute,
putting great distinction between the new Christians and the old: For they
received not the new ones either to Charges or The Spaniards treat them ill.
Sacred Orders; they allied not themselves with them, and, which is worse, made
a thousand An avanie is, when by a false accusation money is forced from any
person.
avanies upon them, and oppressed them with excessive ^mposts. So that these
unfortunate people seeing themselves thus trampled on, and being too weak of
themselves to loosen themselves from their Yoke, they resolved to address
themselves to some strange power, but which should be Christian; because that
of the King of Morrocco, or the other Princes of Africa, would have They
demand assistance of Henry the Great.
appeared too odious. To this effect they had secret recourse by Deputies to
our Henry* when he was then but King of Navarre. Afterward in the year 1595.
when they saw that he had overcome the League, and had got the upper hand in
his affairs, they again implored his Protection. He hearkened favorably to
their propositions; sent disguised Agents into Spain, to see the Estate of
their affairs; and made them hope that he would assist them. And truly he might
have done it, since then he was in War with the King of Spain; and it is lawful
to make use of all sorts of Arms, to defend our selves against our enemies. But
now being returned this year 1608. to solicit him instantly to accept their
propositions and offers, and to hear the answer from his own mouth; he plainly
let them know, that the quality of thrice-Christian King which he bore,
permitted him not He refuses it.
to undertake their defense, so long as the peace of Vervin lasted; but that if
the Spaniard should first openly infringe it, he should have just cause to
receive them into his Protection.

Their Deputies having lost all hopes on this side, addressed themselves to the
King of England, whom they found yet less disposed then he, to lend them
assistance. In the mean time their plots having taken wind in the Court of
Spain, caused both fear and astonishment: for they were near a million of
souls, and were possessed of almost all the Traffic, particularly that of
Oiles, which is very great in that Country.

King Philip the third found no other secure The King of Spain banisheth them
all.
way to hinder the dangerous effects of their conspiracies, but banishing them
quite out of his Territories; which he did by an Edict of the tenth of January,
in the year 1610. which was executed with much cruelty, They are horribly ill
Treated by the Spaniards,
Inhumanity and Treachery. For in Transporting these unfortunate people into
Africa as they had demanded, part were drowned in the Sea, others despoiled of
all they had: so that those who remained to depart, perceiving the ill
Treatment of their Companions, fled toward France: one part by land to St.
John de Lus, to the number of one hundred and fifty thousand; others in French
Vessels, who brought them into diverse ports of the Kingdom. But to speak truth,
those who came by land were not much better treated by the French, then the
others had and by the French.
been by the Spaniards: for in crossing the Countries, they were almost all
robbed and stripped, and their Wives and Daughters ravished: so that finding so
little safety in a Country wherein they believed they might find refuge, they
embarked by the Kings permission in the Ports of Languedoc, and crossed over
into Africa, where they are become implacable They are carried into Africa,
but some stay in France.
and most cruel enemies to all Christians. There remained some families in the
Maritime Cities of the Kingdom, as in Bourdeaux and Rouen; where it is
suspected there is yet some of their Children, who privately follow the
obstinacy of their Fathers.

Much contrary to the taking the protection The great design of Henry 4. for
the extent of the Christian Religion in the Levant.
of these Infidels, the King was about very great designs for the glory and
extent of the Christian Religion toward the Levant. But he would not declare
himself, till he had so ordered the Affairs of Christendom, that there should
be no fear of any trouble or division, and that it might make use of all its
forces against so powerful an enemy as the Grand Signor. Out of these thoughts,
he had sent three He sends some to spy the Country.
or four Gentlemen into the Levant, who under the pretext of traveling and
visiting the holy places, might take notice of the Country, the disposition of
the people, the estate of their Forces, the Garrisons and Government of the
Turks. Which having well considered, he promised himself, that after having
composed the interests, and procured the union of the Christian Princes, he
might in three or four years at most ruin this power esteemed so terrible; and
that with an Army of five and thirty thousand footmen, and twelve thousand
horse only: Alexander the Great not having had more Forces to destroy the
Empire of the Persians, which without doubt was greater and more powerful then
that of the Turks.

I shall declare what his great design for the reunion of Christendom was,
when I shall in brief have observed some important things which passed in the
three or four last years of his Life.

As he labored diligently to heap up money, He seeks means to raise money
without burthening his people.
the Nerves of War, so he hearkened to all Propositions made for the gaining it;
so much the more willingly, because his design was to abolish all Taxes and
Impositions. The first could not be done without much diminishing his Revenue;
so it was necessary to find some He would disengage his demain,
other foundation in its place. Now this stock or foundation was the Demains of
the Crown, which he would entirely disengage and increase by a great quantity
of new rights, and particularly by that of the The Greffes is a due to the King
of 63 ^. 9 d. Tours upon the sale of wood in several places.
Greffes, which had been quite withdrawn for five or six years, but had brought
him fifteen Millions a year. But when he was dead, Queen Mary de Medi^is
re-engaged it f^rther then it was before.

It is certainly worth our wishing, that this sacred Patrimony of the Crown
might be regained; and that care were taken to re-gather this Mass, which the
Law of the Realm, and the diligences of so many wise Heads, have made and
composed for the space of so many Ages, to maintain our Kings with splendor
and magnificence, without being a charge to their Kingdom, except in great and
urgent necessities.

As for the Impost, our Henry had a desire and take off the Impost by buying
the Salt-Marishes.
to buy from the particular Owners all the Salt-Marishes of Poictou and
Britanny; and then when he had them in his hand, sell the Salt upon the place
at what price he pleased to the Merchant, who should again retail it through
the whole Kingdom, as they do Corn, without any constraint or imposition. In
this manner there had been no need of so many Officers, Overseers, Controulers,
Factors, and a hundred other people, which without fallacy amounted to near
twenty thousand, all fed and paid at the expense of the King and Public, and
against whom he had often very great complaints. Thus the poor Country People
would not be burdened by them with imposed Salt; constraining them, will they,
nill they, to take yearly a certain quantity: and it is certain the people
would have had it four times better cheap then they have, and the King have
raised much more money then he does, without expense, without pains, and
without the vexation of his subjects.

Now the King seeking means to fill his Coffers, and to find some other way
then Taxes, it must be acknowledged that he made some Imposts, and likewise
some creation of Officers; but that he removed many things which gave cause of
complaint to many persons. And moreover, to pay his ancient Debts, and acquit
He is constrained to acquit himself of old scores, to make some new imposts and
creations.
himself of the recompenses and pensions due to those which had served him in
his Wars against the League, he was constrained to pass for their profit the
advice of several things which they proposed: so that he loaded himself with
that envy and those reproaches, which ought more justly have fallen upon those
people then on himself. But those who knew his intentions, blamed him not as
did the others: for they called that good husbandry and wise economy, which
some termed avarice and insatiable covetousness.

Moreover, though the will of this Prince was very good for the ease of his
people, and for the grandeur of his Estate; nevertheless it cannot He makes not
always use of innocent means.
be denied but he was sometimes deceived in the choice of the means; and that
all those whereby he furnished himself, were not always as innocent as his
intentions. He had two particularly, of which the one made some noise,
Inquisition of the rents of the City-house cause disturbance.
but never succeeded; and the other was of very dangerous consequence.

The first, was an inquisition of the Rents of the Hostel de Ville is the same
at Paris, as Guild Hall at London.
Hostel de Ville, by which he pretended to make those loose them, who had ill
gained them; and this in it self was very just: but most part of the Rents
having changed Owners, or been parted, he must of force trouble an infinite
number of Families: so that all Paris was moved at it, and the Landlords had
recourse to their Provost of the Merchants. This was Miron, who was likewise
Civil Lieutenant; a man very zealous for the service of the King, as he had
demonstrated in several occasions: but withal, a very honest Man, and one whom
no interest in the world could bribe against the peoples, whose Magistrate he
was. In sum, he sustained it stoutly, he spoke in the Miron, Provost of the
Merchants, sustains the interest of the people.
Assemblies of the Hostel de Ville, acted with the Superintendent with like
vigor, and made Remonstrances to the King. But in these Remonstrances, too
much heat transported him to make some odious Comparisons, not of the Kings
person, but of some people of his Council.

The Louvre stormed; the people of the Some would incense the King against him.
Court cried out, that he had blasphemed those whom he had taken notice of in
his speeches. And those who were interested in this inquisition after Rents,
used all their endeavors to incense the King, and to persuade him to punish
rigorously this boldness. On the other side, the people having understood The
people rise to defend him.
that their Magistrate was threatened, took fire sooner then it was believed:
the Burgesses came in troops about his house to defend it. Miron instantly
entreated them to retire, and not to make him Criminal. He remonstrated to
them, that he feared nothing; that they had to do with a King as sweet and just
as he was great and wise, and who would not let himself be carried away by the
persuasions of ill Counselors.

Upon this, those who wished him ill, employed The King counseled to take him
by force.
all their endeavors to engage the King to take him by force, and to make
valid his supreme Authority: but he wisely answered these people, That
Authority does not always The Kings wise answer worthy a great Politician.
consist in prosecuting things to the utmost extremity: That the time, the
persons, and the cause, ought to be regarded: That having been ten years
extinguishing the fire of civil War, he feared even the least sparkles: That
Paris had cost him too much, to hazard the least danger of loosing it; which
seemed to him insallible, if he followed their counsel, because he should be
obliged to make terrible examples, which would in few days deprive him of the
glory of his Clemency, and the love of his people, which he prized as much as,
nay above, his Crown: That he had in an hundred other occasions made proof the
fidelity and honesty of Miron, who had no ill intention; but without doubt he
believed himself obliged by the duty of his Charge, to do what he did: That if
some inconsiderate words had escaped him, he might well pardon them for his
past services: That after all, if this man affected to be the Martyr of the
people, he would not give him that glory, nor attract to himself the name of
Persecutor or Tyrant: And that in fine, he would not prosecute a man whom he
would resolve to loose, in so advantageous occasions.

Thus this wise King knew how prudently to He will not pursue this business of
the Rents.
dissemble a little fault: nor would he understand what passed, for fear of
being obliged to some blow of Authority, which might possibly have had
dangerous Consequences. He received therefore very favorably the excuses and
humble submissions of Miron, and after prohibited the farther pursuing the
inquisitions of Rents, which had caused so much trouble.

The second means of which he served himself Establishment of the Paulete.
to raise money, and which was of very dangerous consequence, was the Paulete,
or Annual Right. To understand this business well, we must make some recital of
things farther off.

The Offices of Judicature, of Policy and of Justice formerly administered in
France by Gentlemen.
the Revenues, had formerly been exercised in France under the first and second
Race of our Kings, by Gentlemen: for the Nobility was obliged to study and
understand the Laws of the Kingdom. They were chosen for the maturity of their
Age and Judgment: they were changed from time to time, from one seat to
another: nor took they any Fees from Parties, but only a Salary very moderate,
which the Public paid them rather for honor then recompense. Afterward in
the end of the second Race, and the beginning of the third, the Nobility
becoming ignorant and weak together, the Plebeians and Burgesses having learnt
the knowledge of the Laws, raised How it fell into the hands, of the Plebeians,
who made profit of it.
themselves by little and little to these Charges, and began to make them
better worth, because they drew all their Honor and all their Dignity thence,
not having any other by their birth, as the Gentlemen had. Yet they had not
overmuch employment; for the Churchmen possessed almost all the Jurisdiction,
and had their Officers which administered Justice.

In the mean time, the Parliament, which The Parliament of France meddle with
particular affairs, and is made sedentary at Paris.
before was as the Council of Estate of the Kingdom, and an Epitomy of the
general Estates, taking upon them to trouble themselves with the knowledge of
differences between particular persons, whereas before they only treated of
great Affairs of Policy; Philip the fair, or according to some others, Lewis
Hutin his son, made it sedentary at Paris. Now this Company of Judges being
most illustrious, because the King often took seat amongst them, the Dukes,
Peers and Prelates of the Realm made a part of them, and that the most able
people for Law were chosen to fill places there; they made depend upon them all
the They make all other Judges subalternate to them.
power of other Judges-Royal; to wit, the Bailiffs and Seneschals, who though
before Sovereign Judges, became now Subalternate to them.

Long time after, our other Kings created likewise at diverse times many other
Parliaments, but out of a sole intention the better to distribute Justice
without any pecuniary interest: for by it they charged their Coffers with new
Wages, to be paid these new Officers.

At this time the number of the Officers of The number of the Officers of
Parliament small.
Justice was very small; and the order which was observed to fill the vacancies
in Parliament, perfectly good. The custom was, to keep a Register of all the
able Advocates and Lawyers; and when any Office came to be vacant, they chose
three, whose Names they carried to the King, who preferred him he pleased. But
the Favorites and the Courtiers soon corrupted this Order: they persuaded the
Kings not to confine themselves to those presented, but to name one of their
proper motion: which those people did, to draw some present from him who should
be named by their recommendation. And the abuse was so great, that oftentimes
the Charges were filled with ignorant People and Porters; by reason of which,
people of merit held the condition of an Advocate much more honorable then
that of a Counselor.

The mischief daily increasing, and the rich people becoming extremely
liquorish of these Charges for lucre, and their Wives out of vanity, those who
governed began to make a Merchandise of them, and to draw money from them. Thus
under Lewis the xii. his Coffers being exhausted by the long Wars of Italy, the
Offices of the Revenue began to become How Offices became vendible under
Francis 1.
vendible. However, that good King having soon foreseen the dangerous
consequence, resolved to re-imburse those who had bought them: but dying in
that good design, Francis the first, of whom he had well predicted that he
would He had often said, that fat Boy would spoil all.
spoil all, sold likewise those of Judicature: afterward new ones were at
several times created, only of purpose to raise money.

Afterward Henry the second his Son created and Henry 2.
the Presidents; and Charles the ninth, and Henry the third heaping ill upon
ill, and ruin upon ruin, made a great number of other Creations of all sorts,
to have these Wares to sell. And moreover, they sold Offices when they were
vacant, either by death or forfeiture.

Hitherto the ill was great, but not incurable: a part of these Offices need
only have been suppressed, when they became vacant; and the rest when so,
filled with persons of capacity and merit. Thus in twenty years, this Ants-nest
of Officers might have been reduced to a very little number, and those as
honest people.

But the business was not in this manner How this might be remedied.
made known to Henry the Great: they represented it to him in another sense.
They let him understand, that since he drew no profit from vacant Offices,
being almost always obliged to give them, he would do well to find the means
to discharge that way his Coffers of a part of the Wages he paid his Officers;
which he might do, by granting them their Offices for their Heirs; reserving a
moderate sum of money which they should yearly pay, yet without But on the
contrary is made incurable by the Paulete.
constraining any person* so that it should be a favor, and not an oppression.
This was named the Annual Right, otherwise the Paulete, from the name of the
proposer, named Paulete, who gave the Counsel, and was the first Farmer. All
the Officers were not wanting to pay this Right, to assure their Offices to
their heirs.

We need not here tell the mischiefs and Which causes great abuses.
inconveniences which this wicked invention has caused, and does daily cause.
The most stupid may easily know them, and see well that it is a disease whose
remedy at present is difficult.

I will not charge this History with all the Ceremonies and Rejoycings made at
the Birth and Baptism of all the Children of Henry the Great; nor at diverse
Marriages of the Princes and Grandees of the Court, amongst others of the
Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Vendosme, which were made in the Month of
July, 1609.

The Prince of Conde Espoused C^anlatta 1609.
Margarita of Montmorency, Daughter of the Marriage of the Prince of Conde.
Constable; who was wonderfully fair, and had a presence absolutely noble:
which the King having considered, was more lively struck with her, then he had
ever been with any other; which caused a little after, the retreat of the
Prince of Conde* who carried her into Flanders, and thence retired to Milain:
Not without the Kings extreme displeasure, to see the first Prince of his blood
cast himself into his enemies hands.

The Duke of Vendosme Espoused Mademoiselle And of the Duke of Vendosme.
de Merceur, to whom he had been affianced since the year one thousand six
hundred ninety seven, as we have said before; however, the Mother of the Lady
standing upon high punctilio's of honor, brought many troubles to the
accomplishment of this Marriage; so that it had never been made, had not the
King highly concerned himself in it. This was none of the least difficulties of
his life: for he had a high and obstinate spirit to bend; however, he employed
only ways of sweetness and persuasion; acting in this business, only as a
Father who loved his Son, and not as a King who would be obeyed.

Now will I speak of his ordinary divertisements, What were the Kings
divertisements.
Hunting, Building, Feasts, Play, and Walking. I will add only, That in Feasts
and Merriments he would appear as good a Companion, and as Jovial as another:
That he was of a merry humor when he had the glass in his hand, though very
sober: That his Mirth and good Discourses were the delicatest part of the good
Cheer: That he witnessed no less Agility and Strength in Combats at the
Barriers, Courses at the Ring, and all sorts of Gallantries, then the youngest
Lords: That he took delight in Balls, and Danced sometimes; but to speak the
truth, with more affection then good grace. Some carped that so great a Prince
should abase himself to such follies, and that a Grey-beard should please to
act the young man. It may be said for his excuse, that the great toiles of his
spirit had need of these divertisements. But He loved Play too much.
I know not what to answer to those who reproach him with too great a love to
playing at Cards and Dice, little befitting a great King; and that withal he
was no fair Gamester, but greedy of Coin, fearful at great Stakes, and humorous
upon a loss. To this I must acknowledge, that it was a fault in this great
King, who was no more exempt from Blots, then the Sun from Beams.

It might be wished for the honor of his memory, that he had been only guilty
of this; He was extremely given to women.
but that continual weakness he had for fair Ladies^ was another much more
blamable in a Christian Prince, in a of his age, who was married; to whom God
had showed so many graces, and who had conceived such great designs in his
spirit. Sometimes he had desires which were passant, and only fixed for a night:
but when he met with beauties which struck him to the heart, he loved even to
folly; and in these transports appeared nothing less then Henry the Great.

The Fable says that Hercules took the Spindle and Spun, for the love of the
fair Omphale. Henry did something more mean This passion made him do shameful
things.
for his Mistresses. He once disguised himself like a Countryman, with a
Wallet of straw on his back, to come to the fair Gabriella. And it has been
reported, that the Marchioness of Verneuil has seen him more then once at her
feet, weeping his disdains and injuries.

Twenty Romances might be made of the intrigues of his several loves with the
Countess Three or four of his Mistresses.
of Guiche, when he was yet but King of Navarre; with Jacqueline of Bueil, whom
he made Countess of Moret; and with Charlotta d' Essards, without counting many
other Ladies, who held it a glory to have some Charm for so great a King.

The high esteem and affection which the French had for him, hindered them from
being This causes often contentions with his wife.
offended at so scandalous a liberty: but the Queen his wife was extremely
perplexed at it; which hourly caused controversies between them, and carried
her to disdains and troublesome humors. The King, who was in fault, endured it
very patiently, and employed his greatest Confidents, and sometimes his
Confessor, to appease his spirit. So that he had continually a reconciliation
to make. And these contentions were so ordinary, that the Court which at first
were astonished at them, in the end took no more notice.

Conjugal duty without doubt obliged the King not to violate his faith to his
Legitimate Spouse, at least not to keep his Mistresses in her sight: but if he
in this point ought to have been a good husband, so he ought to be likewise in
that of Authority, and in accustoming his wife to obey him with more
submission, and not perplex him as she did with hourly complaints, reproaches,
and sometimes threats.

The trouble and displeasure of these domestic broiles, certainly retarded the
Execution And hinders his great design.
of that great design which he had formed for the good and perpetual repose of
Christendom, and in fine for the destruction of the Ottoman power.

Many have spoken diversely; but see here What that was.
what I find in the Memoires or Notes of the Duke of Sully; who certainly must
know something, being as he was, so great a Confident of this Kings: which
makes me report it from him.

The King (said he) desiring to put in Execution The means with which he served
himself, to put it in Execution.
those projects he had conceived after the Peace of Vervin, believed that he
ought first to establish in his Kingdom an unshaken Peace, by reconciling all
spirits both to him and among themselves, and taking away all causes of
bitterness. And that moreover it was necessary for him to choose people capable
and faithful; who might see in what his Revenue or Estate might be bettered,
and instruct him so well in all his Affairs, that he might of himself take
Counsels, and discern the good from the ill, feasible from impossible
enterprises, and such as were proportionate to his Revenues. For an expense
made beyond them, draws the peoples curses, To this purpose he grants an Edict
to the Hugonots, and pays his debts.
and those are ordinarily followed by Gods.

He granted an Edict to the Hugonots, that the two Religions might live in
Peace. Afterward he made a certain and fixed Order to pay his debts, and those
of the Kingdom contracted by the disorders of the times, the profusions of his
Ancestors, and by the payments and purchases of men and places which he was
forced to make during the League. Sully showed him an account in the year 1607.
by which appeared Acquittances Which regains the reputation and credit of
France.
for eighty seven Millions: which established the reputation and credit of
France among strangers, by whom it was before much cried out upon.

That done, he continually labored to He joins to him all Christian Princes by
promising his conquests.
join in his great design all Christian Princes, offering to give them all the
fruit of his Enterprises against the Infidels, without reserving any thing for
himself: for he would not, said he, have other Estates then France.

He likewise proposed to himself the He reunites them, by accommodating their
differences.
seeking of all occasions to extinguish disorders, and to pacify differences
among the Christian Princes, so soon as they should see them conceived; and
that without any other interest, then that of the Reputation of a Prince
Generous, disinterested, wise and just.

He began to make his Friends and Associates The Princes he made his friends.
the Princes and Estates which seemed best disposed toward France, and the
least indisposed to its interests; as the Estates of Holland, or the United
Provinces; the Venetians, the Swisses, and the Grisons. After having bound them
to him by very strong ties, he endeavored to negotiate with the three puissant
Kingdoms of the North, England, Denmark and Swedeland; to discuss and decide
their differences, and likewise to endeavor How he would have accommodated the
Protestant Princes with the Pope.
to reconcile them to the Pope, or at least to obtain a cessation of that
hatred and enmity by some formulary, in such manner as they might live
together: so that it had been advantageous to the Pope, in that they had
acknowledged him for the first Prince of Christendom* as to Temporals, and in
that case rendered him all respect. He endeavored in fine to do the same thing
among the Electors* He treats with the Electors.
the Estates and Cities Imperial; being obliged particularly, said he, to take
care of an Empire had been founded by his Predecessors. Afterward he sounded
the Lords of Bohemia, With the Lords of Bohemia, Hungary and Poland.
Hungary, Transylvania and Poland, to know if they would concur with him in the
design of taking away and rooting up for ever all causes of trouble and
division in Christendom. He treated With the Pope.
after that with the Pope, who approved and praised his Enterprise, and desired
to contribute on his part all that should be possible.

These were the dispositions of his great design, of which I shall now show
you the platform and model.

He desired perfectly to unite all Christendom, Model of the design of Hen. 4.
so that it should be one body, which had been and should be called the
Christian Commonwealth: for which effect he had determined to He would part
Christendom into fifteen equal Dominions.
part it into fifteen Dominions or Estates; which was the most he could do to
make them of equal power and strength, and whose limits should be so well
specified by the universal consent of the whole fifteen, that none could pass
beyond them. These fifteen Dominations were the Pontificate or Papacy, the
Empire of Germany, France, Spain, Great Britain, Hungary, Bohemia, Poland,
Danemark, Swedeland, Savoy, or the Kingdom of Lombardy, the Signory of Venice,
the Italian Commonwealth, or of the little Princes and Cities of Italy, the
Belgians or Low Countries, and the Swisses.

Of these Estates, there had been five successive; To wit, eleven Kingdoms, and
four Republics.
France, Spain, Great Britain, Swedeland and Lumbardy: six elective; the
Papacy, the Empire, Hungary, Bohemia, Poland and Danemark: four Republics; two
of which had been Democratical, to wit, the Belgians and the Swisses; and two
Aristocratical or Signories, that of Venice, and that of the little Princes and
Cities of Italy.

The Pope had had besides those Lands he What the Pope had had.
possesses, the whole Kingdom of Naples, and Homages as well of the Italian
Commonwealth, as for the Island of Sicily.

The Signory of Venice had had Sicily in faith The Signory of Venice.
and homage of the holy Seat, without other rights then a simple kissing of
feet, and a Crucifix of gold, from twenty years to twenty years.

The Italian Commonwealth had been composed The Italian Commonwealth.
of the Estates of Florence, Genoua, Lucca, Mantoua, Parma, Modena, Monacho,
and other little Princes and Lords; and had likewise held of the holy Seat,
paying only for all by advance of a Crucifix of gold worth ten thousand Franks.

The Duke of Savoy besides those Lands he possessed, should likewise have
Milain; and all Duke of Savoy.
should be erected into a Kingdom by the Pope, under the title of the Kingdom
of Lombardy: from which should have been taken Cremona in exchange of
Mo^tferrat, which should be joined.

There should have been incorporated with Republic of the Swisses.
the Helvetian or Republic of the Swisses, the French County, Alsatia, Tirol,
the Country of Trent and their dependences; and it had done a simple homage to
the Emperor of Germany, from five and twenty to five and twenty years.

All the seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries, The Low Countries.
as well Protestants as Catholics, should have been established into a free
and sovereign Republic, save only a like homage to the Empire: and this
Dominion should have been increased by the Duchy of Cleves, of Juliers, of
Berghe, de la Mark, and Ravenstein, and other little neighboring Signories.

To the Kingdom of Hungary had been Kingdom of Hungary.
joined the Estates of Transylvania, Moldavia and Valachia.

The Emperor had for ever renounced aggrandizing The Empire with free election.
himself or his by any confiscation, disinheritance or reversion of Fiefs
Masculine; but had disposed vacant Fiefs in favor of persons out of his
Kindred, by the consent of the Electors and Princes of the Empire. It should
likewise have been held of accord that the Empire should never upon any
occasion whatsoever be held successively by two Princes of one house, for fear
of its perpetuating, as it has for a long time in that of Austria.

The Kingdom of Hungary and of Bohemia Bohemia and Hungary elective.
had been likewise elective by the voice of seven Electors; to wit, 1. that of
the Nobles, Clergy, and Cities of that Country: 2. of the Pope: 3. of the
Emperor: 4. of the King of France: 5. of the King of Spain: 6. of the King of
England: 7. of the Kings of Swedeland, Denmark and Poland, who all three had
made but one voice.

Besides, to regulate the differences which A general Council of sixty persons.
might arise between the Confederates, and to decide them without sight of
Fact, there should have been established an Order and Form of Procedure by a
general Council, composed of sixty persons, four on the part of every Dominion,
which should have been placed in some City in the midst of Europe, as Mets,
Nancy, Collen, or others. There Three others, of each twenty.
should likewise have been established three others in three several places,
every one of twenty men, which should all three make report to the grand
Council.

Moreover, by the consent of the general Order to hinder tyranny and rebellion,
Council, which should be called the Senate of the Christian Commonwealth,
there should be established an Order and Regulation between Sovereigns and
Subjects; to hinder on one side the Oppression and Tyranny of Princes; and on
the other side, the Tumults and Rebellions of Subjects. There should likewise
be raised and assured a stock of money and men, to which every Dominion should
and to assist the Provinces adjoining to Infidels.
contribute according to the Assessment of the great Council, for the
assistance of the Dominions bordering upon Infidels from their Assaults, to
wit, Hungary and Poland against those of the Turks; and Swedeland and Poland
against the Muscovites and Tartars.

After when all these fifteen Dominions had Three general Captains, two by
Land, and one by Sea, to war against the Turks.
been well established with their rights, their Governors and Limits; which he
hoped might be done in less then three years: they should together of their own
accord have chosen three general Captains, two by Land, and one by Sea, who
should all at once have assaulted the Ottoman-house; to which each Dominion
should have contributed a certain quantity of Men, Ships, Artillery and Money,
according to the Tax imposed. The sum in What forces and what train.
gross which they should furnish out, should amount to two hundred sixty five
thousand footmen, fifty thousand horse, a train of two hundred and seventeen
pieces of Cannon, with Wagons, Officers, and Ammunition proportionable, and
one hundred and seventeen great Ships, without counting Vessels of less force,
Fireships, or Ships of burden.

This establishment would have been advantageous None but the house of Austria
had suffered by this establishment.
to all the Princes and Estates of Europe: There was only the house of Austria
which would suffer any loss, and which was to be despoiled to accommodate
others. But the project was laid to make them either willingly or by force
consent, in this manner. First, it is to be supposed, that on the part of In
Italy the Pope, Venetians and Savoyard, would consent:
Italy, the Pope, the Venetians, and the Duke of Savoy; were well informed of
the Kings designs, and that they ought to assist with all their forces;
especially the Savoyard, who was moreover extremely animated, because the King
gave his Daughter in marriage to his In Germany many Electors; and had chosen
the Duke of Bavaria Emperor.
son Victor Amadeo: In Germany four Electors; to wit, the Palatine,
Brandebourg, Colen, and Ments were likewise to know it, and favor it: and the
Duke of Bavaria had their word, and that of the King, to raise him to the
Empire: and many Imperial Cities had already addressed themselves to the King,
to beseech him to honor them with his protection, and to maintain them in
their Privileges, which had been abolished by the house In Bohemia and
Hungary, the Lords and Nobility.
of Austria: In Bohemia and Hungaria there was intelligence held with the Lords
and Nobility; and that the people, desperate with the weight of that yoke, were
ready to shake it off, and to relieve themselves on the first proffered
occasion.

All these dispositions being so favorable to The business of Cleves happens
to give a beginning to the great design.
him, the business of Cleves happened, of which we at present shall speak,
which furnished him with a fair occasion to begin the execution of his
projects: which he was to do in this manner.

Having raised an Army of forty thousand men, as he did, he was in his march to
dispatch toward all the Princes of Christendom, to give them the knowledge of
his just and holy intentions. After, under the pretext of going to Cleves, he
was to seize all the passages of la Mense, and all at once assault Charlemont,
Mastrich, and Namur, which were but ill fortified. At the same time the Cities
of the Low Countries had cried out for liberty, and the Lords put themselves in
the Field for the same purpose, and had blazoned the Belgique The Cities of
Flanders should revolt.
Lion with the Flowers de Lis. The Hollanders had infested the Coasts with
their Ships in very great number, to hinder the Traffic of the Flemins by Sea,
as it was shut up by the French by Land: which should have been done of purpose
to hasten the people to shake off the Spanish Rule, and to address themselves
to the King and to the Princes his Associates, to pray the King of Spain to put
them in liberty, and out of his goodness to restore peace to them, which they
could never hope so long as they were under his Dominion.

In all probable appearance, at the approach of so great an Army, by reason of
the intelligences of the principal Lords, by the insurrection of the great
Cities, and of the love which these people have still had for liberty, Flanders
would all have risen: especially when they had The King^ Army should have lived
in great order.
seen the wonderful order and exact discipline of his soldiers, who should
have lived like good Guests, paying for all, and not doing the least outrage
upon pain of death; and when it should be known that he labored for the safety
of the people, not reserving any thing of all his Conquests, but the glory and
the satisfaction The King would have reserved nothing of his Conquests.
of having restored those Provinces to themselves, without keeping so much as a
Castle or Village to himself.

At the same time that he had put Flanders into a free state, and accommodated
the difference of the succession of Cleves, all the Princes interested in this
business, the Electors we have named, and the Deputies of many great Cities,
were to come and thank him, and entreat him that he would join his Prayers and
his Authority to the supplications they He had with other Princes prayed the
Emperor to rerestore the Cities of the Empire to liberty.
had to make to the Emperor, to dispose him to restore the Estates and Cities
of the Empire to their ancient Rights and Immunities; above all, in the free
Election of a King of the Romans, without using any practices, constraints,
promises and threats: And that for this effect it should be from that moment
resolved, that they should elect one of another house then that of Austria.
They had agreed among themselves, that it should be the Duke of Bavaria. The
Pope had joined with them in this request; which had been made with such
instance, that it had been difficult for the Emperor, being unarmed as he was,
to have refused it.

The like request had been made to the Bohemia, Hungary, and Austria, had made
the same request.
King and his Associates, by the people of Bohemia, Hungary, Austria, Stiria,
and Carinthia: above all, for the right they had themselves to make choice of
their Prince, and to put themselves under that form of Government they should
think best, by the advice of their friends and allies. To which the King
condescending, had used all sorts of fair means, prayers and supplications,
even below his dignity; that it might be seen he intended not so much to serve
himself of power, as of equity and reason.

After this the Duke of Savoy by the same The Duke of Savoy had demanded the
Dower of his wife from the Spaniard.
way had demanded of the King of Spain, with all sorts of civility, and in the
name of his children, that he would be pleased to give them a Dower for their
Mother, as good and advantageous as he had to their Aunt Isabella; and in case
of refusal, the King was to permit Lesdiguieres to assist him with fifteen
thousand Footmen, and two thousand Horse, for the Conquest of Milan, or the
Country of Lombardy: in which he would have been favored by the greatest part
of the Princes of Italy.

This done, he with his Associates were to The Pope and Venetians to become
mediators of the difference of Navarre, Naples, Savoy, etc.
beseech the Pope and the Venetians to become Arbitrators between him and the
King of Spain, to terminate friendly these differences, which were ready to
break forth between them, by reason of Naples, Sicily, Navarre, and Roussillon.
And then to show that he had no thought to aggrandize himself, nor other
ambition then to settle the repose of Christendom; he had showed himself ready
And the King had yielded his right.
to yield to the Spaniard Navarre and Roussillon, so that he restored Naples
and Sicily; not for himself, for he would have no other Estate then France; but
for the Pope, and for the Venetians, to whom he yielded his right over those
Countries.

In fine, by a Legate Apostolic, and by the Remonstrances of all his
Associates, he had let the King of Spain understand his design, together with
the Princes of his house, and had conjured them by the blood of Jesus Christ to
consent to it; as being Holy, Pious, Charitable, Glorious, and Profitable to
all Christendom. They had withal laid before him They had persuaded the King of
Spain, or else forced him.
the advantages which would have come to himself; and endeavored to make him
comprehend that he would be more rich, less disturbed, and more peaceable: That
in twenty years Spain, which was almost desert, would be repeopled, and become
the most flourishing Estate of Europe. I believe it would have been difficult
to persuade him to it: for unlimited and ill designing ambition embraces rather
Chimera's then solid things, and chooses rather to possess vast and desert
Countries, then a reasonable extent well cultivated and well peopled: but
possibly Arms might have convinced him, had reason failed.

For the rest, the King had resolved to renounce The great Prudence and
moderation intended by the King in the pursuit of his design.
all pretention; not to keep any thing of what he Conquered; not to enterprise
any thing, which should not be approved by his Allies, and which he saw not
them disposed to contribute to; not to begin in many distant places at a time,
but to pursue his expeditions by degrees, still attending the success of the
first, before he engaged in others: To show himself to be without Ambition,
without Covetousness or Pride in the distribution of Quarters, Victuals, Spoils
and Conquests: To favor weak and necessitated Estates: To send always some
honorable and profitable acknowledgement to Captains or Soldiers who had done
some fair Exploit: Never to enter into those partialities often conceived
between friends and Allies, but to appear always an equal, just, and common
friend: To treat honorably the men of War, with praises or reproofs when they
deserved it, and to maintain exactly discipline, prohibiting Spoils, Violation
and Burnings; that he might be received as the restorer of Nations, and he who
brought Peace and Liberty, and not Rnine and Desolation.

He had laid his designs, made his preparations, The preparations he made.
and fitted all his Engines to come to this end, with all diligence imaginable,
for the space of eight or nine years: he had made Friends and Allies on all
sides, entertained intelligences every where, had gained the College of
Cardinals by great pensions, had drawn to his service all the good Captains in
Germany and Switzerland, and had likewise gained all the good Pens in
Christendom: for indeed he would have chosen rather to persuade then force
people, and instruct them so well in his intentions, that they should have
regarded his Arms only as Tutelar Succors.

See here the platform of his design; which without dissembling was so great,
that it may be said, it was conceived by an intelligence more then humane. But
how high soever it was, it was not above his power: To which if Princes
proportionate not their Enterprises, it happens that they ruin their Estates,
just as a man who undertakes a suit at Law, or makes greater bargains then his
purse is able to bear out, is constrained in the end to sell his stock, and
drown himself in a Sea of debts and troubles.

Besides his forces, which were great in The forces he had.
number, but ten times greater in valor, being all chosen men, and having
amongst them four thousand Gentlemen, daring all things in the sight of their
King; the Prince The Prince of Oranges Army.
of Orange was to put himself in the field with fifteen thousand Foot, and two
thousand Horse: The Prince of Anhalt in Germany That of the Electors and German
Princes.
had appeared with ten thousand: The Electors and Duke of Bavaria had in a
readiness twice as many, who would have met at several Rendezvous, at the first
Sound of the Trumpet: The Venetians and Duke of Savoy That of the Venetians and
Savoyard.
would each have declared with a considerable Army, at the first signal given.
For the Swisses, besides a levy of six thousand chosen men which came to the
King, he might have had His Exchequer for defraying this great design.
as many more as he would. As for his stock of moneys, all his Troops were paid
for three months; his Garrisons well furnished, all his Storehouses on the
Frontiers full; his Captains honored with great presents which he had made
them: he had fourteen Millions of Livres in the Bastille, seven Millions in the
hands of the Treasurer of the Exchequer, of the Revenue of the preceding year;
two Millions in other hands: Moreover, the accrewing Revenue, which was more
then twenty seven Millions: and besides all this, Sully his chief Treasurer
assured him of forty Millions extraordinary for three years; so that he might
maintain a four years War without burthening his subjects with new charges. But
he would do it so hotly, that it should last but a short time: for he held it
for a Maxim, That a wise Prince when he is obliged to it, He would make the
War powerfully, that it might be short.
ought to make it powerful and short, and at first astonish the world with
formidable preparations, because by this means it returns to good husbandry;
and the Conquests made through fear of his Arms, reach farther then those made
by his Arms themselves.

I have told you what was his design: none Great appearance it might have
succeeded, having no Princes to oppose it but the Dukes of Saxony and Florence
but God knows what would have been the success. We may say however, judging
according to appearances, that it could not but be happy; for there appeared no
Prince nor Estate in Christendom, who would not have favored it, or who would
have taken the part of the house of Austria, except the Duke of Saxony in
Germany, and the Duke of Florence in Italy. But the King might have made them
both consent: The first, by assisting against him the heirs of that Duke
William, who had formerly been despoiled of the Electorate by the Emperor
Charles the fifth. The second, by stirring up Pisa, Sienna and Florence to cry
for liberty, and shake off their yoke under the Medicis.

But it is time that I tell you what was* the What was the business of Cleves
and Juliers.
business of Cleves and Juliers, which had furnished him with an occasion to
take Arms, and opened ways to him to begin his great design. John-Guillaume
Duke of Juliers, Cleves and Berghes, Earl of the Mark and Ravensbourg, Son of
Duke Guillaume, and Mary of Austria Sister to the Emperor Charles the fifth,
and Grandchild to Duke Death of John Duke of Juliers without issue.
John, being dead without children, on the five and twentieth of March, in the
year one thousand six hundred and nine; his Succession bred a Combustion in the
neighboring States. He had four Sisters; the first married His succession
disputed by many, particularly by Brandenbourg and Newbourg.
to the Marquis of Brandenbourg; the second to the Count Palatine of Newbourg;
the third to the Duke of Deux-ponts; and the fourth to the Marquis of Burgaw.
The children issued from these marriages, pretended to this Succession, the
nearest excluding the farthest off, and the Sons the Daughters. The Duke of
Saxony, descended from an Elder Daughter of Duke John Grandfather of Duke
William, said likewise that it preferably appertained to him, because it was
concluded in the contract of the marriage of that Lady, that in case an issue
Male were wanting to the house of Juliers, the Succession should return to him
and his descendants: Now that arriving, it necessarily followed that the
Succession was open to him. The Duke of Nevers pretended likewise to the Duchy
of Cleves, as he alone carrying the Name and Arms of Cleves: and the Count of
Maulevrier for the same reason demanded the County de la Mark, for he was the
Eldest de la Mark; and in this quality he pretended likewise to the Duchy of
Bouillon and the Signory of Sedan, which were held by the Viscount of Turenne
Marshal de Bouillon. The Emperor said that all the pretensions of those
concurrents The Emperor said it was devolved to the Empire.
were ill founded, for that those Lands being Fiefs Masculine, could not fall
to Daughters; but in default of Males, were devolved to the Empire, and
therefore he to have the disposal of them. And upon this right He invests
Leopold of Austria,
he secretly gave the investiture to Leopold of Austria Bishop of Strasbourg,
and sent his forces to seize those lands under pretext of Right, and in the
mean time assigned the parties to appear before his Imperial Majesty, to give
in their reasons.

The pursuits of the Duke of Nevers and the Count of Maulevrier were not very
hot, because they were made understand that the Fiefs they demanded were
united, and could not be dismembered. The Right of the Marquis of Brandenbourg,
and that of Newbourg, being most apparent, the greatest contestation was
between them. The Landgrave of Hesse, their common friend, became Mediator for
them, and made them pass a transaction to decide their difference friendly,
without employing their forces, except against Usurpers; the administration of
the Succession remaining equal and common amongst who whilst Brandenbourg and
Newbourg dispute, seizes Juliers.
them, saving the Rights of the Emperor. But in the mean time Leopold of
Austria arrives with his forces, and seizes Juliers.

The two Princes resolved to drive him out, sought assistance on all sides, and
particularly They implore the Kings assistance,
implored the Kings: to whom they sent the Prince of Anhalt with the Letters of
the Electors Palatine and of the Duke of Wirtenbourg, who assured him that his
Arms would be just, powerful, and by the grace of God victorious. The Prince of
Anhalt without doubt discoursed with him of many other things touching the
great design. The King gave his person a most gracious reception, and received
his propositions with an unparalled joy: he answered him in terms as obliging
who promises to march in person:
as he could, that he would march in person to the assistance of his good
Allies; and that till such time as he could mount on horseback with an Equipage
befitting a King of France, he would daily make some Troops advance; which he
did about the end of the year 1609. But moreover he prayed him to But tells him
he intended to conserve the Catholic Religion in that Country.
let the Confederate Princes understand, that they would do him great wrong, if
they thought that he intended any prejudice to the Catholic Religion in that
Country: for he desired above all things that the Exercise of it should be
conserved in the same estate it was before the death of Duke William, who was a
Catholic; but Brandenbourg and Newbourg were Protestants.

The Emperor likewise sent to him Ambassadors, Answer made to the Ambassador of
the Empire.
one of his chiefest Confidents, entreating him not to favor the rebellion and
injustice of these Princes; and to consider, that he could not assist them
without doing wrong to the Catholic Religion. Henry the Great answered him,
That being the Thrice-Christian King, he should know well how to maintain and
amplify it: but that he acted not to that intent; that the question was only
about succouring his friends, in which he should never be wanting so long as he
had life.

During the whole Winter, he gave order He establishes good order in the
Kingdom before his departure.
for all preparations for this Expedition, which was only the cover to a
greater. Being resolved to pursue himself the success, he had deliberated
before his departure from the Kingdom, to establish so good an Order for the
Government of it, that no trouble could arrive. For this effect, he believed
that the best way was to leave the Regency to the Queen: Leaves the Regency to
the Queen, but gives her a good Council.
but because he knew that she was governed by Conchini, whom he did not at all
love, he would have her assisted by a Council composed of fifteen persons; to
wit, the Cardinals of Joyeuse and du Peronne; the Dukes of Mayenne,
Montmorency, and Montbazon; the Marshals of Brissac and de Fervaques,
Chasteau-Neauf, who should have been Keeper of the Seals of the Regency, for
the King would take his Chancellor with him; Achilles de Harlay first
President of Parliament; Nicholas first President of the Chamber of Accounts;
the Count of Chasteauvieux, and the Lord of Lian-court, two wise Gentlemen;
Pontcarre, Counselor of Parliament; Gesvres, Secretary of State; and Maupeou,
Controuller of the Revenues.

Moreover, he would establish a little Council He establishes little Councils
in the Provinces, who refer to the great one.
of five persons in every one of the twelve Provinces of France; to wit, one
person for the Clergy, one for the Nobility, one for Justice, one for the
Revenues, and one for the Body of the Cities: and these twelve little Councils
should have correspondence with, and dependence on the great one; which should
have taken its resolutions from the plurality of voices, the Queen having only
hers. Nor could it indeed take any, but according to the general Instructions
formed by the King, or without his Majesty's being informed of it, if it were a
thing which his Instructions did not clearly enough explain. Thus, though
absent, he kept the Reins of his Government, and tied up the hands of the
Queen, for fear lest she should take too much Authority, or have been induced
to abuse her Command.

Whilst he applied his spirit to these things, 1610.
some persons, amongst others Conchini and his Some put it into the spirit of
the Queen, that she should be installed before the Kings departure.
wife, put it into the spirit of the Queen, that she should, to acquire more
dignity and splendor in the eyes of the people, and more advantagiously to
authorize her Regency, be installed and crowned before the departure of the
King. For the same Reasons that she desired it, the King found it not agreeable
to him; besides that this Ceremony could not be made without a great deal of
expense, and without loosing much time, which would keep him at Paris, and
retard his designs. He had an extreme impatience to depart from that City; I
know not what secret instinct pressed him to be gone as soon as possible: but
for this reason the Instalment troubled him; yet He, though unwillingly,
consents.
he could not refuse this mark of his affection to the Queen, who passionately
desired it.

Sully recounts that he heard him say more then once, My Friend, this
Instalment presages me some misfortune: they will kill me. I shall never depart
from this City. My Enemies have no other remedy but my death: they have told me
that I should be killed at the first great Magnificence that I make, and that I
should die in a Coach: this makes me often times when I am in one, be assaulted
with tremblings, and be fearful in despite of my self.

They counseled him, to shun these ill Prophecies, to depart on the morrow,
and leave the Instalment to be done without him: but the Queen was extremely
offended; and he good and obliging, remained only to content her. The
Instalment was made at St. Denis The instalment of the Queen.
on the 13 of May; and the Queen on the 16 of the same month was to make her
entrance into Paris, where there were erected Magnificent Preparations to
honor this Feast.

Already had the forces of the King met at their Rendezvous on the Frontiers of
Champagne. Already had the Nobility, who were come from all parts, sent their
Equipages: The Duke of Rohan was gone to gather together the six thousand
Swisses; and there were gone fifty piece of Cannon out of the Arsenal. Already
had the King sent to demand of the Archduke and the Infanta in what manner
they would that he should pass their Country, either as a Friend, or an Enemy.
Every hour of delay seemed to him a year, as if he had presaged some misfortune
to himself: and certainly both Heaven and Earth had given but too many
Prognostics of what arrived. A very Many Prognostics, which seemed to presage
the death of Henry 4.
great Eclipse of the whole body of the Sun, which happened in the year 1608: A
terrible Comet, which appeared the year preceding: Earthquakes in several
places: Monsters born in diverse Countries of France: Rains of blood, which fell
in several places: A great Plague, which afflicted Paris in the year 1606:
Apparitions of Fantosms, and many other Prodigies kept men in fear of some
horrible event.

His Enemies were at present in a profound silence: which possibly was not
caused only by their Consternation, and by the fear of the success of his
Arms, but out of the expectation they had to see succeed some great blow, in
which lay all their hopes. It must needs be that there were many conspiracies
against the Life of this good King; since from twenty places advice was given
of it; since both in Spain and Milan a report was spread of his death by Advice
from several places that his life should be attempted.
a printed Paper; since there passed a (...) eight days before he was
assassinated, through the City of Liege, that said that he carried News to the
Princes of Germany that he was killed; since at Montargis there was found a
Billet upon the Altar, containing the prediction of his approaching death by a
determinate blow; since in fine, the report ran through all Prance, that he
would not outlive that year, and that he would die a tragic death in the
fifty seventh year of his Age. Himself, who was He seems to believe them, and
fear.
not over-credulous, gave some faith to these Prognostics, and seemed as one
condemned to death: So sad and cast down he was, though naturally he was
neither melancholy nor fearful.

There had been at Paris for about two years, Who Ravaillac was.
a certain wicked Rogue, named Francis Ravaillac, a Native of the Country of
Angoumois; red haired, down-looked, and melancholy, who had been a Monk; but
after having quitted the Frock he before professed, was turned Solicitor of
businesses, and come to Paris. It He is induced to kill the King, but it is not
known by whom.
was not known whether he was brought hither to give this blow, or whether
being come out of some other design, he had been induced to this execrable
enterprise by those people, who knowing that he had yet in his heart some leven
of the League, and that false persuasion that the King was about to overturn
the Catholic Religion in Germany, judged him proper for the blow.

If it be demanded who were the Devils and Furies who inspired him with so
damnable a th^^ght, and who spurred him forward to effect his wicked
disposition; the History answers that it knows nothing; and that in a thing so
important, it is not permitted to make pass suspicions and conjectures for
assured truths. The Judges themselves who examined him, durst not open their
mouths, nor ever spoke but covertly.

But see here how he executed his wicked design! On the morrow after the
Instalment, The King departs the Louvre to go to the Arsenal.
being the 14 of May, the King went forth of the Louvre about four a Clock in
the Evening, to go to the Arsenal to visit Sully, who was indisposed, and to
see as he passed the preparations made at the Bridge of Nostre-dame and the
Hostel de Ville for the reception of the Queen. He was at the bottom of his
Coach, What persons were with him.
having the Duke of Espernon by his side: the Duke of Montbazon, the Marshal of
Lavardin, Roquelaure, La force, Mirebeau, and Liancour chief Esquire, were
before, and in the Boots. His Coach entering out of the street of St. Honorio
His Coach stopped in the street of the Ferronnerie.
into that of the Ferronnerie, or Ironmongers, found on the right hand a Cart
laden with Wine, and on the left another laden with Hay; which causing some
trouble, he was constrained to stop: for the street is very narrow by reason of
the shops builded against the wall of the Churchyard of St. Innocents. King
Henry the second had formerly commanded them to be beaten down, to render that
passage more free: but it was not executed. Alas, that one half of Paris had
not rather been beaten down, then it have seen this great misfortune, which
has been the cause of so many infinite other miseries! The Footmen being
passed through the Churchyard of St. Innocents to avoid the trouble, and no
person being near the Coach, this wicked person, who for a long time had
obstinately followed the King to give his blow, observing the side on which he
sat, thrust himself between the shops and the Coach; and setting one foot on
one Ravaillac kills him.
of the spokes of the wheel, (...) the other against a stall, with an enraged
res^^^tion gave him a stab with a knife between the second and third Rib, a
little beneath the heart. At this blow the King cried out, I am wounded. But
the Villain, without being affrighted, redoubled it, and struck him in the
heart; of which he died immediately, without so much as casting forth a sigh.
The Murderer was so assured, that he yet gave a third blow, which light only in
the sleeve of the Duke of Montbazon. Afterward he neither took care to flee,
nor to conceal his knife; but stood still, as if to make himself be seen, and
to glorify or boast in so fair an exploit.

He was taken on the place, examined by the He is torn with burning pincers,
and drawn in pieces by four horses.
Commissioners of Parliament, judged by the Chamber of Assemblies, and by
sentence drawn by four horses in the Greve, after having had the flesh of his
breasts, his arms and thighs, drawn off with burning Pincers, without his
testifying the least emotion of fear or grief at so strange tortures. Which
strongly confirmed the suspicion had, that certain Emissaries under the mask of
Piety and Religion had instructed and enchanted him with false assurances that
he should die a Martyr, if he killed him whom they made believe was the sworn
enemy of the Church.

The Duke d'Espernon seeing the King speechless The Kings body opened, and
found that he might yet live 30 years.
and dead, caused the Coach to turn, and carried his body to the Louvre, where
he caused it to be opened in the presence of twenty six Physicians a^^
Surgeons; who found all parts so soun^, that in the course of Nature he
might yet have lived thirty years.

His Entrails were the same hour sent to St. Denis, and interred without any
Ceremony. The Fathers Jesuits demanded the heart, and carried it to their
Church de la Fleche, where this great King had given them his house to build
that fair College at present seen. The Corpse embalmed in a sheet of Lead,
covered with a Coffin of Wood, and a cloth of Gold over it, was placed in the
Kings Chamber under a Canopy, with two Altars on each side, on which Mass was
said for eighteen days continuance. Afterward it was conducted to St. He is
buried at St. Denis.
Denis, where it was buried with the ordinary Ceremonies, eight days after that
of Henry the third his Predecessor. For it is to be understood, that the body
of Henry the third remained till then in the Church of St. Cornille in
Compeigne, from whence the Duke of Espernon, and Bellegarde great Esquire,
formerly his favorites, brought it to St. Denis, and caused his funerals to be
celebrated; Civility obliging that he should be buried before his Successor.

The Kings death was concealed from the City all the rest of that day, and a
good part The Queen made Regent.
of the morrow; whilst the Queen disposed the Grandees and the Parliament to
give her the Regency. She obtained it without much difficulty, having led the
young King her Son to the Parliament; and the Prince of Conde, and the Count of
Soissons, who alone could have opposed it, being absent. The first was at
Milan, as we have said before; and the second at his house at Blandy, whither
he was retired discontented, some days before the Instalment of the Queen.

When the fame of this Tragical accident The great desolation in Paris, when
they knew of the Kings death.
was spread through Paris, and that they knew assuredly that the King whom they
believed only wounded, was dead; that mixture of hope and fear which kept this
great City in suspense, broke forth on a sudden into extravagant cries, and
furious groans. Some through grief became immovable and Statue-like; others
ran through the streets like mad men; others embraced their friends, without
saying any thing, but, Oh what misfortune! some shut themselves up in their
houses; others threw themselves upon the ground: women were seen with their
disheveled hair run about howling and lamenting: Fathers told their Children,
What will become of you, my Children? you have lost your Father. Those who had
most apprehension of the time to come* and who remembered the horrible
calamities of the past Wars, lamented the misfortune of France, and said, that
that accursed blow which had pierced the heart of the King, cut the throat of
all true Frenchmen. It is reported that many were so lively touched that they
died, some upon the place, and others a few days after. In fine, this seemed
not to be mourning for the death of one man alone, but for the one half of all
men: It might have been said, that every one had lost his whole family, all his
goods, and all his hopes, by the death of this great King.

He died at the age of fifty seven years and His age, and the time of of his
reign.
five months, the thirty eighth of his reign of Navarre, and the one and
twentieth of that of France.

He was married twice, as we have said before: His two wives, Margaret and Mary.
First with Margaret of France, by whom he had no children: The second time
with Mary of Medicis. Margaret was Daughter to King Henry the second, and
Sister to the Kings Francis the second, Charles the ninth, and Henry the third;
from whom he was divorced by sentence of the Prelates deputed for that purpose
from the Pope. Mary of Medicis was Daughter to Francis, and Niece to Ferdinand
Dukes of Florence. She had three Sons and three Daughters. He had three Sons by
Mary,


The Sons were all born at Fontain-bleau. The first named Louis, came into the
world on the 27 September, in the year 1601. at Eleven a Clock at night. He was
King after him, and had the Surname of Just. The second was born on the 16 of
April 1607. he had the title of Duke of Orleans; but no name, because he died
before the Ceremony of his Baptism was celebrated, in the year 1611. The third
took birth on the 25 of April 1608. and was named John Baptista Gaston, and had
title Duke of Anjou: but the second Son being dead, that of Duke of Orleans was
given him, which he bore to his death, which happened two years ago.

The eldest of the Daughters was born at and three Daughters.
Fontain-bleau, the 22 of November 1602. she was the second child, and was
named Elizabeth, or Isabella: she was married to Philip the fourth King of
Spain, and died some years past. She was a Princess of a great heart, and had a
spirit and brain above her Sex: the Spaniards therefore said, that she was
truly Daughter to Henry the Great. The second was born at the Louvre at Paris
the 10. of February 1606. There was given to her the name of Christina; and she
Espoused Victor Amadeo, then Prince of Piedmont, and after Duke of Savoy; a
Prince of the greatest virtue and capacity in the world. The third was born in
the same place, on the 25. of November, being the Feast of St. Katherine, in
the year 1609. and had name Henrietta-Maria. This is the present Queen Mother
of England, widow of the unfortunate King Charles Stuart, whom his Subjects
cruelly despoiled of his Royalty and Life: but heaven, the protector of
Sovereigns, has gloriously re-established his Son Charles the second.

Besides these six Legitimate children, he He had eight Natural children of
diverse Mistresses. Two Sons and a Daughter of Gabriella.
had likewise eight Natural ones, of four different Mistresses, without
counting those whom he did not own.

Of Gabriella d'* Estrees Marchioness of Monceaux and Duchess of Beaufort, he
had Caesar Duke of Vendosme, who yet lives, and was born in the month of June
in the year 1594; Alexander great Prior of France, who died prisoner of Estate;
and Henrietta, married to Charles of Lorrain Duke of Elbeuf. A Son and a
Daughter of the Marchioness of Verneuil.


Of Henrietta de Balsac d' Entragues, whom he made Marchioness of Verneuil, he
had Henry Bishop of Mets, who yet lives; and Gabriella, who Espoused Bernard of
Nogaret Duke of Valette, at present Duke of Espernon, by whom she had the Duke
of Candale, dead some time since; and a Daughter at present a Religious
Carmilite: after which she died.

Of Jacqueline de Bueil, to whom he gave Of the Countess of Moret one Son.
the County of Moret, was born Anthony Count of Moret, who was killed in the
Service of the Duke of Orleans, in the Battle of Castlenaudary, where the Duke
of Montmorency was taken. This was a young Prince, whose Spirit and Courage
promised much. The Marquis of Vardes Espoused afterward this Jacqueline de
Bueil.

Of Charlotta d' Essards, to whom he gave Of Madam d' Essards two daughters.
the land of Romorantin, came two Daughters; Jane, who is Abbess of
Fontevrault; and Mary-Henrietta, who was of Chelles. He loved all his children
Legitimate and Natural with a like affection, but with different consideration.
He would not that they should call him Monsieur, or Sir; a name which seemed to
render Children strangers to their Fathers, and which denoted servitude and
subjection; He loved all his children, and would have them call him Papa.
but that they should call him Papa, a name of tenderness and love. And
certainly in the Old Testament, God took the names of Lord, the Mighty God, the
God of Hosts, and others, to set forth his greatness and power: but in the
Christian Law, which is a Law of Grace and Charity, he commanded us to make our
Prayers as his Children, by those sweet words, Our Father which art in Heaven.

There remains at present that we put here a Summary recapitulation of the Life
of this Summary recital of the Life of Henry the Great.
great King, and after er^ct an Eternal Monument to his glory, in the name of
all France, which can never sufficiently acknowledge its Immortal obligations
to his Heroic virtue.

He began the first motions of his life in the Camp, at the Sound of Trumpets;
his Mother brought him into the world with a wonderful courage; his
Grandfather inspired strength into him the first day he saw him; and he was
brought up to labor from his tenderest infancy.

The first knowledge that age gave him, was to resent the death of his Father
killed at the siege of Rouen, and to see himself encompassed with dangers on
all sides, distant from Court, his friends dis-favoured, his servants
persecuted, and his ruin conjured by his enemies.

His Mother, a generous and able woman, gave him excellent instructions for
Morality and Policy; but very ill ones for Religion; so that he was a Hugonot
by Engagement, and not by Election. And he often professed that he was not
prepossessed, that he should be ready to clear and ^ay himself open, and that
if they could make him see a better way then that he followed, he willingly and
faithfully would walk in it; but that till then he was to be tolerated, and not
persecuted.

At the age of fifteen years he became chief of the Hugonot party, and gave
such sensible advices, that the greatest Captains had cause to admire him, and
to repent that they had not followed him. He passed the first flowers of his
youth, part in Arms, and a part in his Lands of Gascoin, where he remained till
the age of nineteen years. He was then enticed to come to Court, by a Marriage
as illegitimate as cruel: for we may say, that the present Nuptial was the
sudden death of his Mother; the Feast, the general Massacre of his friends;
and the Morrow of his Marriage, his Captivity, which endured almost four years,
at the mercy of his most cruel enemies, and in a Court the most wicked and most
corrupted that ever was known. His courage was not at all weakened by this
servitude, nor could his soul be infected among so many corruptions: But the
Charms of the Ladies which Queen Katherine made use of to retain him, begat in
him that weakness and vice which endured all his life, not to refuse any of
those desires their beauty inspired.

To withdraw himself from the servitude of the Court, he cast himself into the
snare of his ancient party, and of the Hugonot Religion. He received all those
troubles, and all those perplexities which the Chiefs of a Civil War make proof
of; his dignity of General not dispensing with the pains and dangers of a
simple Soldier. Thrice did he oblige the Court to grant him Peace and
Privileges to his party: but thrice they violated them; and he several times
beheld seven or eight Royal Armies make head against him.

His valor, which had already appeared in many occasions, signalized it self
with great Renown at the Battle of Coutras. This was the first important blow
that he struck on the head of the League. A little after it, having assembled
the Estates at Blois, to Arm the whole Kingdom against him, and exclude him
from the Crown of France; the Guises, who were believed the Authors of this
Tragedy, were themselves made the terrible Catastrophe; but which filled all
with flame, blood and confusion. The Duke of Mayenne Armed himself to Revenge
the Death of his Brothers; and the King almost quite abandoned and shut up in
Tours, was enforced to call him to his aid. Our Hero passed by all distrusts
and all fears some would have infused into him, to take the part of his
Sovereign.

They marched to Paris and besieged it: but upon the point to enter, Henry the
third is Assassinated by a Monk. The right of Succession calling our Henry to
the Throne, he found the way crossed with a thousand terrible difficulties; the
League in head against him, the servants of the defunct King little affected to
him, the Grandees every one for his particular ends. The whole Catholic
Religion Leagued against him; without, the Spaniard, the Pope, the Savoyard,
the Lorrainer; within, on one side the people and the great Cities, on the
other the Hugonots, who tormented him with their continual distrusts. He could
not advance one pace without finding some obstacle; so many days, so many
battails. His subjects endeavored to overthrow him as a public enemy, and he
endeavored to regain them like a good Father. In his Closet, and in his
Council, there were only displeasures and bitternesses, caused by an infinity
of discontents, treasons and pernicious designs, which were from moment to
moment discovered against his Person and against his Estate. Every day a double
Combat, a double Victory; the one against his enemies, the other against his
followers: using Prudence and Cunning, where Generosity would not serve.

At Arques he made it appear he could not be overcome; and at Yvry, that he
knew how to vanquish. Every where, where he appeared, all yielded to his Arms:
The League daily lost places and Provinces: It was beaten by his Lieutenants in
other places, as by himself in the heart of his Kingdom. He had forced Paris,
if he could have resolved to loose it; but by sparing it, he absolutely gained
not only its walls, but its hearts.

The Duke of Parma stopped a little the progress of his successes; but he could
not change their course. Vertne and Fortune, or rather Divine Providence,
seemed linked together to crown him with Glory. God visibly assisted him in all
his designs, and preserved him from an infinite number of treasons and horrid
attempts which were daily formed against his Life. In fine, he overthrew the
intentions of the Thirdlings, and prevented the resolutions of the Estates of
the League, by causing himself to be instructed in the Catholic Religion, and
re-entring into the bosom of the holy Church.

When that pretext of Religion was wanting to his enemies, all the party of the
League mouldred away; Paris, and all the great Cities, acknowledged him; the
Duke of Mayenne, though very late, was constrained to become his subject, and
return to his duty; and all the Chiefs of the League treated separately. This
showed a great deal of prudence and cunning in the King, to receive them thus
disjoyntly: for if they had all together made a treaty of common accord, the
party had by this means conserved its bonds together, and not been overthrown,
but appeased.

When he had got the upperhand in his Affairs, and was reconciled to the Pope,
and that his subjects were reconciled with him, the ill counsel of the
Hugonots, who desired always to see him in trouble, persuaded him to declare a
War against Spain. It was now that he thought he should fall into a worse
Estate then ever. They took from him Dourlens after the gain of one battle;
Calais and Ardres by storm, and Amiens by surprise. The rest of the League
which lay hid under the cinders, began to rekindle; the discontents of the
great ones, to be discovered; Conspiracies were formed on all sides; his
servants were amazed, his enemies emboldened. But his Virtue, which seemed to
sleep in prosperity, rouzed it self in adversity: he encouraged his friends,
re-took Amiens, and forced the Spaniard to make peace by the treaty of Vervin.

The Duke of Savoy, thinking to deceive him in the restitution of the
Marquisate of Saluces, and to raise factions in his Realm which should hinder
the King from demanding reason of him, found that he had to do with a Prince
who knew as well how to over* reach him in his designs, as to conquer his
forces: for he forced him among those rocks where he boasted he had nothing to
fear but the thunderbolts of Heaven, and made him shamefully restore what he
had unjustly usurped.

At the same time the King had thoughts, as well for the security and
tranquillity of France, as for his own, to generate Children of a lawful
marriage. Heaven gave him six, and with them a peace of ten years, which was
only lightly troubled by the conspiracy of Byron, by the devices of the Duke
of Bouillon, and by some popular risings against the Pancarte, or Sol pour
livre.

During all this, he labored principally for two things: the one, his great
design, of which we have spoken; for which he made friends and allies on all
sides, cleared his revenues, paid his debts with as good credit as if he had
been a Merchant, gathered moneys, and pacified all differences which were
between those Princes with whom he would associate. The other was to repair the
damages and ruins of France, which a forty years civil War had caused; remove
those causes which imbittered and divided spirits; reform those disorders which
disfigured the face of the Estate; make it flourishing and rich, to the end his
subjects might live happily under the wings of his protection and his justice.

In the mean time himself was not free from troubles, perplexities and
disgusts: his Mistresses caused him a thousand vexations in the midst of his
pleasures: he found thorns even in his Nuptial-bed, and in the ill humor of
his wife; and Conchini was causer of griefs to him: just as a little but
vexatious Mouse may furiously trouble and turmoile the noble Lion.

As he was ready to mount on horseback to begin his great design by the
assistance of his Allies, he lost his Life by the most detestable Parricide was
ever known. Thus he whom so many Pikes, so many Muskets and Cannons, so many
Squadrons and Battalions of men, could not hurt in the trenches and in the
field of battle, was killed with a Knife by a wicked and traiterous Rogue, in
the midst of his capital City, in a Coach, and on a day of public Joy. Unhappy
blow, which put an end to all the joys of France, and which opened a wound
which to this day has left its scar.

Henry was of a middle stature, disposed and active, hardened to labor and
travel. His body was well formed, his temperament able and strong, and his
health perfect; only about the age of fifty years, he had some light assaults
of the Gout, but which soon passed away, and left behind them no weakness. He
had his forehead high, his eyes lively and assured, his nose Aquiline, his
complexion ruddy, his countenance sweet and noble; and yet withal, his presence
Warlike and Martial, his hair brown, and very thin. He wore his beard large,
and his hair very short. He began to grow gray at the age of thirty five years:
upon which he was accustomed to say to those who wondered at it, It is the wind
of my adversities has blown me this.

Indeed to consider well all his life from his very birth, few Princes will be
found who have suffered so much as he; and it will be difficult to tell if he
had more crosses or more Parallel of his adversities and prosperities.
prosperities. He was born the Son of a King, but of a King despoiled of his
Estates. He had a Mother generous, and of a great courage; but a Hugonot, and
an enemy of the Court. He gained the battle of Coutras; but he lost a little
after the Prince of Conde his Cousin, and his right hand. The League stirred up
his virtue, and made him know it; but it thought to overthrow him. It was the
cause that the King having called him to his assistance, he found himself at
the gates of Paris, as if God had led him by the hand: but Paris armed it self
against him, and all his hopes were almost dissipated by the scattering of the
Army which besieged that City. It was without doubt a great happiness that the
Crown of France fell to him, there having never been a succession more distant
in any hereditary Estate: for there were ten or eleven degrees between Henry
the third and him; and when he was born, there was nine Princes of the blood
before him: to wit, King Henry 2. and his five sons; King Anthony of Navarre
his father, and two sons of that Anthony, eldest brothers of our Henry. All
these Princes died to make room for his succession: But he found it so
embroyled, that we may say he suffered an infinity of labors, pains and
hazards, before he could gather the fair flowers of this Crown. Young he
espoused the sister of King Charles, which seemed a match very advantageous for
him: but this marriage was a snare to entrap both him and his friends.
Afterward, that Lady, in stead of being his Consort, became his trouble; and
in stead of being his honor, became his shame. His second Wife brought him
forth fair children, to his no little joy: but her grumblings and disdains were
the causers of a thousand discontents. He triumphed over all his enemies, and
became Arbitrator of Christendom: but the more powerful he made himself, the
more was their hatred envenomed, and the more means used they to destroy him;
so that after having plotted an infinite number of conspiracies against his
life, they found in the end a Ravaillac, who executed in the end what so many
There are more then fifty conspiracies against his person.
others had failed in.

Now it must be acknowledged that all these adversities which he suffered,
ought to whet his spirit and his courage; and that in fine he should be the
greatest of Kings, because he came to the Crown through so many difficulties,
His adversities whet his spirit and courage. Why Princes who come young to the
Crown, seldom learn to govern well.
and in an age very mature.

And certainly it is difficult and very rare for those who are born to a Crown,
and bred up to a near hope to mount into a Throne after the death of their
father, or who find themselves too soon raised to it, ever to learn well the
Art of reigning; be it their not being so happy as to be educated under the
care of a Mother so virtuous and so affectionate as that great Queen, who has
so diligently caused to be instructed King Lewis the 14 her son in all good
Rules, and in all Maxims of Christian Policy; or so happy as to be blessed
with a Minister so wise and so interested for their good, as that young Monarch
has found in the person of Cardinal Mazarine.

The reasons of this are, that ordinarily those persons into whose hands they
fall in their infancy, desiring to conserve to themselves the Authority and the
Government, in stead of obliging or indeed constraining them to apply their
spirits to things solid and necessary, act so cunningly, that they employ them
only in trifles unworthy of them, and amuse them with so much subtilty, that
it is impossible that a young Prince can know it. In stead of laying
incessantly before their eyes the true Grandeur of Kings, which consists in the
exercise of their Authority, they feed them only with appearances and images
of that greatness, as are exterior pomps and magnificences, wherein there is
only pride and vanity. In fine, in stead of instructing them diligently in
what they ought to know, and in what they ought to do, (for all the knowledge
of Kings ought to be reduced into practice) they keep them in a profound
ignorance of all their Affairs, that they may always be Masters, and that they
may never be able to be without them. From whence it happens that a Prince,
though he be great, knowing his own weakness, judges himself incapable to
govern; and from that moment wherein he is possessed with this opinion, he must
needs renounce the conduct of his Estate, if that he have not indeed
extraordinary natural qualities, and a heart truly Royal. Moreover, these
persons would seize themselves of all Avenues, and hinder ^onest men from
approaching those tender ears: or if they cannot hinder their approaches, they
are not wanting to render them suspected, or to deprive them of all belief in
the spirit of these young Princes, making them pass with them either for their
enemies, or people ill affected, or else for ridiculous or impertinent.
Moreover, they have some Emissaries who infatuate them with flatteries, with
excessive praises and adorations; who never let them know any thing but what
shall be to their ends; who improve their defaults by continual complacences;
who make them believe they have a perfect intelligence of all things, when they
know nothing; who make them conceive that Royalty is only a Sovereign Bauble,
that travel befits not a King, and that the functions of Royalty being
laborious, are by consequence base and servile. In this manner they soon
disgust them with their own Command: they accustom them to have Masters,
because they have yet neither so much knowledge nor so much courage as to be
Masters. And thus these poor Princes, being not at all contradicted, but always
adored; nor having any experience of themselves, or ever suffered pain or
necessity, become often presumptuous and absolute in their fancies, and
believing their puissance to have Peerage with that of Gods: they begin to
consider nothing but their passion, their pleasure and humor, as if Mankind
were created for them, whilst they were created wisely to order and govern
Mankind; who let profusion and waste be made of the life and goods of their
subjects; and who with an unparalled insensibility, hearken no more to their
Laments and Groans, then to the Lowings of a slaughtered Ox.

On the contrary, those who come to the Those who come to a Crown at greater
distance and a more ripe age, are more capable and better.
Crown at a greater distance, and in a riper age, are almost always better
instructed in their affairs: they apply themselves more strongly to Govern
their Estates; they will always hold the Rudder; they are juster, more tender,
and more merciful; they know better how to manage their Revenues; they conserve
with more care the blood and the goods of their subjects; they more willingly
hear their complaints, and do better Justice; they do not with so much vigor
use their absolute power, which oft-times makes the people despair, and causes
strange revolutions.

If the reasons why they are so be sought, The reasons of it.
they are because they have been in a Post or place, where they have often
heard truth: where they have understood what ignominy it is for a Prince not to
enjoy his own personal power, but to leave it to another: where though they
have had some flatterers, they have likewise had open enemies, who by censuring
their faults have induced a Reformation: where they have heard blamed the
faults of that Government under which they were, and have blamed them
themselves; so that they are obliged to do better, and not to follow what they
have condemned: where they have studied to govern themselves wisely, because
they were dependants, and fearful of punishment: where they have often heard
the complaints of particular persons, and seen the miseries of the people: in
fine, where they have understood by suffering, what evil is; and to have pity
of those who suffer injustice, because they themselves have proved the rigor
of a too high and severe Government. We have two fair Examples in Lewis the
twelfth, surnamed the Father of the people, and in our Henry, two of the best
Kings who in the last ages have born the Scepter of the Flowers de Lis.

Now who would gather together and worthily A mystic Crown to the glory of
Henry the Great.
compose all the Heroic virtues, the Noble actions and Eminent qualities of
Henry the Great, would make him a Crown much more precious and resplendent then
that wherewith his head was adorned on the day of his Coronation. That treasure
of freedom and sincerity, free and exempt from malice, from gall and
bitterness, should be the matter more precious then Gold. His Renown and his
Glory, which will never have end, should be the Circle. His Victories of
Coutras, of Arques, of Yvry, of Fontaine-Franzoise; his Negotiations of the
peace of Vervin, of his accommodations between the Venetians and the Pope, of
the Truce between the Spaniard and the Hollander, and that great League with
all the Princes of Christendom, for execution of the design of which we have
spoken, should be the branches. Then his war like valor, his generosity, his
constancy, his credit, his wisdom, his prudence, his activity, his vigilance,
his economy, his justice, and a hundred other virtues, should be the precious
stones. Amongst which, that Paternal and Cordial love he had for his people,
would cast a fire more lively and bright then the Carbuncle: The firmness of
his courage, always invincible in dangers, would bear the Price and Beauty of
a Diamond: And his unparalled Clemency, which raised up those enemies he had
overthrown, would appear like an Emerald, which sends forth enlivenings and joy
into the eyes of all that behold it. To continue the Metamorphosis; I will yet
say, that so many wise Laws which he made for Justice, for Policy, and for his
Revenues; so many good and useful Establishments of all sorts of Manufactures,
which produced to France the yearly profit of many Millions; so many proud
buildings, as the Galleries of the Louvre, the Pont-neuf, the Place Royal, the
College Royal, the Keys for Merchants of the River Seine, Fontain-bleau,
Monceaux, St. Germain; so many public works, Bridges, Causwaies, Highwaies
repaired; so many Churches rebuilded in many places of the Realm, should be as
the Ingravements and Imbellishments.

Let us Crown then with a thousand praises the immortal memory of that great
King, the love of the French, and the terror of the Spaniards; the Honor of
his age, and the Admiration of Posterity: Let us make him live in our hearts
and in our affections, in despite of the rage of those wicked persons deprived
him of life: Let us shout forth as many Acclamations to his glory, as he has
done benefits to France. He was a Hereules, who cut off the Head of the Hydra,
by overturning the League. He was greater then Alexander, and greater then
Pompey, because he was as Valiant; but he was more Just: he gained as many
victories, but he gained more hearts. He conquered the Gauls, as well as
Julius Caesar; but he conquered them to give them liberty, and Caesar
subjugated them to enslave them. Let his Name then be raised above that of the
Hercules, the Alexanders, the Pompeys, and the Gaesars: Let his Reign be the
Model of good Kings, and his Examples the clear Lights to illuminate the eyes
of other Princes: Let his Posterity be Eternally Crowned with the Flowers de
Lis: Let them be always happy, always Triumphant. And to complete our wishes,
let Lewis the Victorious his Grandchild, Resemble, or if it be possible,
Surpass him.

FINIS.

