A PERFECT RELATION Of the several Assaults and Storms MADE BY The KING of
SWEDEN UPON COPENHAGHEN The chief Residence of the KING of DENMARK TOGETHER
With the whole Proceedings and Particulars on both sides.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1658.

A Perfect Relation, etc.
ON the 4th day of this present month of February, the English Resident Mr.
Isaac Ewers, (who for some time since had been with the King of Sweden, and at
his request, did return hither back again) was admitted into this City of
Coppenhaghen, and on the next day had Audience given him by his Majesty the
King of Denmark, unto whom he delivered certain Letters, written unto his said
Majesty by the present Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. said
Highness, and by his extraordinary Envoy Sr. Philip Meddows; the said Residents
Propositions as well as his Letters, purporting, a proffered Mediation by his
said Highness, toward the compassing of a particular Peace between these two
Nothern Crowns.

But by the hostile attempts which did immediately ensue, it evidently
appeared, that the said Propositions were only set on foot by the Swedes,
thereby to amuse the said King of Denmark, to lull him asleep; as also to
surprise this good City, and consequenty after the taking of the same, by force
to subdue the whole Kingdom, and to attain unto the absolute Dominion, both by
Sea and Land, to the great prejudice of the Associated and Neighboring
Princes. All which is most manifestly apparent by the ensuing Actions and
Attempts.

For on the 5th day of this present month, the said Resident made overture of
his said Propositions; though before any Answer could be thereon returned unto
the said Lord Protector, or unto any one else; and whenas his said Majesty the
the King of Denmark had sent a Trumpeter with particular Letters from some
persons in this City, unto their friends in the Country, and with Letters from
the Lord Admiral Opdam, to have passed with them through the Swedish Camp; the
King of Sweden would not permit the same, but only for that one time and no
more, suffered the Lord Opdams Letter only to pass; whereby it appears, that he
sought for an occasion and an opportunity, during this hard frost and these
long nights, to continue his hostile acts, under a color and pretense of a
proffered Peace, as the sequel does sufficiently demonstrate.

Seeing after the said King of Sweden, had by the advice of a Court Martial
transported the main body of his Army into Zealand, out of Schonen and Punen,
whether he had brought them against their wills, out of their own Countries,
being Swedes, Laplanders, Finnlanders, Irish, Scotch, English, Dutch and Poles:
He did, on the 8th day of this present month, give a charge in writing, unto
the chief Field-Officers of his Army, to assault and storm the City of
Coppenhaghen, together with the Fortress of Christians Haven, on all parts, in
a hostile manner; whereof the King of Denmark was timely advertised on the self
same day, and some while before: Moreover the Swedes would gladly have put his
said bloodthirsty design in execution (contrary to his said proffered overtures
of Peace) even before, if not at the very self same time, whenas the said
Resident had but newly propounded it; had he not been impeaded therein by other
accidents which happened, and whereby he was constrained to defer it; whereof we
had sufficient knowledge.

For after the King of Sweden, had in the preceding daytime, made a show of all
his Forces he had in his Camp, and often drawn them forth in battle array,
thereby to beget a fear in the Inhabitants of this City; and that we were for
certain informed, that he would immediately make an assault upon this place: He
did put the same in execution about midnight, between the eighth and nineth of
February last; whenas the Enemy, it being then so dark, as that a man could not
see the length of a half Pistoll-shot from him; did, between twelve and one of
the Clock in the night, hastily advance by Calboch over the Ice, not far
distant from the Longang, or Line of Communication, and the Magazin or
Ammunition House; and made their first assault upon a Lighter, which was placed
about three Msket shot from the Ammunition House: and as the said Lighter was
but a small one, mounted but with six Guns, half Brass, half Iron ones, and
defended but by a Captain, two Gunners, and some Mariners, whence they fired on
the Enemy, yet they heedded that not at all: And as the Ice was not broke quite
round the same, the Enemy entered her, killed one of the Mariners, and took four
Prisoners; whereupon the Captain thereof, retiring with the rest of his men
into the City, the Enemy fired the Hurts which were in the said Lighter, which
gave such a reffection upon the Ice, as that the Enemy could be discerned
marching in great Bodies toward this place; amongst which our Canon
incessantly playing, and (according to the relation of some Prisoners and
Fugatives) a Colonel of the Enemies being shot a pieces, and several of their
Bodies being thereby also broke and disordered, the Enemy was forced to retire
in a confused manner, carrying away their dead men with them, according to
their usual Custom. But whereas the Hutts, which were in the said Lighter, did
make a great flame, the other Troops; thought that a House was fired in the
City, for a sign all that the Town was taken, and therefore in great number
hastened thither; but meeting those which were to have made the assault,
returning back again with bloody Pates, they soon desisted in their design to
proceeed any further. About two of the Clock in the morning, our men regained
the Lighter, quenched the fire, and brought the three Guns which were thrown
out of her, on board again, and fired therewith on the Enemy. In the morning
tide, there was found in the Ice, which had been kept open, a strange kind of
Bridge, which could be taken asunder, and put together, with it is carriage
mounted on eight Wheels, which was brought into the Courtyard; as also
several Shells and Grenades, with crooked Hooks, and other Warlike
Instruments; diverse Skulls and Jaws of dead men: And the same night, the King
of Sweden, with his Cavalry, was gotten into the Isle of Amach, hoping that
those Troops, which he had commanded over the Ice, would have forced their
entrance into Christians Haven, and so have facillitated his passage with his
Horse into the City: But his said attempt, was for that time, by Gods
asistance, frustrated, and himself forced to retreat.

However, they desisted not, but the said Enemy, did again with his whole might
and power, assault the City of Coppenhaghen, and the Fortress of Christians
Haven, in a hostile manner, betwixt the tenth and eleventh of this present
Month, about one of the Clock at night.

The first assault, was jointly made at three several parts; From the Longang,
or private Conveyance, which is situated behind the Kingly Palace, and the
Magazin or Ammunition House, along the Ramparts, and the half Bulwark, or
Bastion, by the water-conveyance, especially upon the adjacent Ravelin, and the
said Line. Behind the Magazin or Ammunition House, there was placed a small
Danish Man of War, called Hoyen hal, mounted with a few Guns, and defended by
not above sixteen or eighteen men. In this Vessel, and in this place, the
Swedes discharged their greatest fury, bringing along with them some
flat-bottom'd Boats, and Bridges, to lay over the Ice; But the said Vessel
defended her self stoutly, to the last man, and not regarding the small number
she had on Board, bore off three several assaults, until there remained but
six of her company alive; insomuch as those which survived, did not only keep
off the Enemy, by their continual playing upon them, but did good execution
upon the several Bodies of their Troops, which advanced over the Ice from
Calleboc, toward the said Stations, which they were ordered to assault, and
very much endamaged their main Battalion which was drawn up there. Finally,
they slew one Major Smith, who was gotten on board of her, and forced the rest
to quit the Vessel again. There were found eleven dead Bodies of the Enemies,
upon the Decks of the said Ship, which had so wounded the Captain, besides
those which were drowned.

Those who assaulted the foresaid Ravelin seated by the water-conveyances were
manfully repulsed, but resolutely renewed their assault again; and after they
had cut down some of the Palisadoes, they rushed through them suriously, and
endeavored to scale the Walls, with their storming Ladders, but were at push a
Pike resolutely received and entertained by our men, who valiantly resisting
them, beat them off again and drove them back; and finally after a hot and
sharp contest, for the space of three hours, during which time the Enemy had
maintained the said Ravelin, they beat them out again, many being killed and
wounded in that Contest.

In like manner, our men which were in the half Bulwork on the adjacent
Curtain, and in the Longang or private conveyance by the Stables, as also on
the Walls, and in the rest of the Works on that side, behaved themselves so
manfully and courageously, as that they continually repulsed the Enemy on all
sides.

The King himself, together with the Senators of the Kingdom, and the Gentry,
were present at, and assisted in the whole Action, as also the Officers
belonging to the Kings Court, etc. some others jointly with the rest of the
Courtiers were placed behind the Magazin or Ammunition House, near unto the
Kings Stables, and in the Longang or Brestwork, which they did manfully defend.

By his said Majesty's presence and most Heroical resolution, who was not at
all dismayed, but continually applied himself to all the places where the
storm and assault was the hottest and fiercest, behaving himself most
Magnanimously; encouraging his men, and destributing the necessary Orders which
were requisite, each one was the better animated and prompted to the duty.

And the (...) and conduct of the Generals, and Field-Officers which were in
the place, was most apparently evident in this occasion, by their encouraging
of each other; their dextrous assistance and joint Actings, with so much
facility and resolution against the Enemy, as that by Gods grace, he could not
gain ground in the least upon them, but was most manfull repulst and forced to
retreat.

In like manner the Burgemasters, Aldermen, and the faithful Citizens
bestirred themselves mainly, behaved themselves wonderfully well, and assisted
personally in this service, being all of them well and fully resolved to
venture their lives, substances, goods and blood, in the defense of their
Country, and the mainteinance of their gracious and lawfully ordained King.

The chief assault therefore was made on this said station, being carried on by
Major General Vavasor; together with the Palsgraves, the English, and the
Hestericks Brigades, as also Major General Ferssers, and Collonell Gorgose's:
who endeavored to comply with their Orders, and to go through with their task
with a great deal of resolution.

The King of Sweden himself was at the head of his Reserve, not far from the
assault, however out of Canon shot, our great Guns and Muskets continually
thundered in amongst the Enemies Troops, who labored in all parts to throw
over his new invented flat bottomed Boats and Bridges upon the frozen Moates,
which taking effect in several stations, they immediately made use of their
storming Ladders to scale the Works, chiefly at the point of the Bulwork, or
round House seated near the Water convayance, which was very well fortified
with Palezadoes, Turnpikes, and Swines feathers, but those who endeavored to
scale the said Works, were for the most part killed and wounded, and the
Assailants, who for three several times were relieved and came fresh on again,
were so well received, as that they had no mind to make any long stay there,
but were totally repulst and driven away.

Some few had the good luck to get upon the Walls, but were likewise so
unfortunate again, as that they forgot to proceed, and will not be well able to
tell how they came on or off.

Finally, The insulting Enemy was constrained by the day light (since the
darkness would no longer serve his turn, to cloak and hide his enterprises,)
to retire in a great deal of confusion toward their headquarters; having
sustained a great loss, leaving behind him a great number of dead and wounded
men, several Ice-Bridges, storming Ladders, some Ensigns, Morter-pieces, and
Petards; with diverse new kind of Materials, Instruments, and warlike Engines;
after the storm and assault, which was fierce and bloody, had lasted for the
space of four hours.

In like manner the Enemy did present himself before Christians Haven,
advancing over the Ice toward the Hollanders station, situated between the
Isle of Amach, and the Ammunion-house, called the Scharport; but were thence
also repulst with bloody pates, and a great loss, both of dead men, and
Prisoners which were taken.

Before the Enemy made this main assault, they gave a false Alarm at
Christians Haven, beating their Drumms, and making a show to have fallen on
there with a great shout, purposely to deceive us, and to cause us to send some
relief thither, and so to have weakened our stations in Coppenhaghen: They
advanced as far as the frozen Moates, but found the Ice wider open then they
had imagined, so that the for most of them fell in and were drowned; and when
the day appeared there were Hatts, Perewiggs and Muffs found swimming on the
water; also on the Ice, and up and down on the Land, several Bodies were found;
the remainder of them, were by the Enemy conveyed off according to his usual
custom, every Trooper and Muskiteer being enforced to carried away his dead or
wounded companion, and to cast them upon the Wagons and Sledges.

About half an hour past four of the clock in the morning a third party of the
Enemies, commanded by the Lieutenant General, the Earl Gustavus Banner, and
led on by Lieutenant Colonels Lentsman, Fittinghoff, Stael and others,
appeared with the dismounted Polish Horse, and other Troops, on the other side
of the City of Copenhaghen, over against the Eastern gate, and the two adjacent
Bulwarks, called the Mill and middle Bulwarks; in which place the Holland
Soldiers and Officers had likewise their stations; who suffered the Enemy to
come so nigh the Ravelin, as that they so hoamly greeted them with their
Muskets (whilst they were busied in ordering their materials, and laying their
bridges over the moat) as that several of them will never think of returning
back; and the remainder were finally enforced to retire in a great deal of
confusion.

As the Enemy thought to have brought on his flat bottomd Boats to that part of
the works, the first of them slipped under the Ice with its fore part, and with
its hinder part reared an end, so that they could make but little use thereof:
however four persons who had jointly cast their scaling Ladders over the Ice,
got up upon the walls, who had quarter given them by the Hollanders: In this
place the Swedes were enforced to leave diverse of their new invented
Ice-bridges, storming Ladders, and other Instruments behind them; running away
and leaving several of their dead and wounded Men; amongst which diverse
healthy men had hid themselves, who afterward kneeling with lift up hands,
demanded quarter, which was granted to them; insomuch as that a great number of
Prisoners were brought in, at this, as well as the other stations: amongst
which were diverse Majors, Captains of Horse, and other Officers, some of which
died of their wounds.

The Lord Admiral of the united States, the Barron of Wassender, was in person
at the head of a considerable Reserve at the Eastern Gate, having several
brave and resolute Stamen in his company.

According unto the information of the Prisoners, the King of Sweden had
encouraged the Troopers (who were otherwise unwilling to be dismounted, and to
serve on foot in the assault) with his Promise, to suffer them, to have the
Plundering of the City for three days space, and to deal with the Women, as
they themselves should please. An exact List is a preparing, of the Names of
all the Officers who commanded and fought on both sides, as also of those which
were killed wounded and taken on the Enemies behalf; for on our part, although
it be scarce credible, there is not so much as an Officer, or a Citizen
missing, and not above eight or ten Soldiers killed, There were two or three
Citizens wounded, particularly two Gentlemen named Rosecrants, and Rotstein;
the first of which died on the place, and the other is dangerously hurt.

Mean while on the Enemies part, these ensuing General Persons and Officers
in chief were slain, forasmuch as we can be assured of as yet:

The General of the Artilery, the Earl of Steinboch. St. William Vavasor,
Major General. Major General Aschenberg. Count Lodowick Lourven Ceupt,
Lieutenant Collonell. Count Jacob Drommondt, Lieutenant Collonell. Collonell
Gengell. Collonell Staell. Collonell Steinhoff. Collonell Scharnestsky.
Collonell Hesterich. Collonell Sparr. Collonell Becker./ Collonell Berenclaw.
Collonell Adjatant General Lavoyette. Collonell Lentzman. Lieut. Col.
Wrangell. Lieut. Col. Kittinghoven. Major Schmidt. Capt. John Frederick, of
Horse. Capt. Neewhugs, of Horse. Capt. Westerhagen, of Horse. Capt.
Vandervosten, of Horse. Cap. Ugla, of Foot. In all 120. Inferior Officers, and
60. Officers in Chief.
There was found an Officer in Chief of the Swedes, drowned under the Ice
behind the Danish Man of War, whose Name is as yet unknown; besides the
slain and wounded men which they carried off upon their storming Ladders and
Wagons, wherewith they brought their Materials and Ice-Bridges.

Moreover the Country People did bury three Wagons full of dead Men, in a Pit
near unto the place of execution called the Galghenberg, which they were to
have carried to the Camp; and over and above those which were drowned, there
has already been found 566. dead Corpse; although there must needs be many
more, since they are not as yet all found, and that the Enemy has carried
several away.

Threescore and two Prisoners were brought into the City; not is it known how
many more may have hid themselves up and down about the Works; some Troopers
which came over to us out of the Swedes Camp, relate, that it is reported in
the Army, that they had lost three Generals, eight Colonels, twelve Lieutenant
Colonels, besides several other Officers, and at least 3000. private
Soldiers, but the Swedes themselves only speak of 2000.

The Swedes their Word was, God help us; and the besieged their Word was
Honest: the Swedes distinction which they wore in their hats, was a green bush
of Juniper tied with a straw: ours wore a white hankerchief in their hats: the
greatest part of the Enemy, had white shirts over their clothes, to the end
they should not be discovered in the Snow.

Our men have lighted upon good booty, as rich Clothes, Rings, coined Gold and
Silver, Chains of gold, whole purses full of Gold, and other such like things
which they found about the dead: Amongst which, is the Seal of Count Drommond,
and the Seal and gold Ring with Colonel Charles Banners Coat of Arms, whereby
its presumed that he is also slain.

This glorious Victory is the Lords work, to whom eternal praise be given for
the same: and for the which, on the 11th of February, public Thanksgivings
were returned to God in all the Churches of this City; and it was very pleasing
to hear the reserve of our men which were drawn up in the great place before
the Kings Court, when day appeared and that the Enemy was defeated and put to
flight, did sing aloud several Psalms of Thanksgiving in way of rejoicing.

It is very observable, That of so many Grenades, which the Enemy during the
assault, did fling in abundance upon and toward the Walls, there was no hurt
at all done; the greatest part of them rebounding back again, endammaged the
Eenemy themselves; so likewise did the Danes play mainly upon the Enemy with
small and great Grenades; and from the Bulwork by the Water Conveyance there
were 300. hand Grenades cast forth.

The wind being North East, was by Gods appointment very favorable for the
Danes, so that the greatest part of the smoke caused by the firing on both
sides, as well as from the Works and Walls, was driven directly into the
Enemies faces.

And the Enemy, by Gods assistance, being in this manner manfully repulst on
all sides, was constrained as suddenly to retreat as he at first did furiously
fall on, having a good conduct of Shot and Hail sent after him from all parts.

On the same day; to wit, the eleventh of February, in the Afternoon, a Swedish
Trumpeter was sent into Copenhaghen, desiring that the dead bodies of Major
General Vavasor, and of Collonell Gangell, might be delivered unto him, which
was granted; and in reference thereunto, these following dead Corpse newly
found, and being decently adorned and wrapped up in burying clothes, were
delivered to the said Trumpeter, viz.

Major General Sir William Vavasor. Colonel Gangell. Lieutenant Colonel Count
Drommondt. Lieutenant Colonel Kittinghoven. Lieutenant Colonel Leutzman.
Lieutenant Colonel Stake. Major Schmidt. Captain Augustine of Horse. Captain
Westerhagen of Horse. Captain Neewhaus of Horse. Captain Vgla of Foot.
Three Cart-loades of Scaling Ladders, which stood betwixt a Chimney and the
Ravelin before the Eastern Gate, were brought into the City by the Holland
Soldiers, which went out for booty; besides a great quantity of Bridges,
flat-bottom'd Boats, and other warlike Instruments; several of which the King
has caused to be preserved for a Remembrance.

Moreover, there are taken six Ensigns, or Colors, twelve Drums, two
Morter-pieces, and one great Petard; wherewithal they thought to have opened
the Longang, or Line of Communication, as also another Petard; several great
and small Grenades and Shells filled with Powder and Bullets, several Pikes and
Suits of Arms; as also diverse new fashioned and invented Muskets; made in such
a manner, as that they carried a small Copper Granadoe, in which there were
several reportitions, being boared through with a sharp Iron, which was hooked
at the end, purposely to remain hanging in a man's clothes, and so to hurt not
only one person, but the several standers by: but these being shot over the
Walls, did little or no harm at all, although the Inventer of the same, had a
great reward from the King of Sweden.

Finally, Some Runawayes, which came lately over from the Swedish Camp, do
relate, That six hundred of the hurt and maimed men, were sent away to
Rotschilt, four hundred to Roeck, and two hundred unto Elsenheur, since there
was no convenience for them in the Camp.

There was found about the Lieutenant Colonel Fittinghoff, (who was slain on
the place before the aforesaid Eastern Bulwork) the ensuing Order in writing,
under the King of Sweden's own Seal and Signature, as follows.

Charles Gustave, by the Grace of God, King of Sweden, Goths and Vandalls, etc.

It is his Majesty's gracious Order, to both the Lieutenant Colonels Lentsman,
and Tythinghoff; That they, (as soon as Lieutenant Colonel Stael, with his
commanded men, shall be advanced along the Ravelin, on the left hand, toward
the Bulwork of the Citadell) shall with their commanded Troopers, and the
Materials which they have with them, (leaving the said Ravelin on their left
hand, and passing on the right) assault the long face of the half Bulwork; and
moreover, endeavor to apply their Materials thereunto, to master the said
Bulwork, to chase the Enemy out of the same, and to keep and maintain their
stands there, until they shall receive further Orders; and in case they happen
to be once or twice repuls't, they shall notwithstanding, not give over till
they have mastered the same: and in the mean while, send speedy word to
General Banner, in what a posture they find the Enemy to be: Where in his
Majesty relying upon the courage and good conduct of both the said Lieutenant
Colonels, and their inferior Officers, does remain confident, continuing them
in his Kingly gracious and good opinion.

In testimony whereof, given under his Majesty's own Hand and Seal in the Camp
by Bromsou, on the 8th of Febr. 1659. Subscribed thus, Carel Gustaf.

With a Seal, directed thus, Order for the Lieutenant Colonels, Lentsman and
Tyringhoff.
Signed, Frans Ivel.


About another, who who was found dead by a certain Chimney, before the Eastern
Gate, and who for certain, is known to be Major General Vavasor, having been
shot through the back, there was likewise found another Swedish Kingly Order,
of the Tennor following.

Charles Gustave, by the Grace of God, King of Sweden, Goths, and Vandalls, etc.

It is his Majesty's gracious Order to Major General Vavasor; That as soon as
Major General Ferssen, with his joint Brigades, shall be advanced toward
those parts which are ordered him: He shall likewise match on toward the
Bulwork, with the Palsgraves, the Hestericks, and the English Brigades; in such
a manner, as that the Palsgraves shall apply their Materials against the Works
upon the right hand, toward Amach, and the Hesterick jointly with the English,
on the left hand, on the Works toward the crooked Line, and shall use their
best endeavors to assault and master the said Bulwork; and having gained the
same, to take their Stations there on both sides of the same, and there to
join; to wit on the right hand, with the General of the Ordnance Sternbock,
and with Colonel Lavoyette, and on the left hand with Colonel Gorgos: and in
case the Captain with the 50 commanded men, or Colonel Gorgos, who are ordered
to master the crooked Line on their right hand, shall not have performed the
same; he the said Major General Vavasor, shall as then open the said crooked
Line on the left side, with those Petards which he has with him, shall drive
the Enemy out of the same, shall nayl up the Gunnes which he shall find
therein, and so join himself to the Brigade on the left hand; and mean while
shall give notice unto his said Majesty, in what a posture he does find the
Enemy in: which being put in execution, the said King does remit himself to the
good courage, conduct and prudence of the said Major General; and remains,
committing him to Gods protection, continuing him in his gracious good opinion:
In testimony whereof,

Given under his Majesty's Seal and Signature in the Camp before Bromsou, on
the 8th of Febr. 165^ Subscribed thus, Carel. Gustaf.

Directed thus, The Order for Major General Vavasor.
Signed, Frans. Sael.


Extract out of other Letters from Coppenhaghen, bearing date the 21th Febr.
1659.
Since we have had a thaw in these parts, there have been found above a
Thousand dead bodies in all, with those which we before specified, in and about
the Works of this City in the Ice and Snow.

As likewise we have received a Confirmation of the defeat given to General
Wrangell, in an Assault which he made on the Isle of Langland; where he lost
500 men, besides the Earl of Waldeeck, and Colonel Putcamer, who were slain in
the said attemp.


FINIS.

