The whole Duty of Man, Containing a PRACTICAL TABLE of the TEN COMMANDMENTS:
Wherein the Sins forbidden, and the Duties commanded, or implied are clearly
discovered, by Famous Mr. Will. Perkins.
I. The first Commandment.
THou shall have no other Gods before me.

In which Commandment note these two Affirmatives.

1. That we must acknowledge God. 2. We must acknowledge no other God but him.
And the love required from this God is,

To hear his Word willingly, to speak and think of him frequently, and to do
his will cheerfully, to yield up body and soul for his Cause, to delight in his
presence, and to bewail his absence, to love and hate what he does, and to draw
others to that love, to rest upon his revealed Counsels, and to call upon his
name with affiance.

The Negative part of this Commandment, is, to acknowledge none other than the
true God, where note these things forbidden; Ignorance of this God and of his
will; Atheism, denying God, or his Attributes, of Justice, Wisdom, Providence,
Presence, etc. setting our hearts upon any other thing, distrust in God expressed
by impatient suffering, despair of his truth, expressed by Creature-confidence,
Riches, Pleasures, Physicians. Self-love hates God, declines his ways, flies
from him; the want of God's fear hardens the heart, is carnally secure, and
will neither acknowledge God's Judgments, nor his own sin.

II. The Second Commandment.
Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image, or any likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the
Water under the Earth; Thou shall not bow down thy self to them; for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me; and
showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

The Affirmative part of this Commandment, is, to worship God in Spirit and
Truth, wherein the ordinary means of God's Worship is commanded, as calling
upon his Name, by humble Supplication, hearty Thanksgiving, by reading,
hearing, talking and continual meditating on God's Word, use of the Sacraments,
all this to be done holily, as God's Word commands.

The Negative Part of this Commandment, is, neither to worship any false Gods,
nor the true God with false worship, and here is forbidden any Image,
Similitude, Likeness, or Figure whatsoever; for all Idols are lies, and all the
badges and monuments thereof, or to worship the beast and receive his mark; all
hypocrisy is to be also avoided, to make a glorious show of serving God, or to
pry into others weakness and not mind our selves, or to be more zealous for
Tradition than Truth.

III. The third Commandment.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

The Affirmative Part of this Commandment, is, to be zealous of God's Glory
above all things, to use God's Titles only in serious affairs with all
reverence, to celebrate God's praise which shines in his Creatures.

To confirm the Truth by an Oath, with the Invocation of God alone, as a
witness of Truth and revenger of a Lie.

The form of this Oath must be truly, justly, in Judgment, whether public or
private.

We are also commanded to sanctify God's Creatures, as Meats, Drinks, Works,
Callings, Marriage, etc. by the reverent use of his Holy Name, for a blessing
on, or return of thanks for blessings received, the Creatures being sanctified
by the Word and Prayer.

The Negative Part of this Commandment, is, Perjury, either lying unto God, or
vocation of God's Name to confirm a lie, or to swear in common talk, or to
swear (...) strange Gods, blasphemy of and against God, all cursing, all use of
God's name ^^^ly.

IV. The Fourth Commandment.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it Holy; Six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it
thou shall not do any work, Thou nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy Man
servant, nor thy Maid servant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger that is within
thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day, and hallowed it.

The Affirmative part of this Commandment, is, to cease from sin, from the
works of our ordinary callings, and also to perform those spiritual duties,
which God requires: Where in Preparation to the Sanctification of this day, (as
Christ and the practice of the old Law were wont) the Assemblies must be
frequented, God's word and his creatures meditated; Works of charity, the needy
relieved, the sick visited, the fallen admonished, differences reconciled.

This blessed Rest-day is a Type of that inward rest from sin, and that blessed
rest of the Saints eternally in Heaven.

The seventh day from the Creation is ceased, and the Lord's day Sabbath
confirmed by his Resurrection, and the Apostolical practice. Things of present
necessity, as to preserve life, or goods, provision of meat or drink, watering
cattle, curing diseases, Voyages of Mariners, Shepherds tending flocks, or
necessary employment of Physic.

The Negative part of this Commandment, is, not to pollute the Sabbath, by
works of our ordinary calling, Fairs on this day, all manner of Husbandry, all
scurrility of Jests, Sports, all manner of Profaneness and Hypocrisy.

V. The Fifth Commandment.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon the Land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

The affirmative part of this Commandment, is, Reverence to the Aged, obedience
to all the lawful commands of Parents, and relief of them in their need, and to
obey and pray for Superiors, and all in Authority; Superiors must be Examples
of blameless life, and rule in and for the Lord. Punishing great faults by
correction, and light faults by rebuke.

The Negative part of this Commandment, is, Contempt of Superiors,
disobedience to Parents, also Parents cruelty to their Children, either in
correction, threatening or provoking; Servants are forbidden stubbornness,
deceitfulness, running away, and we are not to offend our Equals either in word
or deed.

VI. The sixth Commandment.
Thou shall not Kill.

The Affirmative part of this Commandment, is, to preserve our Neighbors
welfare, both in Body and in Soul, to help him in his streights; to our
utmost, speedily, and to share with him in his adversity; to abstain from
Anger, and refrain from wrath; to forgive injuries, and rather to suffer than
do wrong, and to overcome evil with good, by love to cover a multitude of evil.

To preserve the life of our Neighbor, and to win his soul to the faith, we
must ive like Lights to direct and admonish offenders.

The Negative part of this Commandment, is, Hatred of our Neighbor, unadvised
Anger, want of compassion, frowardness, desire of Revenge, bitterness in
speaking, r^proach and Railing, contentions, brawlings, exclaiming, complaints,
malicious persecution by derision.

To wound our Neighbor, or procure his death, to be cruel in punishing, to
injure inpotent poor strangers, widows, to stop the laborers hire, not to
restore the poors pledge.

He^e self-murder, hurting or endangering our selves is also forbidden.

VII. The seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not Commit Adultery.

The Affirmative part of this Commandment, is, chastity in body and mind, free
from fleshly concupiscence, and chaste from putting lust in execution,
preserving chasti^y with modesty and sobriety, which appears in the countenance
and eyes; Modety also is seen in words, when talk is holy, decent and comely;
An Adulteress is loud tongued; Modesty is also seen in apparel, holy comeliness
expresses to the eye the sincerity of the heart.

Sobriety is a virtue consisting in the holy use of food; Take these Rules to
observe in the use of diet, Consecrating the creatures to God by craving a
blessing upon them, furnish your Table with necessaries at due times and
seasonable hours, eat and drink moderately, to strengthen the body, for to
refresh the Soul to perform Holy Actions.

Table-talk must edify, not corrupt.

The Negative part of the Commandment, is, the lust of the Heart, all
lascivious pleasure, Sodom's sin, all fornication, all adultery, unchaste
thoughts, effeminate wantonness; Occasions of lust, as lascivious apparel is
the note of idleness, such can take no pains; also forbids immoderate fullness
of diet, or drink, corrupt, dishonest and unseemly Talk, and vain lascivious
Discourse or Songs, unseemly Pictures.

VIII. The Eighth Commandment.
Thou shall not Steal.

The Affirmative part of this Commandment, is, to employ God's blessings to his
Glory, for a man's own good, and to the good of his Neighbor; The virtues of
contentation and thriftiness, cheerfully and without prodigallity, enable a man
to employ temporal and worldly blessings for his own and others good, and to
deal justly in buying, selling or letting, squaring their dealings according to
the Law of Nature, in sale substantial goods, just weights, and just measures;
pay the hireling, restore the pledge or pawn according to the parties
necessity, yet avoid being surety, perform just promises though to loss, lend
freely, restore carefully.

The Negative part of this Commandment, is, Steal not, live neither inordinatly
nor idly, deal not unjustly, in word or deed.

Covetousness is Idolatry, the root of all evil; unjust dealing is forbid in
bargain, to sell that which is not saleable, or false weights or measures, or
counterfeit for good, or to conceal the fault of a commodity, or to blindfold
the truth with falsehood or to oppress in buying and selling, as by raising a
commodity, or by sale upon a set day to take advantage, or by engrossing, or by
breaking to deceive.

IX. The ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

The Affirmative part of this Commandment, is, to rejoice at the welfare of our
Neighbor, and to acknowledge any goodness in him, to conceal and keep secret
his imperfections, but not conceal his sin for him to continue in that course.

The Negative part of this Commandment, is, not to envy, disdain, or desire
another man's Glory, also evil suspicions, hard censures; not to judge others,
unless by the word when we see the sin; friendly to judge and admonish, not to
lie, or accuse another wrongfully, or to raise hurtful tales, or spread flying
ones, or to believe all reports, or accuse out of malice.

X. The tenth Commandment.
Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House; Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbor's Wife, nor his Man servant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

The Affirmative part of this Commandment, is, to keep our hearts pure toward
our Neighbor, both in thought and motion, and to fight against all evil
affections, by glancing or sudden thoughts; and by withstanding more abiding
thoughts that do as it were tickle the mind with some inward joy.

Beware of those thoughts or motions which draw from the will and affections a
full assent to sin.

To covet, is inwardly to think and to desire any thing, whereby our Neighbor
may be hindered.

The Negative part of this Commandment, is, Concupiscence, that is, original
corruption, it being hurtful to our Neighbor; and all those sudden
cogitations which spring out of that root, and all Sathan's suggestions, and
all unchaste dreams.

The use of the Law to the unregenerate lays sin open, and increases it,
denouncing to them eternal damnation.

The use of the Law to the Regenerate is to guide them to new obedience in the
whole course of their lives. And this new obedience is acceptable to God
through Christ.

Collected by C. T.
Reader, there will be finished this Term, a Looking-Glass for Persecutors,
containing multitudes of Examples of God's severe, but Righteous Judgments upon
bloody and merciless haters of his* Children in all Times, from the beginning
of the World to the last Age; Collected out of the Sacred Scriptures, and other
Ecclesiastical Writers both Ancient and Modern, by Samuel-Clark.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in S. Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1674.

At which Place you may be furnished with most sorts of bound or stitched
Books, as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Speeches, Declarations, Letters,
Orders, Commissions, Articles; As also Books of Divinity, Church Government,
Sermons, and most sorts of Histories, Poetry, Plays, and such like, etc.


