To the KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY, AND TO THE Right Honorable the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament, THE PEDIGREE OF JAMES PERCY, Who has by
Infancy, Potency, Privileges, and foul Practices been kept out of his
Birthright, Title and Inheritance above fifteen years. Now as God has
wonderfully Preserved, Restored and Confirmed our King upon the Royal Throne of
his Ancestors (in Peace) therefore a Loyal Subject in right of Succession,
Humbly Prays for a fair Hearing, and for speedy Justice.
HENRY PERCY, Fifth Earl of Northumberland, Married; and had Issue Three Sons,
viz.
I. Henry Percy, First Son, and Sixth Earl, was Married, but died without
Issue. II. Sir Thomas Percy, Second Son, Married into the Family of the
Harbotles, but Rebelled in King Henry the Eighth's Days, and was Executed in
his Elder Brothers lifetime: He had Issue four Sons, viz. I. Thomas Percy,
Seventh Earl, was Created by King Phillip and Queen Mary; He Rebelled in Queen
Elizabeth's days, and was Beheaded at York: Married, and had Issue as follows.
Thomas Percy, who died young: Had this Tho. lived, he had been a bar to his
Uncle, the Eighth Earl, as his Father, the Seventh Earl, was a Bar to his Uncle
Sir Ingelram Percy: The Heir Males of this Line are extinct also. But the Blood
of this Line was Corrupted twice.
II. Henry Percy, Eighth Earl, had Issue eight Sons, as by the great Pedigree
does appear, Sir Ingelram was great Uncle to Sir Rich. Henry Percy, Ninth Earl,
had Issue four Sons, and three of them was Henry's. Algernoon Percy, Tenth
Earl, had Issue. Joscelin Percy, Eleventh Earl, died and left no Heir Male also.


III. Ingelram Percy had a Bastard Daughter, and no other Issue. IV. Guichard,
the Fourth Son, was under the Attainder of his Father Sir Thomas Percy:
Doubtless had he had Children, or himself had been living, his name would have
been in the new Patent and Grant by King Philip and Queen Mary.
Guichard Percy, Fourth Son, was found in the Heralds Books. Ob. S. p.
III. Sir Ingelram Percy, Third Son, Married into the Vauxes Family, and had
Issue Sons and Daughters, as by the Oath of Henry Champion, Esquire who kept the
Books and Records of the two late Earls. I. Henry Percy, Esquire was Married and
had Issue three Sons, the two Elder died without Issue Male. Henry Percy, third
Son, Married and had three Sons, two of them was Henry's, both the Henry's died
young. James Percy Second Son, Married, and has Three Sons. Anthony, Henry and
John. This Line, from Henry Fifth Earl of Northumberland, has no Corrupted
Blood: Moreover, this Line being found innocent, Claims under the Original
Grant by King Richard the Second.




II. Robert Percy had Issue. Thomas Percy in the Gunpowder-Plot. Francis Percy.
Francis Percy. But this Line the Blood's Corrupted.



III. Two Daughters, Ann had no Issue, but Eleanor had Issue, Mary Tyl^r now
living, Aged about eighty three years.
The mistake in Claiming under Sir Richard Percy, Fifth Son of the Eighth Earl
of Northumberland, was because Sir Ingelram's name was left out of the first
Pedigree, blotted out of the Haraulds Books, and the Matches of the Family of
the Percies rent out also.

Both these two Lines are under the new Creation.

This following Pedigree has been proved at several Trials, and is Clear from
Attainders, as appears by the above Pedigree; but the Law does refuse the
Confirming of Pedigrees, by reason it is the proper Work of the Earl Marshal,
who does not refuse, but desires the Parliaments Assistance.
The true Pedigree of JAMES PERCY, Right Heir Male, Descended in a Collateral
Line from HENRY PERCY, Fifth Earl of Northumberland, as follows, HENRY PERCY,
Fifth of Northumberland, had Issue.
I. Henry Percy, Sixth Earl, had no Issue, Heir Males Extinct of this Line. II.
Sir Thomas Percy, Second Son, was Attainted, and Executed in his Brothers
lifetime, about the first Difference in Religion temp. King Henry the Eighth,
and had Issue. This Thomas Percy was new Created by Queen Mary, to him and the
Heir Male of his Body, and the remainder to his Brother Henry. Thomas Percy,
First Son, seventh Earl, was Attainted and Executed at York in Queen Elizabeth's
days, and had Issue. Thomas Percy died young, Heir Males of this Line Extinct.

Henry Percy, Second Son, eighth Earl, shot himself in the Tower, and had Issue
eight Sons, as by the Great Pedigree. Henry Percy, Ninth Earl, was fifteen
years in the Tower, and had Issue. Henry Lord Percy, Second Son died in France.
Algernoon Percy, First Son, Tenth Earl, had Issue. Joscelin Percy, Eleventh
Earl, Born 1644. and died beyond the Seas in 1670. Heir Males of this Line
Extinct also.


III. Sir Ingelram Percy, Third Son Married, and had Sons and Daughters. These
four Children were sent in Hampers or Panniers, out of the North into the
South, as follows,
Two Daughters, Ann had no Issue, but Eleanor had Issue Mary. Robert Percy,
Second Son had Issue. Thomas Attained.
Henry Percy, Esquire of Pavenham in Bedfordshire, he Married the Daughter of
Tibbot and had Issue. I. James Percy, First Son, left no Issue Male. II.
William Percy, Second Son, died young. III. Henry Percy, Third Son, Married
Lydia Cope of Horton in Northamptonshire and had Issue. Henry Percy and
Elizabeth died young, both being elder than the Claimant; there can be no
Bastardship in the Case. James Percy, Born at Horton in Northamptonshire, and
has Issue three Sons, viz. Anthony, Henry and John, Anthony is Married, and
has Issue Henry.



So that Henry, Fifth Earl, was Great Great Grandfather. Sir Thomas Percy,
Second Son, Great Grandfather. Sir Henry Percy, Eighth Earl, Grandfather. Henry
Percy, Ninth Earl, Father of Algernoon Percy, Tenth Earl, who had Joscelin
Percy Eleventh Earl, who died and left no Issue Male: Heir Males is spent of
this Line.
So that also Henry, Fifth Earl, is Great Great Grandfather. Sir Ingelram
Percy, Third Son, is Great Grandfather. Henry Percy, Esquire of Pavenham, is
Grandfather. Henry Percy, Gent. of Horton, is Father of James Percy the
Claimant, who has Anthony Percy, next Heir Male after the Claymant James
Percy.
Percy coat of arms

Therefore by this Pedigree the Contemporizing of the Family is made manifest.

The short Pedigree, in the Printed Case explains the whole matter more at large

The Petitions and Orders are in Print on the Backside of this Pedigree.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled, The Duke and Dutchesses of Somerset, and Percy, proved at Law to be
Earl of Northumberland, their Petitions and Orders referred to the Right
Honorable Lords Committees for Privileges.
The humble Petition of Charles, Duke of Somerset, and Elizabeth, Duchess of
Somerset, his Wife.
Shows,
THAT the said Duchess of Somerset being the Daughter and Heir of Josceline,
late Earl of Northamberland, and Heir-general of the Family of the Percies, and
Entitled to several Honors, Manors and Lands descended to her from the said
Earl her Father; A mean person, whose true Name not certainly known, calling
himself James Percy, and by Profession a Trunk-maker, falsely assuming to be
descended from Sir Richard Percy, the Fifth Brother of Henry the Eighth, Earl
of Northumberland, and thereby to be Entitled to that Earldom, and to the said
Manors and Lands, had the confidence to Petition your Lordships, that he might
make out his Claim and Right to that Earldom, and several Baronies, as devolved
upon him by the death of the said Earl Josceline, without Issue Male: which
Petition coming to be heard, and it Evidently appearing to your Lordships, that
the said Sir Richard Percy was never married, and if he had been married, to
make out the said Trunk maker's Pedigree as he would have it, the said Sir
Richard Percy must have been a Grand father at Thirteen Years of Age.

Your Lordships were pleased by your Orders of the 20th of February 1672. and
the 28th of March 1673. to dismiss his Petition, and thereupon, on the Petition
of Elizabeth, Countess of Northumberland, then Guardian to the Petitioner, the
said Duchess, to Resolve and Vote, That the further Consideration of the said
James Percy, concerning the Imposture, should be taken into Consideration on
the next morrow morning, which was not done, the Parliament happening that day to
be Prorogued. Since which time the said James Percy, disregarding your
Lordships Judgment, has in the Courts of Westminster Hall ever since been
carrying on his false Pretenses; And, though he has there had one Verdict at Bar
and three Nonsuits, upon full Evidence, yet still persists, and has now lately
brought Ejectments at Law, and a Bill in Equity, against your Petitioners and
their Tenants, and, with unparalleled boldness, takes upon him to be Earl of
Northumberland, to the great Dishonor of the Peerage of this Realm, and of
your Petitioners, to their continual Charge and endless Vexation.

In Consideration whereof, your Petitioners humbly pray your Lordships, for the
Dignity of your own Peerages, as well as for your Petitioners Honors, in
prosecution of your former Vote made, concerning this Imposture, to take the
Matter into your serious Consideration, and to do therein as you in your great
Wisdoms shall think just and reasonable. And your Petitioners, etc.

Die Lunae, 1^ Junii, 1685.
UPon reading the Petition of Charles Duke of Somerset, and Elizabeth his Wife,
showing, That one James Percy, falsely assuming to himself the Title of Earl of
Northumberland, and other things in the said Petition set forth, and praying,
That this House would take the former Matters and Proceedings of this House,
upon the same Case into their Considerations. It is (...) by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That the Consideration of this
Petition, and the Proceedings formerly had in this Case, (...) is hereby
referred to the Consideration of the Lords Committees for Privileges, whose
Lordships are to consider thereof, and of what they shall think fit to be done
(...) upon, and make Report to this House.

An Answer to the Matters alleged in this Petition.
First. THat James Percy is a mean Person, and his true Name not certainly
known, and by Profession a Trunk-maker, and falsely assuming to be descended
from Sir Richard Percy, who was never married, or if he had, must have been a
Grandfather at Thirteen Years of Age. Second. As to the Charge in the
Petition, That the Lords in Parliament, upon hearing the Cause, dismissed the
Claimants Petition. Thirdly, As touching the charge in the Petition, that the
Lords in Parliament were pleased, in March 1673. on the Petition of Elizabeth
Countess of Northumberland, then Guardian to the now Duchess of Somerset, to
Resolve and Vote, that the further Consideration of the said James Percy,
concerning the Imposture, should be taken into Consideration, on the then next
morrow, which was not done, the Parliament happening that morning to be
Prorogued. Fourthly, As touching the Charge in the Petition, that since the
Dismission in the Lords House, the Claymant has one Verdict and three Nonsuits
against him.
For Answer,
1st. FOr Answer to this. As to the claiming under Sir Richard Percy, read the
Printed Case, fol. 3. where the occasion of claiming under him is fully and
truly set forth, and in fol. 10. this very Objection is so fully Answered that
more cannot be said. Pray read.

As to that of his true Name not being certainly known, read the same Printed
Case, and the solemn Declaration of Judge Hales, at fol. 4. in the Trial
against Clerk, and in fol. 5. and Judge Rainsford 's Declaration, in the Trial
against Wright, when James Percy had a Verdict which is Exemplified.

And in all other Trials the Claimant's Pedigree was fully proved, and so
admitted by the Adversaries Council and declared by the Court.

2. Answer. This was upon the mistake in claiming under Sir Richard Percy, and
could not for^close the Petitioners claim by that dismission, for if it had, it
might have been Pleaded in Bar by Wright, where the Claimant, as before is
said, at a Trial at the Kings-Bench-Bar, proved his P^^^gree, and had a Verdict
and Damages in affirmance thereof. Answer 3. There have been many Parliaments
since, and yet the Adversaries never thought fit to pray any further
proceedings upon that Resolve of the Lords in Parliament. The Reasons for not
doing it being very plain. As first, for that they knew the Claymant after
that, had fully rectified that mistake in clayming under Sir Richard, and had
fixed his Claim certain and right, under Sir Ingelram Percy, and so proved the
same in the Trial against Wright, and had a Verdict thereon as aforesaid.

Besides, the Adversaries themselves having been under a mistake of a greater
and more dangerous nature, when Sir John Hanmore swore in Parliament, that Sir
Richard Percy died a Bachelor in France, in the Year 1648. which was a mistake.

Answer 4. And since the said Dismission, the Claymant has had a Verdict on
full Evidence for him, and all the said Nonsuits and Verdict against the
Claymant, he fully proved his Pedigree and Claym, and so admitted and declared;
but either for want of Copies of Records, or through mistakes (...) the
Declaration, through the designed Practices and ill Management of his Agents,
suffered those Nonsuits, and not any ways, upon the true merits of his Right or
Cause.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LORDS Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled.
The humble Petition of JAMES PERCY, who claims to be Earl of Northumberland,
and has been so proved.
Humbly shows,
IN answer to the Duke and Duchess of Somersets surprising and scandalous
Petition, alleging against clear proof.

He says, that the said Duchess has for above fifteen years sheltred her
self under Infancy, Guardians, Agents, and Privileges of Parliaments, and
thereby kept your Petitioner out of his undoubted Right, to the Honors,
Manors and Lands belonging to him as Earl of Northumberland.

That the mistake he committed once, in deriving himself under Sir Richard
Percy, which he confesses, is no impediment or bar to his Good and Rightful
Title, which he has to the said Earldom, Manors and Lands from Sir Ingelram
Percy, under whom he derives himself, and has at several Trials at Law proved
himself to be Lineally and Lawfully descended. All which, the Petitioner has
set forth in his Printed Case, with the reasons of his Miscarriages, most of
them occasioned by the ill usage and designs of some Agents of the said
Duchess, tho^ her Grace her self might be innocent therein.

The Humble Request of the Petitioner is, That your Lordships will be pleased
to appoint a day for Hearing the Petitioner's Cause, and that he may have an
Order to bring in the Heralds Books, Records, and take out the Depositions of
his Witnesses in Chancery, Exchequer and elsewhere; and for all such Witnesses
as may be brought in within time of the Order. And your Petitioner, etc.

Die Veneris 12 June 1685.
IT being moved that a Packet of Papers found upon the Table might be read,
superscribed Percy 's Petition of Complaint, and the two Petitions that were
wanting are annexed, humbly Prays, that they may be read, and that Justice may
be had, and he shall ever Pray: Equal Justice do, or tell the reason why. This
superscription was read. It is ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled, that the Packet of Papers aforesaid, be, and are hereby
referred to the Committee for Privileges to open the same, and Report their
Opinion, of what is fit to be done thereupon, to this House.

Cop. vera. Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

My LORDS,
I Beg pardon for any unadvised Expressions on the Superscriptions of my
Papers, that has given any distaste to any of your Lordships. My Council being
in the Country, I wanted Advice; my Potent Adversaries surprising Petition, and
my own several Petitions and Precedents, which were presented, not finding so
much success as to be read, but were lost, my self unexpectedly contrived into
a Prison, as by his Petition of Complaint appears, and 31 days of the
Parliament spent, put me into a passion, which forced those unadvised words
from me, which I pray may be forgiven me, and humbly revive my Address, that my
three Petitions may be read, and the Prayers of them considered by your
Lordships. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

Psalm. 82. were the words of a King, who had been a shepherd.
JAMES PERCY.
19 June, 1685.

