THE Devil of Mascon. OR, A true Relation of the chief things which an
unclean Spirit did, and said at Mascon in Burgundy, in the House of Mr Francis
Perreand Minister of the Reformed Church in the same Town.

Published in French lately by himself: And now made English by one that has
a particular knowledge of the truth of this Story.

OXFORD, Printed by HEN: HALL, Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for RICH: DAVIS, 1658.

TO MY REVEREND AND LEARNED FRIEND Doctor Peter Du Moulin.
Sir,
THough I suppose you will look upon my sending you Monsieur Perreauds French
book as a minding you of the promise you were the other day pleased to make me
of putting it into an English dress; Yet I hope you will do me the right to
believe that if the subject were not extraordinary, and if my own pen were not
(as you know it is) preingaged to a theme of a very distant nature, I should
think it injurious to the public, and to you, to be accessory to his turning
translatour of another books, that has already manifested in several
languages, how able he is to write excellent ones of his own.

I must freely confess to you, that the powerful inclinations which my course
of life and studies, has given me to diffidence and backwardness of assent,
and the many fictions and superstitions, which (as far as I have hitherto
observed) are wont to blemish the relations where spirits and witches are
concerned, would make me very backward to contribute any thing to your
publishing, or any man's believing, a story less strange then this of Monsieur
Perreand.

But the conversation I had with that pious Author during my stay at Geneva,
and the present he was pleased to make me of this Treatise before it was
printed, in a place where I had opportunities to enquire both after the writer,
and some passages of the book, did at length overcome in me (as to this
narrative) all my settled in disposednesse to believe strange things. And sinc
I find that you have received an account both of Monsieur Perreand himself,
and several things relating to his book from that great scholar and excellent
person your Father: I have no reason to doubt, but that as your skill in the
tongues, out of which and into which this treatise is to be translated, will
bring it the greatest advantages that it can receive from a translators pen: So
the reputation which your and your learned Fathers names will give it, will
prove as effectual as any thing of that nature can be, to make wary readers as
much believe even the amazing passages of it, as I hope you do that great
truth of my being in a high degree

Sir, Your very affectionate friend and humble servant ROBERT BOIL.

TO THE HONORABLE AND MOST EMINENT IN GOODNESS AND LEARNING Mr Robert Boil.
Sir,
IN obdedience to the charge which you have been pleased to lay upon me. I
have translated this admirable story, worthy to be known of all men, and of
singular use to convince the Atheists and half believers of these times: Most
of which will persuade themselves that there is no such thing in the world as
any spiritual, immateriall, intelligent substance; And some of them will say
that which most of them think: That if they could have any certainty that
there are Devils, they would believe also that there is a God. And Satan to
confirm these pretenders to the title of strong wits in their pernicious
unbelief, will scarce once in an age discover himself in any visible or
audible manner, but either to the rudest poor people and the most bestial
natures in some remote barren heath, or if he converse with Magicians, whose
wit is of a form somewhat higher, it is only in secret conference; that the
confessions of the first sort may be ascribed to the fumes of gross and
terrestrial melancholy, as the only Devil that frames meetings and dances
of witches in their brains; and that the profession of the other sort may be
imputed to the imposture of wicked men, such as all Magicians are. Likewise
when they are told of persons possessed or obsest with Devils they ascribe those
disorders to sickness or juggling. And the truth is that the Devil does most
harm where he is least seen, heard, and suspected. Wherefore I verily believe
that he has not in many ages done more wrong to his kingdom, then in
disclosing himself so plainly and sensibly as he did in the passages here
related: for thereby he has left no shift for the unbelief of reasoning
Atheists. And though this was a witty Devil, yet (in that respect) he was not
well read in the Politiques of Hell. Many relations are extant of
manifestations of Demons: the most certain are in the history of the Gospel,
how the Devils spoke alowd out of possessed bodies in the presence of great
multitudes, which they did constrained and frighted by the presence of the Lord
of life, their Sovereign and their Judge. But no history either sacred or
profane ancient or modern relates such a voluntary, public, continued, and
undeniable manifestation of the wicked Spirit as this does. For this familiar
conversation of the Devil was not with Magicians and witches but with godly
men: And it was not in a corner, or in a desert, but in the midst of a great
city, in a house where there was daily a great resort to hear him speak, and
where men of contrary religions met together: whose pronenesse to cast a
disgrace upon the dissenting parties did occasion the narrow examining and the
full confirming of the truth thereof, both by the Magistrate, and by the
Diocesan of the place. All these particulars and many more have been related
to my Reverend Father when he was President of a National Synod in those parts
by the man that was most concerned in them, the Author of this book, a
religious well poised and venerable Divine, who (if he be a live still) is
above 80 years of age. He writ this relation when it was fresh in his memory,
yet did not publish it but 41 years after, in the year 1653; being compelled
to it by the many various and therefore some false relations of that story
which were scattered abroad. With this he set out a Treatise about Demons and
witches which he entitled Demonologia, a book worth reading. His behavior in
all these passages was prudent courageous and godly, for he allwaies resisted
the Devil in his several postures, whether of an Angel of light or of an
open enemy of God. He was tempted by the evil Spirit sometimes to curiosity,
sometimes to covetousness, sometimes to fear, sometimes to jesting and
merriment: But the good man was always alike, grave, constant and serious, in
rebuking Satan and using the weapons of righteousness against him on the right
hand and on the left. And he was not disappointed of his trust in God, for in
all the time of that persecution God permitted not that stirring Devil to do
him any harm, or to any belonging to him, either in their persons or goods,
and in the end of a hundred days God dispossessed the Devil of his usurped
hold. My labor in translating these few sheets is so inconsiderable that I
would not have put my name to it, but that you thote, Sir, my knowledge of the
truth of this history by the relation of my Reverend Father would be some
confirmation of the certainty of it. I have it at the second hand, yet from a
sure hand. But your self, Sir, had from the Author himself a more immediate
information, Which being prefixed before this narrative, gives it a free and
uncontrolable pass to be admitted into the belief of the most severe and
judicious readers. Neither will they have a less opinion of the utility then
truth of this relation, when they see that a person so high in learning, so
deep in judgment, so real in godliness, so exemplary in good works has
judged it to be of principal use for the convincing of unbelievers, and the
confirming of those that are in the faith. Thereby also I shall reap this
benefit to my self, that the world shall know I am honored with your
commands, and that I delight to approve my self

Sir, Your most humble and obedient servant, and true honorer PETER Du-MOULIN.

The Devil of Mascon. OR A true relation of the chief things which a Demon or
wicked Spirit did and said at Mascon, etc.
THe fourteenth day of September in the year 1612. I went with one of the
Elders of the Church of Mascon, to the classical meeting held at the Borough
of Couches, and five days after we returned. Being come home, I found my wife
and her maid in a very great conscernation, apparent in their face and
countenance. And when I enquired of the cause of that great alteration, my wife
told me that the night after I went out of town, she being in bed, her first
sleep was broken by some thing, she knew not what, that drew her curtains
with great noise and violence. That her maid that lay in another bed in the
same room, hearing that, arose in have and ran to her, to see what it was, but
saw nothing; yea that she found the doors and windows of that room very
close as she had shut them before she went to bed. My wife told me also that
the night following she made the maid lie with her, by reason of that accident.
That as soon as they were in bed they felt something that pulled off their
blankets: That then the maid getting out of the bed went from that room, which
is on the backside of the house, to go to a kitchen which is in the midst of
the house, but that she found the door bolted, not within only, as she had
bolted it herself, but without also, which before she could perceive, after
she had unbolted the door and would open it, she felt resistance, as if a man
had been on the other side thrusting against her. That the maid finding
herself shut up called a youth that lay in another room on the foreside of
the house, who rose to open her the door, to whom she would say nothing of that
disorder lest he should be frighted, but lighting the candle she found in the
kitchen the pewter and brass thrown about, wherewith the same night and the
following nights the evil Spirit made such a noise as they use to make when
they give a A Charivary is a mad kind of serenada music of pans and kettles
given to old widows when they marry.
charivary, or when they will hive bees.

Upon this relation I will not dissemble that I was seized with some amazement,
yet so that I took a resolution not to be too credulous at such a strange
story, nor too incredulous neither. Several thoughts came to my mind.
Sometimes I considered the frailty and timorousness of women, Sometimes I
thought that it might be the imposture of some knave hidden in the house;
Wherefore before I would go to bed I carefully searched all the corners of the
house and set bolts and barricadoes to all the doors and windows of the house,
stopping even the very cat-holes of the doors, and leaving nothing that might
give way to suspicion of imposture: And after I had prayed with my family I
went to bed, while my wife and her maid sat spinning by the fire, with a lamp
upon the table.

Scarce was I in my bed, but I heard a great noise from the kitchen, as the
rolling of a billet thrown with great strength. I heard also a knocking
against a partition of wainscot in the same kitchen, sometimes as with the
point of the finger, sometimes as with the nails, sometimes as with the fist,
and then the blows did redouble. Many things also were thrown against that
wainscot, as plates, trenchers and ladels, and a music was made with a brass
cullender, gingling with some buckles that were at it, and with some other
instruments of the kitchen. After I had given attentive ear to that noise, I
rose from my bed, and taking my sword, I went into the room where all that
stir was kept, the maid holding the candle before me, and did search narrowly
whether I could find some body hidden, but finding nothing I returned to my
bed. The noise beginning again, I rose again. and searched again, but all in
vain. Then did I begin to know indeed that all this could not proceed but
from a wicked Spirit, and so did I pass the rest of the night, in such an
astonishment as any man may imagine.

The next day very early I gave notice of it to the Elders of the Church. Yea I
thought fit to make it known to Mr Francis Tornus a Royal Notary and a
Procurator of Mascon, although he was a Roman Catholic, and very zealous of
his religion. What reasons I had for it, I will say afterward. Since that time
both he and all the others to whom I had imparted it did not fail to visit me
every evening, either together or by turns, as long as that persecution
continued, sitting up with me till midnight, and sometimes longer.

The first night that they came, and some other following nights, the wicked
spirit kept himself from making any noise or stir in their presence, as not
willing to be known to them. But in the end, upon the twentieth of September
about nine a clock he made himself openly known for such as he was; For in
the presence of us all, Mr Tornus being one of the company, he began to whistle
three or four times with a very loud and shrill tone, and presently to frame
an articulate and intelligible voice though somewhat hoarse, which seemed to be
about three or four steps from us, He pronounced these first words singing
vingt and deux deniers, that is two and twenty pence, a little tune of five
notes which whistling birds are taught to sing. After that, he said and
repeated many times this word Minister, Minister. Because that voice was very
terrible to us at the first, I was long before I would answer any thing to that
word, but only, Get thee from me Satan, the Lord rebuke thee. But as he was
repeating again very often that word Minister, thinking (belike) thereby to
grieve me much, I was provoked to tell him. Yes indeed I am a Minister, a
servant of the living God, before whose Majesty thou tremblest. To which he
answered, I say nothing to the contrary. And I replied, I have no need of thy
testimony. Yet he continued to say the same, as if he would win us to a
favorable opinion of him.

Then he would offer to transform himself into an Angel of light, saying of
his own accord and very loud, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the morning and
evening prayers, and the ten Commandments. It is true that he did always clip
and leave out some part of it. He sung also with a loud and audible voice part
of the Psalm. 81. Then said many things which might be true, as some particular
passages belonging to my family, as among other things that my father had been
poisoned, naming the man that did it, and why, and specifying the place, and
the manner of the poison.

That very night he said that he came from Pais de Vaux, that he had past
through the village of Allamogne which is in Bailliage de Gez, at the door of
my elder brothers house, where he had seen him with Mr Du Pan Minister of
Thoiry. That they were ready to go to supper together at my brothers house.
That they were neighbors and dear friends. That he had saluted them, and
asked whether they had any thing to command him to deliver to me, because he
was going to Mascon. That they had showed themselves very kind to him and
desired him to remember their love to me, 'yea and had invited him to drink
with them. Thou wicked fiend (said I to the spirit) had they known thee they
would not have been so kind to thee.

Some truth there was in his story, for M Du Pan has since told me and many
others, that they remembered very well how at that very time a man of such and
such a shape, riding on a very lean horse, that hung down his head, had
spoken with them, and that such discourses past between them.

The Demon told us also of another brother of mine living in the Vale of the
Lake de Joux in the Country of Vaux saying that one day when some of our near
kindred were come to visit him, he to give them some recreation made them go
upon the lake without a boat, upon floating wood tied together: And that they
being far on the Lake a stormy wind did arise, which constrained them to
return in haste to the shore. Not far from which all that floating wood was
overturned and they all welnigh drowned. Which storm he affirmed to be of his
raising. The relation of that passage being very true, it may be true also that
he had raised that wind, as we read in the book of Job, that Satan raised a
great wind that made the house fall upon the children of that holy man.

Another night the Demon speaking to Claude Repay a bleacher of linen cloth,
one of them that used to come to me at night, asked him whether he remembered
not that upon such a day, after he had set in order some pieces of cloth and
skeanes of yarne, he found them a while after removed out of their place and
out of order, and then said that it was his doing. He asked another bleacher
called Philibert Guillermin, who was also in the company, whether he remembered
not that one day as he was stooping to turn some pieces of cloth and skeanes
of yarne, lying upon the grass, something pulled him behind by the skirts of
his doublet, and made him go back two or three steps, and that the next
evening as he lay in his bleaching house, his hat which he had hanged on a
nail by his bedside was flung at his face, and made him start out of his
sleep. That (said he) was of my doing. Both Repay and Guillermin acknowledged
that these things had happened to them, but who had a hand in these accidents
they knew not before.

That Philibert Guillermins brother, a merchant of Lovan coming from Lions
lodged in his brothers house, and had a mind to visit me the first night, but
his brother would not let him. The Demon failed not to tell us of it, saying, I
know why Mr Philibert came not to sit up here yester-night. His Brother had a
good mind to have bestowed a visit upon us, but Philibert dissuaded him,
because he would not that his brother should hear what noise we keep in this
house.

He spoke also of a late quarrel between one James Berard a cutler of Mascon
and one Samuel du Mont who had so beaten the said Berard that he had brought
him to deaths door, which was true and told many particulars of that quarrel
which were not known. He told us how at the late fair of St Lawrence, upon
which the citizens of Mascon march in arms under their several colors, one
Francis Chickard had been hurt with a musket shot in the leg, which
afterward being gangrened was cut off; And he named the man that had shot him,
and said that he had done it to be revenged of Chickard, to whom he bore a
malice, which might very well be true.

He related a notable story of those that lived before in the house where we
dwelt, Philibert Masson and Guillauma Blane his wife, commonly called la
Challonoise; that one day, they being fallen out, the wife took her time when
her husband would go down into his shop, and pusht him behind with such
violence that he fell down the stares stark dead. And that she presently by
another pair of stairs went down and called the prentices and journeymen
from the shop to their drinking, that they finding their master in the bottom
of the stairs dead, might impute his death to some sudden sickness. This
secret revealed by the Devil many have believed to be a truth.

Another night the Demon speaking to one of our company told him such private
and secret things that the man who affirmed never to have told them to any
person came to believe that the Devil knew his thoughts, till I had disabused
him.

Then he began to mock God and all Religion, and saying Gloria Patri, he skipt
over the second person, and upon the third person he made a foul horrible and
detestable equivocation. Whereupon I being incensed with a just anger told him:
But rather thou wicked and abominable Spirit, should have said Gloria Patri,
creatori coeli and terrae, and Filio ejus Jesu Christo, qui destruxit opera
Diaboli: That is Glory be to the Father, Creator of heaven and earth, and to
his Son Jesus Christ, who has destroyed the works of the Devil. He then
desired us with great earnestness that we should send for Mr Du Chassin the
Popish Parson of St Stevens Parish, to whom he would confess himself, and
that he should not fail to bring holy water along with him, for that (said he)
would send me away packing presently.

We wondered that the dog of the house who used to be very watchful, and would
bark at the least noise, yet never barked at the loud speaking and hideous
noise of the Demon: He said of his own accord without asking, You wonder that
the dog barketh not, It is because I made the sign of the Cross upon his head.

Then being upon a merry pin, he fell a scoffing and jearing, and among
others things said that he was one of those that scaled the walls of Geneva,
and that the ladder being broken he fell from the wall into the ditch, where he
had been near to have been eaten by the frogs, whose croaking he did
perfectly imitate. He said that a Jesuit called Father Alexander stood at the
foot of the ladder, exhorting the Savoyards to go up boldly, assuring them
that they should take the city, and win Paradise: And that when the thirteen
that were got up and taken, were led to the gallows, the women of the town
said to the hangman, Courage Tabasan, thou shall have money to drink.

Speaking of Pays de Vaux he said that it was a country where they made goodly
carbonadoe's of witches, and at that he laughed very loud. He delighted much in
jesting with the maid of the house calling her Bressande (that is a woman of
the country of Bressia) and counterfeited her language. One night as she went
up to the garret to fetch coals he told her, Thou art very bold to pass so
near me, and making a noise as if he had clapped his hands together, he told
her, I will put thee in my sack.

He seemed also to delight much in jeasting with one Michael Repay who came
almost every night to us with his father, calling him often Michel Mihell. He
told him once that he would bring him to war with the Marquess of St Martin
who was raising a troop of horse in Bressia to go to Savoy. But Michael Repay
answered him smiling, should I go to wars with such a coward as thy self,
since thou professest that thou did fly from the scalado of Geneva? To which
the Demon answered. And do you think that I would go and be hanged with my
camrades? I was not such a fool. Continuing to jest with Michael Repay he put
him in mind that the Sunday before going to Church with one Noel Monginot to
the village of Vrigny, he was saying that the way to catch the Devil was to
spread a net for him, and then he told him, Will thou now spread thy net to
catch me? At the same time he did so lively counterfeit the voice of Michael
Repay's mother that he said laughing to his father, Father, truly he speaks
justilike my mother.

Another time he told us in a faint and moaning tone that he had a mind to make
his will because he must needs go presently to Chambery where he had a
law-suite ready for the trial, and that he feared to dye by the way; wherefore
he had the maid to go for a Notary naming Mr Tornus, father to that Tornus of
whom we spoke before; Of his family he said many particularities, of which, as
also of all the passages of this Demon acted in his presence, the said Tornus
the son, a Royal Notary as his father, has left a relation, written, and
signed with his own hand, which I have in my keeping for confirmation of all
that is here related. And it was to have such an authentical testimony that I
adrest my self to him when this vexation came upon me.

In that relation he mentions the several legacies which the Demon declared
that he would leave, to one this, to another that. One of them to whom he said
that he would give five hundred pounds, answered him, that he would have none
of his money, and wished that it might perish with him. He named another to be
his heir general, who also answered, that he would not accept the
inheritance, I free thee of it (said the Demon) for six pence and a piece of
bread.

A while after he counterfeited that he was not the same Spirit that had spoken
before, but his servant only, That he came from waiting upon his Master, who
had charged him to keep his place in his absence, while he was in his journey
to Chambery. And when I rebuked him in such words as God put in my mouth, he
answered with much seeming lenity and respect, I beseech you Sir to pardon me,
you are mistaken in me, you take me for another. I never was in this house
before, I pray Sir what is your name? As he was thus speaking one Simeon
Meissonier, that used to resort often to my house upon that occasion, rusht
suddenly to the place whence the voice seemed to come, and having searched it
again and again, as others had done before him, and found nothing, he
returned to the place where we were all, bringing with him several things from
the place where the voice sounded, among other things a small bottle. At which
the Demon fell a laughing and said to him. I was told long since that thou were
a fool, and I see now that thou art one indeed, to believe that I am in that
bottle: I should be a fool my self to get into it, for so one might take me
with stopping the bottle with his finger.

One night when Abraham Lullier a goldsmith was coming into the house, where
he seldom failed to be at that hour, the Demon said, Go, open the door to
Lullier who is coming, and at the same time Lullier knocked at the door. As
soon as he was come in, the Demon told him, that he desired to learn the
goldsmiths trade of him, and that for his prentiship he would give him fifty
Crowns. Then giving him fair words, I love thee well (said he) thou art an
honester man then such a man, (naming another goldsmith a man of Geneva) who
has cosened such a Lady of Mascon, who was gone to visit some of her kindred at
Geneva, in the sale of some rings, Jewels, and plate. Upon which when Lullier
told him I have no need of thy love, I am content with the love of my God,
Neither will I take such a prentice as thee. The Demon answered Since thou will
not teach me the Goldsmiths trade, let Master Philibert teach me to be a
Bleacher. Then acting again the part of a servant he complained that he was
poor and ill clad, that he starved for cold, and that his wages were but
twelve crowns a year. He told us that if we would have him to go away
quickly we should give him something, and that any thing would please him. I
told him that he knocked at the wrong door, and that I would not give him the
paring of my nails. He answered You have then very little charity.

Again he obstinately affirmed that he was not the same that had bin in the
house from the beginning, but his servant, yea that he was not the same that
had bin in the house the night before, that then one of his fellow servants was
waiting, and that they two were expecting their masters return from his
Journey to Chambery whence he should return within few days.

Howsoever whether it was the Master Devil that then spoke, or one or more of
his servants, I have been informed by worthy witnesses that at the same time
there was a Spirit in the house of Monsieur Favre the first president of
Chambery, who for his learning in law was one of the illustrious men of his
age: To him the Spirit spoke, and told him, among other things, that he came
from Mascon and had past through Bresse, and seen such and such kinsmen of his.

To return to what was in our house at that time, the Spirit bespoke aloud
great preparations of provision, as turkies, partriges, hares, and the like for
the coming of his Master. Then he sung many profane and bawdy songs, among
others that which is called le filou. He counterfeited the voice of Juglers and
mountebankes, and especially that of huntsmen crying aloud holevrier ho
levrier, as hunters use to shoute when they start a hare.

He offered to tempt us by covetousness (one of the ordinary temptations of
the Devil for which reason he is called Mammona.) Diverse times he would
peremptorily affirm that there was six thousand crowns hidden in that house,
and that if any of us would follow him he would, show us where the money was
hid. But I can say with a good conscience before God and his holy Angels, that
I never searched for it, nor employed others about it, nor suffered any to look
for it, or ever had any will to make benefit by it.

He would try us also by curiosity, saying that if we had a mind to see him in
any shape of man, woman, lion, bear, dog, cat, etc. he would give us the sport
of it, Which motion we did much abhor and reject, saying that we were so
far from desiring to see him in any of these shapes, or any other, that we
were very desirous, if it might be Gods pleasure, never to hear him; but that
we hoped that God would shortly deliver us from all his temptations.

In the end he became very angry, first against me because I had told him Go
thou cursed into the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
Whereupon he told me. Thou lie, I am not cursed, I hope yet for salvation by
the death and passion of Jesus Christ. This he said perhaps to make us believe
that he was the soul of a woman deceased a little before in that house, the
daughter of a woman whom I had ejected by law out of that house, for there had
been a rumor that when she died she prayed to God that she might return to
the house after her death to vex us.

He told me in great wrath that he would do this and that to me. Among other
things he told me that when I should be a bed he would come and pull off my
blankets and pull me out of the bed by the feet. I answered him the same thing
that the Royal Prophet David said to his enemies, I will lay me down and
sleep for the Lord makes me dwell in safety. I told him also that which Jesus
Christ said to Pilate, Thou had no power on me but what is given thee from
above, Whereupon he answered me repeating two or three times these words It is
well for thee, It is well for thee.

He was also very angry with one of the company who had called him stinking
hee-goate, and gave him many ill words, as these Thou would appear a good
man, but thou art but an hypocrite, thou go often to Pontdeville, pretending
to go hear Sermons: But when thou go thou take thy box of bills; and
bonds along with thee, to exact thine arreares and use money. Go, thou would
make no conscience to hang a man for twenty shillings, as Mr Denis does; That
master Denis was the hangman of Mascon. Then making a noise as if he had clapped
his hands together, he said again to the same man, Thou make hear the show
of a valiant man, having brought thy sword along with thee this night, but if
thou be so bold as to come hither without a light, it shall be seen which
of us two is the most valiant.

Having said all these things of the time past, and present, he would also
speak of the future. Speaking of those that profess the reformed Religion
within the Kingdom of France, he made once this exclamation! O poor Hugonots!
you shall have much to suffer within a few years! O what mischief is intended
against you! and more words to the same purpose.

He said of my wife that was with child, and near her time, that she should
have a daughter, and said it two or three times. The case she was in made me
fear, that she should get some harm in her childbearin, by a fright, caused
by our infernal ghest. Wherefore, I desired her to go out of the house, and
go to her grandmother the Lady Philiberta de la Moussiere with whom she had
bin bred from her infancy, and to lie in at her house. But she did excuse
herself from it very courageously, saying, that going away would be
mistrusting the power and mercy of God: That since it pleased God to visit us
so he might find us as well in another house, and that to resist the Devil we
must not flee from him. Wherein verily I acknowledged her to be in the right,
because we are often exhorted in the Scripture, to ^esist, and fight, and
wrestle with the Devil, ^ut never to flee from him, which would be ^eilding to
him the victory. For he is like he wolf, or the crocodile, whom if you and
against stoutly they will run away, but if you fear them and run from them
they will run after you.

The Demon said one night before us all, that without fail I should dye within
three ^eares, thinking thereby to torment me with a continual apprehension of
death, and so make me fall if he could into some melancholy, and so into
sickness thereby to have made his words good. But I answered him in the words of
St Paul Act 20. None of these things move me neither count I my life dear unto
my self, so that I might finish my course with Joy and the ministry which I
have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

The Demon having used all these wiles against us was forced to say that he
could not prevail against us, because we did call two much upon the name of
God. To show the efficacy of our prayers, this is an observable truth, that
every time that the Devil saw that we began to kneel to go to our prayers
he left talking, and many times told us these words, While you are at your
prayers I Will go take a turn in the street. Really, whither he went forth or
staid we had a wonderful silence during our prayer; But no sooner was the
prayer done but he began again as before, and urged and solicited us to
speak with him* And so continued speaking and provoking us to speak till the
25 of November when he spoke these last words Ha ha je ne parleray plus, that
is, Alas alas I shall speak no more: From that very time he gave over, and
spoke no more.

I might add many other discourses of this Demon, but I confess that I
purposely omit them because they offend either Religion or the State or the
good name of some great persons and honorable families, or because they are
foul and dishonest as proceeding from an unclean Spirit: So much as we have
related is sufficient to show how strange and admirable was this speaking of
the Devil.

As his words were strange and admirable so were his actions, for besides those
which I have related, done in my absence, he did many more of the same kind as
tossing about very often a great roll of cloth of fifty else which a friend
had left at my house to be sent to Lions by water. Once he snacht a brass
candlestick out of the maids hand leaving the candle lighted in her hand: He
would very often take that mayd's coats and hang them over the bed posts,
setting over them a rough hat such as the countriwemen of Bresse use to wear
for she was of that country.

Sometimes he would hang at those poasts a great starching plate with coards so
tied and with so many knots that it was impossible to untie them and yet
himself would suddenly untie them in a moment. Once I found my boots so
entangled within a winding blades that they could not be taken off. And many
times he has so twisted radishes together that the like could not be done
unless it had bin studied with a very long patience and leisure.

One afternoon a friend of mine one Mr Connain a Physician of Mascon, bestowed
a visit upon me; As I was relating unto him these strange passages we went
together to the chamber where the Demon was most resident: There we found the
featherbed, blankets, sheets, and boulster, laid all upon the floor. I called
the maid to make the bed, which she did in our presence, but presently we being
walking in the same room, saw the bed undone and tumbled down on the floor
as it was before.

In the room over that, where I had my study, I found several times part of
my books laid on the floor, and my houre-glasse unbroken, and no other harm.
As I was once sitting in my study the Demon made a noise as it had been a
great voly of shot in the room above. Sometimes he would be the groom of my
stable rubbing my horse, and platting the hair of his tail, and maine, but he
was an unruly groom, for once I found that he had saddled my horse with the
crupper before, and the pommel behind.

He was a good while in the house before we could perceive that he resorted to
my bedchamber. But one night after all were retired that were come to hear
him, my self and my family being all a bed, the doors and the windows of the
house being well shut, he came in and began to whistle softly and by
intervalles, as if he had bin afraid to awake us: he knocked as if it had bin
with his finger upon a trunk near my bed, as he did many times since. He would
throw our shoes about the room, those of the maid especially, who feeling him
once taking one of her shoes laid hold presently on the other, and said
smiling. This thou shall not have. Under the table in the same room he did
once imitate the noise of hempdressers that beat the hemp four together such
as we had in our neighborhood, and keeping the same equal measure.

He made us hear for a long time a harmony not unpleasant of two little bells
tied tohether which he had taken among some rusty irons in my house. When I
heard them first, and knew by their sound that they were mine, I went to the
place where I had laid them, but did not find them. Neither did the Demon use
these bells in my house only, but he carried them about to many places both of
the town and country. Upon a Lords day morning as I was going to officiate at
Vrigny, with some elders of my Church we heard the sound of those bells very
near our ears. Mr Lullier, one of our company, affirmed unto me that he had
heard those bells many times at his house. Many others have heard them very
near, but could never see them.

Neither did that Demon play his tricks only at my house, Mr Lullier has told
me of many of his actions in his house and both shop. As the taking and hiding
of his jewels or tools, and then putting them again where they were before.
While Mr Lullier was telling me of this, he laid a golden ring which he had
then in hand upon the table with the tool that he held it with, but presently
he found them missing and in vain sought them half an hour; wherefore he
betook himself to other work; but then he and I saw both the ring and the
tool fall, we knew not from whence, upon the table again.

One night that Lullier had not set up with us as he used to do, two that came
from my house very late stayed by Lulliers shop to give him an account of the
Demons actions and words that night. While they were talking the Demon smote
three times very hard upon a shed of boards that was over the shop.

The next night after, Lullier and Repay coming from my house met a woman
alone at the corner of the street in a country habit spinning by Moone-shine.
But when they came near to know what she was, she vanished from their sight.

Leaving now such actions as the Demon did out of my house as things of which I
cannot speak with the like certainty as those which I have seen and heard my
self. I will but add his last actions at my house, and indeed the most
troublesome of all, as they say that the Devil is always more violent in the
end then in the beginning, and is then most fierce when he must be gone. He
threw stones about my house continually the ten or twelve last days from
morning to evening, and in great quantity, some of them of two or three pounds
weight.

One of those last days Mr Tornus coming to my house about noone, would know
whether the Devil was there still, and whistled in several tones, and each
time the Devil whistled to him again in the same tone. Then the Demon threw a
stone at him, which being fallen at his feet without any harm to him, he
took it up and marked it with a coal, and flung it into the backside of the
house which is near the town wall and the river of Saone, but the Demon threw
it up to him again, and that it was the same stone he knew it by the mark of
the coal: Tornus taking up that stone found it very hot and said he believed
it had been in hell since he had handled it first.

Finally after all these words and actions the Demon went away the 22 day of
December; And the next day a very great viper was seen going out of my house,
and was taken with long pincers by some naylours our neighbors, who carried it
all over the town crying, Here is the Devil that came out of the Ministers
house, and finally left it at one William Clarke's house Apothecary, where it
was found to be a true and natural viper, a serpent rare in that country.

All the time that the Demon haunted my house God permitted him not to do us
any harm, neither in our persons nor in our goods. Those bells which he did so
toss and carry about, he hanged at a nail over the chimney of the room where
he was most conversant, the day that he left the house. He had not so much
power given him as to tear one lease of my books, or to break one glass, or
to put out the candle, which we kept lighted all the night long. Wherefore I
bow my knees, and will as long as I live, unto my gracious God to give him
thanks for that great mercy.

This is the plain and true relation of that Demons words and actions. And
Marcelin a Capuchin that preached at the same time at Mascon has truly related
many of these passages in a book of his, printed at Grenable against Mr
Bouterove, saying, that he had the story from diverse persons, especially from
Mr Fovillard Lieutenant General in the Balliage of Mascon, who upon the
general rumor of that strange accident, sent his brother in law Mr Francis
Gucrin and Mr Guichard an Advocate to my house, to desire me to come to him, as
I did, to tell him the whole matter. Yet (by Marcellins leave) it is not true
that which he and other prejudicate and passionate men do infer out of it to
disgrace my person and my profession, namely, that I had communication with
evil Spirits. For God bears witness to my conscience that I never had
communication with those horrible creatures, and know no more of them then what
it has pleased his divine wisdom to let me know by his word and by this
domestique experience; and that my chief curiosity was to improve the little
talent which God has given me to instruct my self and others in the true and
solid science of eternal salvation, which is to know him the only true God
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

And truly Marcellin and others that have spoken and written of this history to
my disadvantage herein, contradict both Mr Fovillard Lieutenant General of
Mascon, and the Lord Gaspard Divet then Bishop of Mascon, who upon the common
report of these passages sent for Mr Tornus to know the truth of them; And for
more certainty sent his own Secretary Mr Chamber to learn the particulars of
them from mine own mouth, to whom I related all without concealing or
disguising any thing. These two Gentlemen Tornus and Chamber have told me since
that the Bishop had heard that story with great admiration, and had made some
records of the same.

If any now enquire of me what may the cause be of this admirable accident (as
there is nothing more ordinary or more natural to every man then to enquire of
the causes especially of things extraordinary) I will answer that considering
the circumstances of time, and place, and persons, which I had then to do
with, many causes seem to have concurred for it.

First, whereas there are times in which Devils are in a manner unchained and
have more liberty to do their feats, and other times when they are tied short
and restrained from acting, as we learn in the twentieth chapter of the
Revelation. Truly one may with good reason say that when the Demon made
himself so bold in my house it was a time when the Devil was, as it were, let
loose; for then the world was full of stories of the extraordinary pranks of
those wicked Spirits.

This may be justified by the book written by Mr de l' Anere one of the Kings
Counselors joined in Commission with Mr D' Espagnet President at Tolosa to
Judge the witches of the country of Labor, otherwise the Country of the
Basques near the Pyrenean mountains, the title of the book is A
representation of the inconstancy of Demons and wicked Spirits, where such
strange and horrible things are represented, as will make the readers hair to
stand.

To which join the horrible story of Lewis Gauffredi, a Priest of Marseilles
one of the greatest instruments of the Devil that ever Hell brought forth, who
had been burnt a little before by the order of the Court of Parliament of Aix
in Province.

At the same time a Demon appeared at Lions in the shape of a fine Gentlewoman
to the Lieutenant of the Knight of the watch named la Jacquiere, and to two
others of his companions, which three had carnal knowledge of that Demon, and
thereby came to a most tragical and fearful end. Which story is printed
among many other tragical stories of our time.

At the same time, which was in the year 1612, the like story to that of Lions
was published, how in Paris, the first of January of that year, a person of
quality had cohabitation with a Demon, which to him appeared a beautiful Lady,
but the next morning that Lady being visited by Justices and Physicians was
found to be the body of a woman that had been hanged a few days before.

About the same time the prisons of Mascon were filled with a great number of
men and women, young and old of the village of Chasselas, and other towns
near it, all indicted of witchcraft, who being condemned at Mascon, appealed
to the Court of the Parliament of Paris, and were conducted to Paris by a
massinger and some guards. In the way a coach met them, and in it a man that
looked like a Judge, who staid, and asked the massinger what prisoners he led,
whence they came, and whether they went. The massinger having satisfied him,
the man (if one may call him so) eying these prisoners said to one of them,
calling him by his name, Ho now! art thou one of them? Fear nothing, for
neither thou nor any of thy company shall suffer. And his words proved true,
For soon after they were all released.

At the same time a girl of Mascon about 13 or 14 years of age daughter to
one of the chief citizens of the town, lying with the maid of the house,
perceived that she absented her self many times in the night, and once asked
her whence she came, the maid answered that she came from a place where there
was good company, gallant dansing, and all kinds of sports and merriment. The
girl taken with this report desired the maid to bring her to that place.
Whereupon the maid anointed her, and made her do the ordinary ceremonies
prescribed to witches by the Devil, after which the girl was carried up into
the air by a Demon, as she reported, but seeing herself above the convent of
the Capucin friars, she was afraid, and called upon God, who did help her and
caused the Demon to lay her down in their garden about midnight: The Capucins
hearing her lamenting voice came to her help, and when she had told them who
she was, and what had happened to her, she was secretly conducted by two of
them to her Fathers house. This relation I have heard from many persons,
affirmed as most certainly true. That girl I have often seen, and I was told
that she was married since.

At the same time the common report was, that a Demon haunted the house of a
woman baker of Mascon, in the street de na Tupinerie, in a man's shape, with a
red cap. and would look out of the window by moon light. This many persons
have affirmed to me to be very true, the foresaid Abraham Lullier being one of
them. I doubt much whether the Demon has yet left the house notwithstanding
all the exercising, and the judicial course also which was used to eject him.

At the same time a Demon kept a great stir at St Stevens Church of Mascon,
turning over many graves, which being bruited about the town, I saw, as living
in that neighborhood, great part of the people flock thither.

The like happened also in the Church of St Alban near Mascon, and at the same
time.

Again, at the same time a widows house at Marigny les Nonnains, not far
from Mascon, was for three month haunted by a Demon who did there a great
deal of harm, letting out the wine in the cellar, and beating untragiously
several persons among others a locksmith that came into the house drunk, and
gave many ill words and threatenings to that Devil, who presently was even with
him, for he took one of the andirons, and grievously beat him with it, till he
ran away out the house, which he did in all haste. By these relations, and many
of the like kind, which I omit, it is evident that at the time that the Demon
was at my house; the Devil was in a manner unchained.

I conceive also that this Demon might be sent to me by some that were incensed
against me, for procuring a license from the King to build a Church for our
Reformed congregation near the walls of Mascon; for that very day that the
Devil began that disorder in my housel, was threatened by one before the
civil corporation of Mascon, that some evil would overtake me presently, and
that man was suspected to be a disciple of one Caesar a known Magician, who had
lived Mascon a little before.

Many have attributed the coming of that Demon to my maid Bressande, of whom I
spoke before, for she was suspected to be a witch, borne of parents suspected
to be guilty of witchcraft as some do report: I remember that once she asked
of me, whether any of those that had given themselves to the Devil, could find
mercy before God. And that another time, when she saw me afraid lest the Devil
should hurt two youths that lay in a room next to that where he was heard, she
told me Fear not, he will do them no harm. And the truth is that she would
jest and be familiar with him. For besides that I said of it before, she would
once expostulate with the Demon that he brought her no wood, whereupon he
presently threw down a faggot for her at the staire foot; And whereas upon her
offering to leave our service another came to serve us in her place and lay in
the same bed with her, the Demon, who never hurt her, would beat that new maid
in the bed, and power water upon her head till he forced her to go away. My
suspicion of that Bressande was increased by a relation which she made unto me,
one day that I was sick, of a tall black man that had appeared unto her the
night before by mooneshine, holding a vial in his hand like a Physician. This
and other like things gave me an ill opinion of her, as one that might be a
concurrent cause of the coming of that hellish ghest.

To these add the circumstance of the place; for in the same house a murder
had been committed, if the Demons words and the common report may be credited.
As it is not unusual that houses where some murder or some other foul fact
has been committed will be haunted by the Devil. Cardan relates that there
is a castle at Parma belonging to the noble family of the Torelli, in one of
whose chimney's a wicked spirit appears in the shape of a foul old wife every
time that one of the family is to die, ever since that an old woman very rich
was slain in that house by her covetous nephews, who cut her in pieces and
threw her into the jakes.

But the most likely cause is that after I had recovered that house by law, and
was put in possession by the power of justice, the woman whom I came to
dispossess was found under a chimney calling upon the Devil and using
terrible imprecations against me and my family, saying that she would be
content to be hanged, yea to be damned, and to be in the bottom of hell with
all the Devils if she might but be avenged of me and mine. Which words being
related to me, I presented a Petition aganst her to the Judge of Mascon
Lieutenant General Foillard who bound the woman to her good behavior,
forbidden her to annoy us either in our person or our Goods upon great
penalties; And I and my family were put under the protection of the King and
justice. Of which process I keep still with me the judicial Acts. But
without staying any more upon the second causes, I attribute all to the
disposition of the first, and lift up mine eyes to the hand that gave the blow,
showing together his strength in my weakness, his mercy in my sinfulness, and
his wise, moderate, and admirable dealing with me in that he suffered me not to
be tempted above my strength, but gave me with the temptation away to come out,
that I might be able to bear it. Great reason I have to say with the Royal
Prophet David. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the hand of the fowlers,
the snare is broken and we are escaped, Our help is in the name of the Lord
who maat heaven and earth, To him be glory for it, now and for evermore, Amen.

An Appendix of the Translatour.
THe Author to make his word good that he would publish none of the discourses
of the Demon that were offensive to God, or the State, or the credit of some
honorable persons, has left out diverse notable stories, some of which he
has related to my Reverend Father, upon whose relation I will add here two
considerable passages. Being to speak of two several persons for the one I
must be true to the intent of the Author, which is to offend no man, whether I
will or no; for I know not the man's name. The name of the other I do purposely
suppress.

One of them was a grave Divine who hearing the Demon speak profanely, rebuked
him religiously, and vigorously. To whom the Demon answered, Minister you are
very holy and very serious in this company, you were not so when you were
singing such a baudy song in such a Tavern, and then the Demon sung the whole
song before the company. The Divine answered much to this purpose, It is true,
Satan. I have been licentious in my young years, but God in his mercy has
given me repentance and pardon; But for thy tart thou art confirmed in sin,
and shall never have repentance nor pardon. Let every one keep a watch to his
words and actions, for the Devil, who is called the accuser of the brethren,
and is so by his trade, keeps a register of that which we say and do, and
will be sure to bring it forth when and where it may do us most harm.

The other man was an eminent Officer of a Court of Justice and a Papist, who
being brought by his curiosity to the Ministers house, to hear that Devil
that told future things and secrets both of public and private businesses,
would needs offer to make questions to the Demon about several things;
Whereupon the Minister, who had always very earnestly forbidden and hindered
that any should propound questions to the Devil, desired the Gentleman to
forbear, and represented to him the sin and the danger of it; But the Lawyer
rejected his counsel with scorn, bidding him to teach his own flock and let
him have the government of himself. So having silenced the Minister, he
entertained himself with the Devil without interruption, questioning him
sometimes about one absent friend, sometimes about this or that private
business, sometimes about news and State affairs. Upon all which when the
Demon had answered him, he spoke to him further, much to this purpose. Now Sir,
I have told you all that you demanded, I must tell you next that which you
demand not, That at this very time while you are making questions to the
Devil, such a one (whom he named) is doing your businesses with your wife, and
then revealed many secret foul dealings of the Lawyer, which made him appear
a dishonest man. Neither was this all, for in the conclusion the Devil told
him. Now Sir let me School you for being so bold as to question the Devil,
you should have taken the Ministers safe counsel. Then upon a sudden the whole
company could see the man drawn by the arm into the midst of the room, where
the Devil whiyled him about, and gave him many turns with great swiftness,
then touching the ground only with his toe, and then threw him down upon the
floor with great violence. His friends took him up and carried him to his
house where he lay sick, and distracted many days: giving by his example a
lesson to all, that the Devil may be for a while a fair companion to them
that will keep company with him, but will pay them in the end with torment and
despair.

Approbation of the Author by the Synod of Burgundy.
We Pastors and Elders, of the Reformed Churches of the Province of Burgundy,
assembled in a Synod at Bussy in the Bailliage of Chalons upon Saone, certify
to all, that Mr Perreand Minister of the Holy Gospel, has exercised the
charge of the holy Ministry in this Province, for the space of fifty years,
first in this town of Bussy, where he was borne, being descended of the most
ancient and considerable family of the town, and since in the Church of
Mascon, and afterward in the Churches of the Bailliage of Gez, where he is
now, serving the Church of Thoiry; In all that time, and in all those Churches,
doing the office of a good Pastor and a faithful servant of God, both in
doctrine and life; Of which he had an especial testimonial given him by the
Church of Mascon in the last Synod of this Province held at Psustile in the
year 1649, the said Church expressing much satisfaction of his godliness and
singular charity as it appears by the Acts of the Synod. And the like he has
from the Church of Thoiry by an Act bearing date the 8 of March 1651. To which
we add that although it has pleased God to bring him into many, and some very
extraordinary trials, especially while he served the Church of Mascon. yet the
same God has strengthened him with a constant health of his body, and a godly
tranquillity of mind, and has endued him with virtue to bear and to overcome
all his afflictions. We therefore beseech the Lord daily to fill his servant
with more and more strength in his old age, and that after he has finish his
course he may depart in peace, and obtain the Crown of glory reserved for
those that will persevere faithful unto the end.

Done at Bussy October. 29. 1651. SIGNED Francis Reynaud Moderatour. G. Bruys
Adjunct. H. Morlet Secretary.


FINIS.

