Naked people swim, dive and run along the bank of a river. Cows graze in
fields beyond a town on the opposite bank.

The Complete Swimmer: OR, The ART of SWIMMING: Demonstrating The Rules and
Practice thereof, in an Exact, Plain and Easy METHOD.

Necessary to be known and practiced by all who study or desire their own
Preservation.

By William Percey, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the three Cups in Paul's
Churchyard, near the West End. 1658.

TO THE INGENIOUS, PRUDENT, AND SELF-PRESERVING READER, And Vigilant Practiser
in the Thrice-noble Exercise and Art of Swimming.
THere are two only chief ends, which are the only inducements to all Actions
in the whole world; and these are pleasure and profit; yea these are the mayn
and only objects whereon all Creatures animal or rational fix their eyes; the
wheels is on with all our Actions turn, as the Universe does upon the Axletree
these are the Magnets or Loadstones that attract all our thoughts and actions
to themselves as their Center: Does not the indefatigable Emmet keep still
exercising his restless motion all the summer, that he may enjoy the pleasure
and profit thereof in his low-roof, but to himself, and his un-aspiring
thoughts, a delightful Palace. What incessant pains takes the Laboriou; Be,
that she may enjoy the sweetness of the Honey in the Artificial Chambers of her
well-wrought Castle? Herein consists pleasure and profit both. Sed quid moror
istis? The prudent and industrious Merchant Roames far and near, spares neither
costs nor pains, danger, care nor trouble; and all for the sacred hunger of
Gold: Therein consists both his pleasure and profit too. Nay, the
Toyl-embracing husbandman merrily whistles along the tediousness of his
painful furrows, in hopes to rejoice in a fruitful Harvest.

But to stay no longer to tire you with a prolixious Context, which tends only
to unfold unto the ingenious Reader the pleasure and profit that may be reaped
by this ensuing discourse; pleasure there is most excellent in the exercise,
in sporting our bodies upon, and playing with the silver streams: profit there
is in it, in many respects; one is, in regard it is healthful for our bodies,
cleansing them from sweat and outward filth; and the greatest profit of all, is
the preservation of our own Lives: what more dear? what more precious? skin for
skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life: As King Richard the
third when his horse was killed under him at Bosworth-field, would have given a
Kingdom for another horse, that thereby he might have saved himself and the
other Kingdom; Crying out, A Kingdom for a Horse! Were the greatest Potentate
in the world in danger of drowning, would he not give half his Dominions to any
one that could save his life? yea, all, rather then dye.

To excite you to this Noble and self-saving Exercise, modern examples I could
give you many; as not long since a Gentleman in danger of drowning in the
Thames, cried out, A thousand pounds for him that could help him: had he spent
but the tithe of that time he had employed in more vain recreations, in
learning this Art, he might have saved himself and his money too.

If Hero had been skilled herein he had not lost his lovesick life in swimming
to his Leander.

Certainly this Art of Swimming was had in great esteem amongst the Ancients:
for when Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, and Father of Nature, would
describe a famous and notorious Dunce indeed, or a mere sottish blockhead, he
gives him this Character; (...). neque nare, neque legere; that is, one that
could neither Swim, nor Read: As if he should say, What man in the world would
be so foolishly mad, as not be skilful in Swimming? and who so blockishly
serdid, as not learn to read?

We daily see, that when men grow old, and past learning, how they will wish
they had given all they are worth, so they had but learning; nay, that they
could but read their mother-longue: and yet as they have been bred up better
fed then taught themselves; so they will set children all the week to keep hogs
for six pence, rather then send them to School to keep them from being hoggish.

I remember when I was a schoolboy, delighting much in hot weather to bath in
our Country Rivulets, I once was in danger of drowning; but by the help of
another that could Swim, was saved, (and I hope preserved to be a means to
teach others to save themselves) which danger wrought in me such an earnest
desire to learn to Swim, that I seldom did forbear the exercise a day, till I
was become a perfect Swimmer.

I could very well wish every man and woman were perfect in Swimming likewise;
which with a little practice they easily may attain unto: and that they may do
it, this ensuing Treatise is on purpose composed, to direct them, as I am
assured it perfectly will, and that not only in one only usual posture of
Swimming, that is, on the belly, but in very many various postures; some far
more easy then that common way of Swimming on the belly, and not so toilsome
nor wearysome: for a man may Swim on his back without any motion of his Arms,
less with his body, then he must use when he Swims upon his belly; and is more
free from gusts of waves, which sometimes otherwise he must be forced to
receive against his face, and so consequently into his mouth.

It is a common received opinion, and generally believed by most people; and I
account it none of the smallest reasons that so many are unfortunately drowned,
that is, That all Creatures naturally can Swim, Mankind only excepted; which
opinion, with the fear of death working upon the Imagination, possesses the
patient with such a senseless fear, that he endeavors not to Swim to help
himself, but yields up his life to the sury of the most merciless Element.

But indeed, and this ensuing Treatise will clearly demonstrate unto you, that
Man does, or at least may, naturally Swim, better then any Creature; nay, as he
is the more Noble, and above all other Creatures; so indeed he excels them all
in Swimming, any Fishes themselves.

I shall not deta in you any longer in the Chanel, but invite you to lanch out
into the Ocean; I mean from the preface, to the book it self; from study to
practice in this excellent exercise, which here you will plainly see set before
you; and attain both to the pleasure and profit may come thereby: which I
heartily wish, as I do yours and my own welfare.

WILLIAM PERCEY.

THE Complete Swimmer: Or, The Art of Swimming.
SECT. 1. The first elegrees and end of Swimming.
BEfore we can attain to the perfect Art of Swimming it self, we must endeavor
to experience our selves by many Actions and postures on the water: so that we
may in a word call the first degree of Swimming, to bear our selves up upon the
water; And this may be said to be done two ways; either by holding up the head
only above the water, or by lying more flat upon the water, and bearing up the
middle of the body.

This beginning being well learned, is more then half the whole Art. And to
proceed to declare the ends of swimming, they are many: some delight herein, to
cool themselves from the parching beams of the Sun, to cleanse their bodies of
sweat, to whiten and purify the skin: others use this excellent Art for the
delight and pleasure of the exercise; others practice this Art to fortify
themselves from the danger of waters: and this is the greatest use thereof; and
therefore in it self seems to challenge a necessity for the learning of it:
for the chiefest end and aim to which this Art is destinated, is for the
preservation of life from the danger of drowning; Swimming being a faculty
which Nature has denied to man, more then to all others creatures.

SECT. II. Whether all creatures do naturally Swim.
Nature as an indulgent parent has infused into every creature a special care
of self-preservation, and Armed them accordingly to defend themselves: but not
every one after the same manner, nor against all things; much less against
that incurable suffocation, or choking in water. Now to speak distinctly of
all beasts and other creatures which do naturally Swim, and which not, is a
work of some difficulty. But if we consider the fabric of Nature in the work
of their bodies; what Element most abounds in their composition, and what
motion, place, and action they for the most part naturally affect, the matter
will be the more easily made appear: for every creature follows the seeds of
its own nature; so that whither Nature directs, thither all things naturally
tend and incline themselves.

Therefore such creatures which Nature has ordained to inhabit in the Caverns
of the earth, are more unapt to Swim then others, and do with greater
difficulty support themselves above the waters: as may appear by worms, who
being cast into the water, soon go to the bottom. A Toade is of a more large
body then a Frogg, and by his form may be thought more apt to Swim then a
Frogg; yet because he inhabits in holes of the earth, and is as it were an
earthly poison reposed in the Cavernes of the earth, and the Frogg is composed
of a more light Airy substance, therefore he more easily swims on the top of
the water; altogether representing a man Swimming upon his belly.

Snakes and Eeeles, feeding on dirt and dust, and inhabiting therein, do
difficulty Swim on the top of the water: the same reason may be given why birds
of the Air, that are conversant in Airy and mountanous places, do fly more
swiftly then such as are bred upon the earth, and walk thereupon; as domestic
fowls.

SECT. III. What creatures do naturally Swim.
As bodies without life, which partake more of Air and fire then other, are not
without difficulty immerged under the waters; as Wood: and those which partake
more of earth and water, will not swim above the waters; as Lead: So those
Animals which by constitution of body are hottest, do most easily and swiftly
Swim above the waters.

The Lion, a beast of the sun, because he is hot of blood, swift and nimble in
members, Swims swiftly and strongly: like unto him for Swimming is the dog,
temperately hot: of a more inferior degree in Swimming, are the Horse, the Ox,
the Ass, the Hogg, being conscious of their own death. And these Animals do
not so easily Swim, because of the natural temperament of their bodies, but
because the figure of their bodies is well disposed to Swim.

And here a question may arise, why a Cock Swimmeth not so well as a Duck; the
one being a bird of the Sun, the other Saturnine: but it may be thus resolved,
that the Cock wants such membranes to his feet, as Nature has endued the
Swan, the Duck and Goose withal, whereby they direct themselves in Swimming,
and whereby they raise themselves to fly out of the water: so that fowls, and
worms, and four-footed beasts, do for the most part all know how to preserve
themselves in the water; but to man only Nature has denied this gift.

SECT. IV. That man Swimmeth by the help of Nature.
As we have already declared that man does not altogether naturally Swim as
other creatures do, but immediately descends toward the bottom; it is partly
becaule of the erected and upright figure of a man; going only with his feet
upon the ground, and his body straight up, as Nature has ordained. As an Arrow
Armed with an Iron head soon sinkes down right, if it be cast upon the water's
but take away the Iron, and it will Swim prostrate upon the superficies of the
water: so if man, when he goes into the water, extend himself flat upon the
water, whether it be casually or skilfully, he may support himself from sinking.

And although the whole Art of Swimming may appear in projection, which may
easily open unto us a perfect progress to the rest; yet nevertheless (as we
shall hereafter more plainly teach,) if only upon his back, fixing his eyes
steadfast up to heaven, without moving hands, feet, or any motion of his body
(which is not granted to any fourfooted beasts) he may swim free from any
danger of the waters.

And those that perish in the water, do strive with their hands and feet, but
they bow down and bend themselves, seeming to comprehend and hold the water in
their Arms, and thereby are violently attracted toward the bottom, which they
endeavor to take hold of with theirhands; which none that are skilful in
Swimming will do: And those that are altogether unlearned and unskilful in the
Art of Swimming, when they do sink to the bottom, they are not long detained
there while life remains, but by a certain Natural reluctance ascend again
twice or thrice to the top of the waters: which does manifestly teach, that
Nature does assist men to swim.

SECT. V. A man excels all other creatures in Swimming.
As all other creatures have the gift of Nature in greater or lesser measure to
swim without the help of Art, which they are incapable of: so man by Art,
together with the help of Nature, excels all other creatures in Swimming.

But here it may be objected, that fishes, whose perpetual motion is Swimming,
and that in a wonderful manner, are to be excepted.

To this we answer, that fishes are by nature assigned to this element; and
this is their natural place, wherein they live without any respiration: but to
a man, who gives out and draws in breath, the water is violent and deadly:
wherefore fishes being long detained in the Air, or men in the water, die and
perish: so that although fishes may challenge to themselves a precellency in
Swimming, yet if we consider this very reason of their habitation and nature,
fishes are very far inferior to a man who is skilful in the Art of Swimming.

For a man may swim with his face upwards, downwards; on his right side, on his
left side; stand, sit lie, carry his clothes and other things safely, walk in
the bottom of the waters: which no fishes nor other creature can do.

SECT. VI. What time of the year is to be observed.
Those that would learn to be perfect and expert in this Art, must in their
progress make several observations. And first, of the time of the year, and the
season of the month when to swim; although if cruel Necessity compel, we must
not then respect the time of the year, nor the water, but be inured to swim in
all times, cold or hot, and in any water: but commodiously to choose a time to
commit our render skin to the water, and to learn Experience in the Art of
Swimming, these four months are most proper, viz. May, June, July, August,
which yield a calm and temperate Air: although in May there are sometimes rigid
and sharp blasts, and more hurtful then in the other months; yet in that month,
and in all the other, there is an Election of time to be taken, and of the
days; for in the hottest months, the water is on some days more cold and
hurtful then in others: yet from the twentieth day of May, unto the twentieth
of August, we may commodiously adventure our Bodies in the water.

SECT. VII. Swimming in the night is not to be used.
As the time of the year is to be chosen by him that without hurt to himself
would learn to swim, so also are the days: for the learner ought not to swim
every day, and not at all in the night: for going into the water by night is
altogether to be avoided; Although it has been much used, because in the night
the waters seem to be more warm then in the daytime; yet dear-bought
experience has made many leave it off.

And though the waters seem warmer in the night then in the daytime, yet the
Sun, the Author of heat, light and life, is absent, and darkness is spread over
us, and the author of death lurkes in deep waters: And in the night many deadly
dangers occur, and that suddenly and unthought of; As boughs, stubbs, mudd
flaggs, weeds, quicksands, and infinite other dangers of present death: And if
you do fall into danger, to whom can you call in the night for help? And
besides these dangers, the night it self may be the cause of many more: As
fumes and thick poisonous vapors arising from the water, hurtful and noisome
vapors in the Air by reason of the absence of the Sun; Toades, snakes, and
other hurtful poisonous things abroad. And although the month be very hot, yet
every day it is not good to go into the water.

SECT. VIII. It is not good to Swim every day.
The days and hours are also to be observed by the diligent learner; the
knowledge whereof we shall now lay down unto you: for there are some days and
hours more hurtful then all others, and more obnoxious to these Aquatical and
watery exercises, in which the Air is much more raw and crude then in others,
and the water therefore more cold, and the exercise consequently more
dangerous: which are the days and hours of the Change or New Moon; especially
if it happen in earthly or watery fignes, it renders the waters more cold, the
Stomach raw and crude; And therefore the body is the more unfit to endure the
water, is more unapt to swim, and therefore in more danger of drowning: the
same same rule is, when the Moon passes earthly or watery Signs; or the Sun
and Moon suffering an Eclipse in any such Signs.

SECT. IX. When it raines, Swimming is not to be practiced.
Youth do oftentimes with pleasure purchase ensuing pain and sorrow; which in
this Art to avoid, be careful in observing the rules thereof: therefore in
cloudy or rainy weather, attempt not to go into the water; for the falling of
the rain is always accompanied with a cold and moist Air, unprofitable to the
body, hurtful to the eyes, and to the whole man, bringing many inconveniences.

The banks also of the river are diligently to be observed, where we intend to
go into the water; for there are many fit and commodious places, and many
dangerous and discommodious: let therefore such banks be chosen, as are not
sandy, not full of soft clay, nor muddy, for therein your feet may stick, so
that you cannot get out: neither let it be a place growing full of weeds or
grass; for therein often lurk Toades, Froggs, and other noisome and hurtful
vermin: But choose a solid, hard, dry, gravelly bank, with green grass growing
in the Meadow by the rivers side, flourishing with flowers.

SECT. X. The waters are to be searched.
A convenient bank being chosen, as before is directed; yet before we attempt
to go into the waters, the River is diligently to be sounded and searched, that
is, that the water be clear and clean upon the top, without any grass, straw,
sticks, leaves, froth, or any sordid and unclean superfluities upon the top:
then we are with a careful penetrating eye to look unto the bottom, and
diligently observe whether it be pure and clean, And that there be no earth or
other thing fallen thereinto from above, nor no filth cast therein: And that it
be not muddy; for such a place is altogether to be shunned: And then we are
certainly to inform our selves of the depth of the water, of the quantity and
quality of the bottom; where it is deep, and where shallow: for if it be muddy,
and shallow in one place, and suddenly falling into deep holes in another, or
muddy, such a place to the unskilful Swimmer is very ^angerous: And if you be a
skilful Artist in Swimming, yet in waters which are muddy at the bottom,
unless the water be very deep, you may oftentimes have no cause to boast of
your attempting therein: for if your legs happen to stick in the mudd, the
water will soon be a deadly covering for your head. And if one should have such
an unhappy chance as to stick in the mudd, by how much the more he strives to
deliver himself out, by so much the deeper he sticks into the bottom; unless
happily the mudd lie but thin, and not very deep, having firm ground
underneath; then he having standing for his feet, may raise himself up:
therefore a clear stream, having a firm, hard, sandy or gravelly bottom, which
may plainly be seen, is to be chosen by boys and learners to swim.

And therefore whenever you intend to exercise the Art of Swimming, first walk
round the banks of the water, before you adventure into it, diligently
observing the depth and bottom of the same, having to that purpose a
fishingrod, or some such thing, with a line and a plummet of Lead affixed there
unto, where with you may plainly and exactly try the depth of every place:
which be sure to try everywhere, until you are well acquainted with the degrees
of the water in every place: And never presume to go into any water which you
are not acquainted withal, until you are a skilful Swimmer; and seldom or
never venture into any water alone without a tutor or a faithful friend. And
these things being well understood, there remains only a few more rules to be
observed.

SECT. XI.
When all things before directed are seriously and exactly considered and
performed, then when you are ready to enter into the water, if you sweat, or
did lately sweat, then loose your clothes a little, and walk gently and
moderately until the sweat be cooled, and your body in a moderate temper: then
when you have diligently observed a place to enter in the water, and to come
ashoare convenient; if you can swim, leap into the water; but if not, then walk
gently in, till you have waded so deep that the water covers your belly, and is
up to your middle: then spread your body flat upon the waters, and endeavor to
swim with a good courage.

SECT. XII. The first posture to be observed in going into the water.
It is to be learned, as we have said before, that the unskilful and ignorant
in the Art of swimming, ought first to go into the waters leisurely and as it
were by degrees; but the more skilful Artists have many and various ways and
postures to cast their bodies upon the waters, which are unto them delightful:
but let the fresh learners wade with their bodies upright into the waters;
keeping the bottom within the reach of their feet.

Some going likewise gradually into the water, do lie down, stretching out
their bodies and hands together.

Others that are skilful, with their right hand fixed behind their neck, and
some with hands clasped there, suddenly cast themselves from the bank into the
waters with their faces downwards; and casting their heels upwards, nimbly turn
themselves ove, and fall with their back upon the water, swimming upon their
backs; and always swiftly leap from the bank when they first cast themselves
into the water.

Others running, fall upon their right or left side.

Others, whose posture is the most commendable, with a swift motion run to the
brim of the River, and jumping up with their bodies, leap into the river with
their body straight up, casting up both their feet, so that their buttockes and
hinder parts of the thighs do first light upon the top of the water. This
manner of going into the water is the most easy, and of all others the most
safe.

There is not any of these several postures and ways of leaping into the
water undecent or unprofitable, unless only one detriment may happen to the
more unskilful Swimmer; and that is, casting himself violently into the water,
he may by a deep sinking down to the bottom (not having the Art to turn himself
upwards) be suffocated with the waters, by reason of the long retention of his
spirits.

But a remedy for this evil is thus to be learned; that is, when first you
leapinto the water, to turn your body descending downwards, into an ascension
upwards: and this is performed after this manner; by casting out your right or
left Arm and leg, and striking the water as it were with an oar, you may turn
your body, and elevate your self to the top with your Arms and legs.

SECT. XIII. The first degree of Swimming.
When (as before I have said) thou art familiarly acquainted with the rules of
Swimming, and have with a staff, as thy guide and leader, found out the depth
of the water, and assured thy self thereof, then thou may accommodate thy
self to the practice of Swimming: in the proceeding hereunto, you must first
begin as these directions instruct you.

First, go leisurely into a calm and clear River, then spread out your body
upon the water with your belly downwards, looking upwards with your face, and
erecting up your head and neck, bowing your back inwards, by reason of
thrusting out of your breast: then stretching straight out your hands before
you, drawing them back again to your breast, and likewise drawing up your legs
and extending them straight again, using this posture with both Arms and legs
together, you shall Swim securely and safely, as long as your convenience shall
admit of your stay in the water.

SECT. XIV. How to turn your self Swimming.
Those that are skilful in the Art of Chiromancy, teach, that such as are born
in the night time, have their right Arm stronger then their left; but they who
are born in the day time, have most strength in their left Arm: wherefore they
who do most use their right hand, let them when they would endeavor to turn
themselves in the water, stretch forth the palm of the right hand by an
extensive declination toward their right side, and attract or draw inwards
their left hand from the region of the waters, and so they shall turn their
whole body upon the left side: and they who would turn on their right side, let
them do the contrary with their Arms.

SECT. XV. To swim with the face upwards.
It may seem an Action very hard and difficult to be performed, for one to swim
with his face upwards, and contradictory to our Nature; but it is the most
fair, easy and safest way, and most agreeable and suitable to our Nature;
whereof the Poet sings,

Os homini sublime dedit Coelumque videri
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus,
To man God gave looks mixed with Majesty,
And wil'd him with bold face to view the Sky.
And it evidently appears, that many do suddenly perish Swimming in the waters
by sudden Accidents happening; this being only the cause, that they endeavor
to swim contrary to Nature; folding the water as it were with their Arms, they
compress their Arms close together; and the water thereby prevailing, sinkes
them down to the bottom of the water: but if they did swim on their backs, they
are secure from that danger; and may learn how to repose themselves upon the
waters, and to turn themselves, as common experience teaches: therefore all
expert Swimmers do commonly swim upon their backs, and can turn themselves how
and when they please.

Now the way to swim after this manner, is thus briefly to be learned; let the
body when you are in the water, be erected straight up; or in plain English
thus: raise up your body upright in the water, and gently cast your self
backwards, lying with your face upwards; and move your self backwards upon the
water: raise up your breast, that it may seem to swell above the superficies of
the water: let your whole body be lineally erected from the head to the foot;
exercise and move your self with both your legs, stretching out and drawing in
both your thighs, resting both your hands upon the bottom of the belly: and in
this posture steer your course backwards, that is, with your head forwards.

This is the best and surest way to swim, and the most easy; for a man may
swimm more easy on his back then on his belly, and much longer: neither is he
that swims on his back, troubled with gusts of water, which will oftentimes
fly forceably into the mouth of him that swims on his belly, and many times
the waves beat against his head: and he that swims on his belly is in more
danger of weeds then he that swims on his back, although at first it may seem a
little more difficult to the learner.

But I must admonish the learner, when he first begins to swim, and would try
this posture of the exercise, let him beware that he do not deceive and be a
thief to himself; that is, that he do not go about to elevate his body, and
cast up one foot, the other touching the bottom: for this argues but the part
of a timorous and fearful mind, and a deceiver of himself: neither let him lift
up his knees much, nor press down his limbs at all; but let him stretch out
his whole body lineally, and then he may swim backwards swiftly and cheerfully.

If he be minded to turn himself, he may do it artificially and nimbly, by
holding still one leg, and striking the other down into the water, either the
right or left, according to that side which he is minded to turn upon.

But in your circumvolution or turning about, you ought (as we have often
before warned) to be very careful to shun the danger of reeds, stakes, weeds,
mudd, stones, or the like; the danger of them is not small, you being once
ensnared amongst them, unless you be the more careful and skilful.

But to escape and avoid these mischiefs, there are many things to be used,
which are very safe and decent; the first whereof follows.

SECT. XVI. Maxims in Swimming.
To Turn with both legs and arms upwards.

This is done by proceeding from the right side to the left, and from the
Region; and it is done with the like declination of the opposite hand, and by
inclination of the body and head, and the turning about of both thighs
together, almost in the same manner as the first mentioned manner of turning is
to be acted; only this requires a more nimble and speedy action, and must be
done with the greatest Agilitie of the most Active Swimmer: for this must be
done as it were in a moment; not after the manner of a common conversion or
turning about: we turn our selves about, laterally or side-ways; But if one
would suddenly turn to the left side, it is done after this manner: stretch
down the right thumb toward the bottom, stretching the hand something bending,
striking the water side-wayes underneath; and with the left hand open, and the
fingers joined together, turning himself backwards, and attracting the water
suddenly with the body and face, casts you on the left side: but if you would
with the like expedition turn on the right side, use the same order only on
the contrary hand. The use of this conversion or turning is this, chiefly to
shun and escape sudden dangers: As, if one should be Swimming, and a ship
should suddenly before he descryes him, be flying under Sail, in danger to run
over him: the like danger may he be in of Boats unadvisedly coming too near
him. Likewise if there should be any Lions, Bears, or fierce dogs lurking in
the River; or if any other sudden danger should violently assault us; by this
only quick turning about, we may escape them all: and if any other be in the
water in the danger of drowning, by this way we may commodiously help him, and
without danger to our selves.

But let them that use this way, beware that the water be not too shallow, lest
it hurt their thighs, and the spine of their backs, to which it is inimical.
Here follows another posture, not so neat, but much more safe.

SECT. XVII. A Conversion or turning like a bell.
We give unto this kind of posture the name of turning like a bell, because it
is performed by the sole motion of the body, without the discerning of any
latitude thereof, as a bell turns about when he is Rung. This conversion
therefore is thus performed: if you swim on your belly, suddenly draw up your
feet, and immediately strike them both downwards, and cast your face upwards:
on the contrary, if you swim on your back, if you turn and extend your legs
and thighs perpendicularly downwards, you are immediately turned to swim on
your belly; in this course proceeding contrary to the former. But if you swim
on your belly, draw up both your legs together, and stretch them both
downwards, casting up and spreading up both your Arms, you cast your self upon
the water backwards, and so swim with your face upwards: and when you swim upon
your back, and would turn about upon your belly, suddenly clap your heels to
your Arse; that is, nimbly cast your feet backwards to your buttockes, and
stretch them straight down toward the bottom, raising the body strongly with
the motion you cast your self upon your belly.

This Action is of very excellent use in a narrow Creek of water, or narrow
stream or rivulet, where we may turn our selves without hurting of our feet
against the banks: but be careful that the ditch be deep enough, and
especially free from weeds and mudd; for very many excellent and skilful
Gentlemen, when they have been Swimming, have perished by being fettered in the
ligaments of weeds, or cleaving and sticking in a muddy bottom. Therefore those
that swim strongly and with a courageous Agilitie, do frequently use another
posture in turning themselves, which is called Circumvolution.

SECT. XVIII. Circumvolution, or turning about in the water.
When we swim after the usual manner, with our body extended plain upon the
water, we would turn and carry our selves about with an easy habit of our
body, and be circumvolved upwards, downwards, to the right side, to the left
side successively, and many ways (like the Axletree with the whole globe) the
manner whereof may be more plainly and easily demonstrated by gesture then by
words. But as I have begun, I shall demonstrate and show unto you the practice
hereof by a plain discourse.

If you would begin your Circumvolution, or to turn your self about from the
left side; when you swim on your belly with the largest extention of your body,
stretch downwards your right Arm and hand as deep as you can, dashing or
pressing the water with the palm of your hand, raising up your head, breast, and
left side of your body with your face upwards, suppressing down your left
thigh, and raising up your right hand to the top of the waters, carrying your
self about from the left side toward the right; oftentimes turning or rolling
your self about upon the water, either from the right hand to the left, or from
the left toward the right contrariwise.

As for example, that I may the better explain it unto you; when one would turn
himself about from his belly to his back, stretching out his right Arm with his
largest extension, that is, as far as he can, declining it downwards toward
the bottom of the water, lifting up his head toward his left side, that he may
swim with his face upwards; let him Elevate or lift up his right thigh, and
depresse or cast down his left, with one and the same Action; which being often
and nimbly performed, the exercise will appear easy and delightful, and also
very useful and profitable, to free ones self from any weeds, straw, or other
base and sordid filth upon the top of the water, which we desire to clear our
selves from; As also, if one should be infested and troubled with Gnats or
swarms of flies hovering and flying about us, this action is very useful; for
by the percussion or dashing of the water with our motion, we drive them away.

SECT. XIX. A quadrupatite or fourfold percussion or striking of the water.
This posture is called Quadrupartite or fourfold, because we do beat or dash
the water with four parts of the body successively; and with a very swift and
nimble Action and motion, which is after this manner, with the hands and feet
together, but they are not all to be lifted up and moved together with an equal
motion at one and the same time out every one of them successively one after
another; as ten times the right foot, twenty times the right hand; thirty times
the left foot, and forty times the left hand: and this is to be done with the
greatest Agilitie and nimbleness of body as possible may be; And this is done
by stretching out the body (...) ^levating or lifting up the breast, an^
extending and stretching out the Arms and legs, partly side-wayes and plainly
as far as you can.

Use this but seldom; and when you do, let it be either for delight, or when
the fleas bite your face shrewdly: for it causes a sound under the water, that
very much offends the head.

SECT. XX. To Swim on the back with the hands and feet upward.
Although the shaking about of the hands be of little use to those that swim on
their back, yet if you intend to swim swiftly, you must use it both with feet
and hands: it is used by those that swim on their belly, and those that swim on
their back too, when the Swimming forward on the back is more swift: this is a
very rapid motion indeed. They that swim on their back, begin the motion of
their hands thus; first they cast their han^ backward behind their head, and
whilst they are extended or stretched forth, the palms of their hands being
open toward their ears at their extention when they are stretched forth, but at
the extremity or later end of this extention, their hands being turned
outward, opening the A ms in the same manner, and withdrawing them again,
striking out the feet, as they use to do, you must endeavor to leap up in this
manner.

The use of this, is to be put in practice when we swim against a swift and
rough Tide, and is the most disagreeing of all to the succeeding way of
Swimming.

SECT. XXI. Retrogradation, or Swimming backward.
This is done when Swimming on your back, you after the same manner almost,
lying on your back stretched, you go back, striking first with the heels, and
then pushing forward with the head: but I will clear it to you thus; lying
down, stretchtforth as I told you before, their breast standing up sweld as
'twere, so that the very back will be hollow by reason of this tumor of the
breast, holding your hands (not according to the received opinion, on the
privities, but the bottom of the belly; for else you will do the Ladies an
injury, and not satisfy their longing desire) upon the bottom of the belly;
lifting first one Leg up, and then the other successively, and so letting them
down again, so that after they have come to the top of the water, being
strongly drawn toward the hams, may force us forward. You may make use of this
Swimming backward, for it is both graceful and necessary; you swim on your
back, viz. when being in deep and large rivers, and if wearied out, you may
ease your self by this kind of slight, without bottom, or rest, without the
help of any one, or trouble, which is to be esteemed the chiefest part of
delight; for in shallow water you may go backward playing in the top of it, and
it adds much pleasure to the party.

SECT. XXII. The side-turn.
There is a great deal of difference between a circumvolution, or turning
round, and this down-turn. Although it seems to be in the same form, yet if you
make a more exactscrutiny or search into the business, the one is done by
motion, the other by a pleasant rest; as for example: by that, you lift up your
body swiftly and often, lifting your Leg out of the water, and then striking
of it down again with a force. Whilst you use this, you must lie on your back
extended, or stretched out, your Elbo's close to your sides, striking your Arms
straight out from your body, your legs being separated a foot's distance one
from the other, the soles of your feet tending toward the bottom, lying on the
water, now show the right, then the left side, as often as you please: observe,
that whilst you lift up your right side, you must extend or stretch forth the
left hand laterally, or sidewayes, and press down your feet a little; but you
must draw or attract to your self your left hand and foot.

The use hereof is very frequent, and extraordinary profitable; for he that
swims on his back, is oftentimes in danger, either of running against the bank,
or Swimming in weedy places, or other dangers that may evene or happen, if he
be not extraordinary well skilled in this kind of circumvolution or turning.
Therefore be circumspect, that when you try this feat often, it be in a place
free from weeds; lest you be so entangled, that you scarce (if ever) get out
again safe. If by strongly Swimming forward you strike into some place or
other, that is spread with thick high weeds; Then if you would at once escape
secure, and look about you without danger, let them practice this following
piece of Agility or nimbleness, termed

SECT. XXIII. Circulation or turning round.
So termed, because as that foot that is placed for to make the cirle by is
immovable, but the other is wheeled round till it be terminated in the same
that it began; so they that use circulation or turning round in the water, they
beat the water with their feet, and wheel round about, whilst the head
remaining as it were in the middle, makes the Center: the first way of doing
this, is, you must lie on the water as when you swim on your back; if you would
turn from the right hand to the left, depress or bend down a little your right
side toward the bottom; then with both your feet first on the left, then on the
right side, being alternatively and successively lifted out of the water toward
the left hand, at every motion proceeding the length of a foot; and thus your
head being fixed, and resting in the Center, there is made a near turning,
marking out a frothy circle on the surface of the water.

The use of this circulation or wheeling round is both great and frequent,
especially, if the superficies or top of the water be covered with a frothy
scum, or any old straw, or any other kind of filth that is offensive, and
adheres or sticks to the head or neck of the Swimmer; all these discommodities
this circulation drives away immediately, and makes the River clear to his
sight. He that sports upon the water in this manner, must have a care of
lifting his leg too high, lest his head sink; in like manner he must beware of
striking the water too hard with his feet; for it causes a sound in the water,
that immediately brings the headache; for the avoiding of this evil, the
following circumduction or turning round is most proper, viz.

SECT. XXIV. The perpendicular conversion or turning, being upright in the
water.
That is called prependicular, or straight, when a man stands upright in the
water, his head and body straightly raised, gazing upon the standers by, and
speaking to them with much grace, and facility. When you stand upright in a
deep water, you must move your legs and feet underneath: And if you would
begin from the right side, stirring first the waters with the sole of your
feet, and your nimble fingers, then after the same manner almost must the whole
habit and posture of your body incline successively to the left: then must you
covertly draw as it were the waters to you, and strongly too; the left hand
first attracting or drawing them, then the right hand successively receiving
them, and repelling or beating them back again.

Consider how much commodity or profit results to a man from this exercise:
When as you are in an unknown River, or in the vast Ocean, (if so it please the
heavenly Powers) being well exercised in this trick, lifting up your head above
the vast waves, you may look out to find the safest shore, and most free from
the Enemy, to land at: Besides, if you are escaped out of violent hands, and
your Enemy prosecute and persecute you with stones, arrows, or other things of
the like nature; you may by the help of this perpendicular or straight descent,
in the twinkling of an eye perceive from whence they come, and avoid them.

Yea farther, if you happen to have some controversy or skimish with man or
beast in the water, stopping or hindering you, being erected or raised up in
this manner, you may fight stoutly and nearly. But you must have a care that it
be not clayie ground, for else it may cost you your life. Many other neat and
pleasant tricks and Agility are practiced in these conversions or turnings,
that cannot be truly exercised, but by those that are expert Artists, and have
a stout and undaunted courage: and he that does them with dexterity, and can
exercise them all as easily as he can see the Sun, all persons will call him
Neptunes Nepheus, The Captain of the Sea; and will never cease filling their
mouths with his praise.

SECT. XXV. To swim forward with the palms of the hands joined together.
This has deserved the first place, because it is most a greeable, or like to
that simple ordinary way of Swimming on the belly, joining hand and wrists
together, and contracting or speading them even to the breast; Then you must
extend or stretch your hands and the palms of them in the forementioned manner
and order, both thumbs erected or standing up, the tops of the fingers partly
tending downwards, till they come to the very top of all the water.

The use of this is not only graceful, but beside that, if perchance a heap of
straw should meet you Swimming (that oftentimes causes a great deal of trouble
and danger) this strong extension or striking out of the hands penetrates or
pierces it immediately, and disperseth it on each side: 'twill help you in the
same manner, when you fall into any sandy place, and makes way for you to get
out, especially if he have a care of separating or striking his hands too wide
the one from the other being in this straight. Nor is this ensuing slight
impleasing, v. z.

SECT. XXVI. Swimming neither on back nor belly.
It Is strange any man should swim, and yet neither on his back nor belly; If
you would swim so, you must strike forward either with your shoulder, Arm,
thigh, or Leg, right or left, lifted or raised up either on the right or left
side, and contiguous or touching the top of the water. When you swim on your
back, or belly, pressing down the left hand at once, but lift up your right
side in Swimming, and that being extended or stretched; And while you lie thus,
let your left hand look to the extension, not dilating or spreading abroad the
motion, or pressing it down to the bottom, but extending or steering in a
straight line, and contracting that which lies parallel or level with the water.

Besides the delight of the mind that the party Swimming has, there is much
profit or use; for he may swim to any shore, and view it all the time he is
Swimming, without the motion of either hand or foot. It Is possible

SECT. XXVII. To swim on the belly without the help of either hand.
And that very easily, as you may hear by this following relation: The breast
being stretched out forward, lift up your neck, or rather raise it upright,
casting your hands behind your neek or back, being folded together backward,
striking your self forward with your feet and legs, as you do when you swim
the common way on your belly.

The end of Swimming in this manner and intent, is, that if the cramp should
seize upon any one unluckily, or if you be compelled to betake your self to the
water, with your hands fettred behind you, being in danger of your life; one
would imagine it more convenient and fit, to try this on the back, then the
belly: but it is not, because, when you swim on your belly, you foresee your
way, and view it all over: but when you swim on your back, you cannot, unless
it be by the use of conversion or turning about: besides, if in Swimming your
Arms should be tired, that you may the better in this case keep your self up,
you must swim on your belly, and

SECT. XXVIII. Hold your left foot in your right hand.
Variety much affects a learner; and this way cannot but be a most delightful
one; It will be very pleasant and useful for you in Swimming on your belly, to
lift up your left leg, and draw it to your buttocks, and stretching forth at
the same time your right hand on your bottocks, and holding your right foot,
and that fast, striking out still with your left hand and leg together, or the
contrary.

This Agility or piece of nimbleness is very useful against the cramp, and
safe; especially, if one of the feet be extangled in the weeds; for he that is
skilled in this feat, can soon pull away the weeds from his feet, and break
them; but if the weeds that grow in the bottom be more thick then ordinary, you
must use variety of Swimming, and strive and endeavor

SECT. XXIX. To Swim like a Dog.
Think not this way hard; for many do as it were ignorantly fall upon this kind
of Swimming that is used by four-footed creatures, and are able to bear
themselves up so in high water, before ever they learned to swim.

This you may do, if lifting up and depressing or letting down a little both
your hands by turns, and so likewise your feet; drawing the water to you with
these, and hiding them with these, you may leap up as it were; first using your
right hand and leg, then your left hand and leg, alternately succeeding or
changing by course.

SECT. XXX. The percussion or striking of the water, to turn in the water.
It is a question worth the discussing, for a man to know whether he strike the
water with the hand or Leg: without doubt (take this for the resolution) it is
with the right; or left leg, and the way thereof is ingenious and recreative:
this is performed ordinarily when Swimming nearly upon the back the leg being
lifted either up or down, every stroke the waves are struck, drops are raised
on high, and bedew them: they that are more expert in it, go about it with the
chin depressed or hanging downward. But if they endeavor to exercise it with
more grace, then every stroke is succeeded with a percussion or striking of the
waters on high, either proceeding from the right or left hand, together with
the circumvolution or turning round of the whole body: This is a very neat
trick, and the most noble of all that have been forementioned. Now if you would
exercise and perform this feat, you must lie on your back in the water, with
your body and legs extended, the breast being puffed up or elevated, with both
hands open, tending toward the bottom of the waters, and partly lifting up the
body (whilst you jerk out the legs) that is in the water: But if you intend to
turn your self with a blow on the water, then if you lift the leg out of the
water, you must depress or force it down of a sudden, lifting up in the same
instant your left, turning your whole body at once with that only action.

This Agilitie makes one swim more neatly, and with less labor; and

SECT. XXXI. The sporting with one foot.
These neat gestures and good grace in Swimming, seem to be more pleasant then
profitable; nay, there are none of these, but in times of danger (as in
Swimming there is very much) afford more pleasure to him that wantonly plays
so, then use in freeing from danger; therefore this discourse should be the
more grateful to thee, being there is in it a mixture both of pleasure and
profit: These playing with one foot (that I am now mentioning) though it seems
to confer much to the pleasure of the swimmer, because that they that have this
trick, seem to rise with a grace, triumphing as it were; yet it has its
destinated use and commodity perpetually succeeding it, as I will manifest it
by word and example: They that affect this way while they swim, look upon their
feet, lifted up out of water, now the right, then the left leg or foot: in
their proceeding they are tumbled up and down, triumphing as it were, wheeling
their leg round three or four times in the Air, together with a settled
countenance, the chinbeing bowed to the neck. These seem an easy and pleasant
sport, but it is very difficult, unless first with your breast strutting out,
with the palm of your hands under the water toward the ground, treading the
water with the other leg at the same time: all which things require a stout
heart, elevating it self: for while the leg is lifted up, the head is
implunged into the water. This is a hard, though neat trick, and helps much to
the shaking out of their feet that may be entangled in weeds or any other
encumbrances.

Being terrified with this difficulty, that you may not desist in the middle of
your course, this pleasant subsequent way will facilitate it.

SECT. XXXII. The showing of the feet, etc. Sailing.
Any one may without touching ground show both his feet on the top of the
waters: This indeed is common and very easy; nor can they only stand, but
swim forward, showing both their feet; and the manner of it is thus: he that
desires to do it lies on his back (the contrary is used in all other showing of
the feet) bending his back downwards, removed as it were from his hands on his
belly, whilst the palms of his hands are moved to and fro, keeping up his body
by the rolling of the waters, his feet being lifted up on the top of the water.

The use of this action in the water, is this: after you have swom, having
obtained this art in a sufficient time, you may see and look steadily on your
feet, whether they be clean enough, white enough, or washed enough, although
you chance to be in never so deep a place: and as far as I can guess, the feet
excel the head in Agility; for the head is the stable repository of Counsel:
and yet if our discourse should run from the heel to the head, we should view
one gesture the most excellent of all, proper and peculiar to the head, which is

SECT. XXXIII. The suspension or holding up of the Chin.
Whilst I am silently endeavoring to treat about the holding up of the chin, I
am at a stand; for as the head standing on a high place, is more eminent then
the other parts of the body; so really this faculty is far beyond all the rest;
and if it be neatly and artificially upheld, it goes beyond Art it self: for
one that is skilful in this way, stands upright without moving, though he be in
the deepest waters, sinking. Wherefore if the rest of our Arguments were
obscure, yet this one facility would evince it apparently, that a man by nature
is apt to swim, viz. if he will lift up his head; This is done after this
manner; when we swim on our backs, after the last stroke of hands and feet, we
rest, lying so on the water; Then, whilst the legs are stretched forth as
before, sink down together: when they come perpendicularly to the ground, you
must bend your legs toward your knees; your breast must be puffed up, your Arms
(both the backs of your hands laid on your back, toward your shoulders) must
be gathered up, or to be cast laterally and equally on each side, your fingers
close, with the palms of your hands toward the bottom, looking upwards with
your countenance as much as possible.

This is a wonderful way, and sometime profitable: when in the deep of winter by
accident you pass over some pond, the brittle ice breaks, this is the only
remedy: if in dead time of the night you be compelled by necessity to pass
over a River, and your enemies follow you in a wherry; you may stand sure by
the help of this Agility, even in the deepest waters, without moving them, and
so obtain your desire; this is succeeded by

SECT. XXXIV. Treading of Water.
By the benefit of this, we stand and move upright in the water, without any
motion of the hand: and this (that I may be brief) is done by the lifting up of
the feet circularly one after the other, the sole of the foot being flat
toward the bottom. The use of this cannot but be various: whilst you tread
water strongly and artificially, you may look about you with ease, discharge a
Gun, shoot a bow, or brandish a sword above the highest waves, and have the
free use of your hands. But let him that treads water often, have a care of
going into shallow, muddy, or weedie Rivers; for it is desperate and dangerous;
because the legs may sometimes be caught in the weeds: if this happen, you must
presently make use of

SECT. XXXV. The contradictory Swimming on the back.
So termed, because that as words that do much contradict one another, and are
diametrically opposite: so this Activity proceeds from the contradictory
position of the members; these members are either the right hand, left foot, or
the left hand and the right foot: after this manner, when you swim on your
back, you take hold of your left foot with the right hand, and the contrary
sometimes, quickly jerking the leg up or down.

If the weeds stick to your legs when you swim on your back, they are soon
shaken off by this artifice. But if it fall out so infortunately, that whilst
you swim on your back both your legs are fastened together with some base
weeds, in this case

SECT. XXXVI. Connex Swimming, or Swimming cross legged,
Helps much and often, and preserves life; but it is difficult to swim over the
water with hands and feet tied athwart, as it were, one cross the other; but it
may be happily achieved; for when the legs are so crossed, lay your Arms
enfolded one within the other on your breast; Then stretching the body, you
move forward on your back, lifting up both legs, and again letting them down
again, and bending them whilst you lay them down, till you come to the shore,
according to your desire.

This is succeeded with a greater and more dangerous difficulty, viz. when one
is cast out of a prison, or ship, or any other place whatsoever, with hands and
feet tied; being skilful in this Artificial way, you may safely come out of the
water: The avoiding of this danger and others of the like nature, when you swim
on the belly, is shown by

SECT. XXXVII. Prolapsion or Swimming forward.
Also Swimming forward (as I apprehend) is Prolapsion: and though the term be
borrowed, yet it is properly and genuinely to be so called; because as worms or
Snakes slide forward, drawing the posterior parts (that cling together) by the
slimy tenacitie of their foreparts; so he that is expert at this, slides out of
the midst of the thickest weeds by little and little; Thus, Swimming on the
belly, in this case, you go forward; your legs stretched out neatly backwards,
and your hands forwards, but both together; but so, that the Arms and hands be
extended as far as they can from the breast, with your fingers close together,
the palms of your hands hollow, and tending to the bottom: being thus disposed
according to Art, through the strength of the hollow palm, and the bones of the
elbo, you draw to you the water that is before you; which whilst the body and
the legs jointly do accommodate themselves to a gentle, slow, and farther
motion, does bring us safe and sound out of the thick plats of weeds.

Let them that use this trick, beware lest they strive in this condition too
fervently and furiously, but pleasantly, gently and courageously; let them not
spread forth their hands, nor their feet at all; for without controversy this
predicted danger would succeed; whose knotty connection or twisting together
(unless some external aid were present) can no ways be untied without
endangering their life: this difficulty is succeeded by a pleasant and pretty
collusion or sport.

SECT. XXXVIII. Sitting on the water contracted or bending.
For they that are skilful in Swimming, swim several ways, and by a various
artifice, lying, walking, standing, and also sitting; in what chair they use to
sit, is hard to resolve, it is without doubt a soft and easy one, that one may
sit upon it without a cushon: so that the water is to a good Swimmer, a bed in
which he may repose himself; a floor where he may fix his foot; a way wherein
he may walk; a chariot in which he is carried forward; a green field where he
may delight himself variously; a Chair wherein placed he may sit. But I am
almost tired out with standing on the shore, therefore I learn to sit in the
water. This is not performed with a straight, but bowing body, and that by
holding one foot in one hand, and the other in the other, his feet being thus
held by the hands, being both freed successively, and pressed diligently: that
you may the better perform this slight, first you must strive to ease your body
on each side, by the attraction and depression of the waters, the legs
likewise after the same manner; but so, that whilst you do this, you must draw
your feet under your hams, toward your thighs, withal bowing them to the
knees, till they according to the forementioned manner, lay hold of them, and
hold them fast; so that the Swimmer must bear himself up as much as he can,
holding his head downwards, and so he may sit.

By the help of this trick, you may when your legs are entangled in weeds, one
or both, untie them with both hands: but that which is most wonderful is, that
if by chance you fall into a deep Well, where you cannot swim by reason of the
narrowness, nor tread water because of the clayie bottom, or hold up your head
for your ease, then holding your feet with your hands, and moving to and fro,
being in a narrow, and shallow muddy fountain, you may cry for help out of the
bottom: this affords much ease to the subsequent posture, above all others,
which is termed

SECT. XXXIX. The cutting of the Toes.
This seems a very hard and difficult way, because few can do this in the
water: some men being on the ground cannot stand on one leg and turn
themselves without falling: but many things may be done in the water, that
cannot be performed on the Land; and I my self several times have tried to kiss
my Toe with the help of my hands, when I have been either on the ground, or in
bed, and could never do it: but to tell you how to cut the nails in the water,
be it never so deep, must be done after this manner; holding a knife in your
right hand, lift up your left leg, and with it draw your foot to your right
knee: being thus ordered, take hold of it with your left hand; and being thus
held, take hold of your Toes with your right hand; touch them and handle them
as you please, and pare them at pleasure; for you may safely do it, and without
danger.

The utilitie of this is such, you may easily wash your Toes, which many times
are fowl between the joints; pare, clip and cut them, and this at pleasure
unseen: Though this be less profitable then the rest, yet it is more pleasant
and delightful.

SECT. XL. (...), or the showing of four parts together above water.
It Is possible for a Swimmer to show four parts of his body above water at one
and the same time, viz. his head, both his lboes, and his knees; It Is a curious
epiece of Agilitie, nor can it soon be attained unto. They that go about it,
must do it on this manner: you must lay one knee athwart the other, lifting up
and letting down each leg often, fixing both your hands under each side, so
that your elboes come exactly over your breast, your breast full, and as
possible; and so you may swim, and make a sport of it.

Besides the pleasure that rifeth from this difficulty, by this means you may
lift up or ease both your legs (one of them at least) when your are Swimming
in very deep waters, as is manifested by

SECT. XLI. The Erection or lifting up of the Leg.
There is a difference between showing of the feet and lifting up of the Leg;
for the latter is not performed without the help, of the other Leg, and the
hands on each side pressing down and forcing the water somewhat lower; so that
whilst one Leg is shown half above water, the other Leg presses hard and
strong the waters beneath.

They that have this faculty, may pass over a River, and carry any small thing
between their great Toe at pleasure; but it is better done by far, by the

SECT. XLII. Erection or lifting up of the hands.
Whilst we swim on our backs, the use of our hands is various and manifold; for
we can wash our body Swimming, or remove weeds from our head, arms, or legs,
or can easily ease our selves; but it is very hard to lift up both hands
together when you are Swimming; though it seems far easier and familiar, then
many of the forementioned trick: but the difficulty appears in this, that when
the armsare lifted up, the breast is contracted; which so contracted, the body
tends speedily downwards. Therefore here lies the slight, that when you lift up
your arms, you must bend your breast, but lift up together with the motion of
the hands, as much as can possibly.

If this be done Artificially and firmly, we may transport or carry over a
garment or purse, or any other thing dry. This is followed by

SECT. XLIII. The drawing on of Boots.
That no man can draw on Boots in the water, or swim Booted, nor indeed is it
necessary, is beyond controversy; and indeed those that are in danger of
drowning, would rather pull them off, then keep them on; Therefore I mean by
this term of drawing on Boots, not a realitie, but rather the form or manner of
doing it, that represents a man putting on Boots; because first he lifts up one
of his Legs out of the water; then the other successively, and so holds them
both in his hands; then he lets one down, and sumbles about the other, as if he
were drawing on a Boot. This must be done by lifting up the breast on high, and
extending of it, so that it appear above water, so that you may let down that
Leg quickly, and take up the other with much ease, and do the like by that.

This is most useful for the washing of the Legs, and freeing them from weeds;
Like this is

SECT. XLIV. The leaping of the Goat.
So termed, because like skipping you leap and double the motion of your feet
most dexterously; so that they that have have this trick, do double the motion
of their feet, as they do that dance in a ring when they caper about. This
various and quick motion of the feet at one time, is not done but by an
excellent spirit, and the Agility of an active body. If a man be qualified with
these two things requisite, it must be done thus, stretching out his breast
very much, waving about and pressing down with his hands the water that is
about his sides three or four times, and that thick and quick; but so, that
having with your hands pressed down the water deeper then ordinary, and with
more strength too, lifting your body up strongly, you may cast up your Legs on
high, shaking them as often as you please, and that singly or both together,
before you put them into the water again.

SECT. XLV.
This is the most difficult and most ingenious of them all; when you have
attained this perfectly, you are arrived to the very height of the Art: do not
be ambitious after any more, when you have obtained your desire in this
particular; but now our intent is to find out the way of Swimming under water,
and that Artificially too. It Is I must confess the chiefest part in the Art,
because few try it, because it is very dangerous; but I will in the following
Section manifest it unto you as clearly as pofssible may be, that you may
perform it without any great danger, neatly and Artificially.

SECT. XLVI. Leaping in, head forwards.
This is an unseemly sight to all persons, and a vice, that men should sink
downwards: It Is a vice I confess, but not a vice of Nature; and you would think
that it was not necessary for a man to dive by Art: but in realitie to do it
Artificially, speedily, neatly, and without danger, is rare. Any one may very
easily dive down into the water, as it appears by the woeful experience of so
many that are drowned in the Sea. It Is difficult, as you may see by this
following example, from many that go about to dive head forwards: they stand a
great while bending downwards, and double as it were, their face only being
covered with the water, the hinder part of the head and the buttocks floating
as it were upon the superficies, or top of the water; so that the spectators
cry aloud oftentimes, A rod, a rod, they want a rod. They cannot indeed go down
to the water, unless they contend and strive very earnestly to force themselves
down to the bottom: and hence it appears, that a man may naturally swim, when
he cannot dive, unless he violently force himself downwards; and that so many
are daily drowned, because they violently and eagerly catch the waters and
grasp them, when they come to the bottom: neither does it happen quickly, but
after a great luctation and striving. Now they that are exercised in the Art,
can dive down to the bottom, and that with as much expedition and swiftness, as
an arrow out of a well-strung bow, when necessity requires it; nay, they can
vary more then an arrow, for they can turn up side down, go forward, backwards,
ascend, descend, straightly, crookedly, obliquely, according to their pleasure.
The manner of diving head forward is as follows; you must stand upright first
with a straight body, upon the shore, or any other convenient place: thus
placed, when first you go to dive head forwards, you must bow your body as is
mentioned; and then, when you intend to rise again, when you are under the
water, leap upward, drawing your chin to your breast, and bending it, laying
your hand on your hips, and so you will start up immediately. In descending, you
must observe this Mothod; be sure lay both hands upon the opposite sides of
your back; and your hands being bowed outwardly, let them be extended stiffly;
and these dilating, or stretching, will raise you upwards, bend you a little
backward.

This causes the first kind of diving downwards, which is called

SECT. XLVII. The perpendicular descent, or straight leaping into the water.
They that practice this, do it off high places, as green banks, trees,
bridges, cockboats or ships; and before they jump down, they lift up their body
in the Air as 'twere, that so they may reach the bottom with more speed, and
more directly. They deal with their bodies in this case, as Archers by their
arrows; for when the arrow comes to its height, then it turns, and falls
perpendicularly, or directly downwards; in the same manner almost, he that
means to jump down evenly, lifts himself up a little, that so his head may the
better look down to the bottom; and that is easily done, if according to what
is forementioned, if his hands be athwart, as soon, as ever they enter the
water with the palms exteriorly bended, let them stretch or extend on both
sides the head descending, but the hands ascending with an oblique contention,
or athwart one another on one side.

The use of this slight is very great, in seeking out the deepest bottom,
without the benefit of which swift motion we could by no means perform, for
want of breath, nor could we draw breath during that motion: this is seldom
used because it is dangerous, Though not difficult: but of great pleasure and
use is this subsequent

SECT. XLVIII. Subnatation, or Swimming under water.
Many are very much given to this kind of Swimming, which must be practiced in
this manner; after that you are under the water, as is before mentioned, first
(which you must resolve on before you dive) either the upper, middle, or lower
Region of the water or running River, being under, laying the back of your
hands on your back, and being thus placed, stretch them quickly, holding the
thumb upwards, and the little finger downwards, the deeper you would swim, the
higher must you hold the palm of your hand pointing to the bottom with your
Thumb; on the out side they are to be stretched and dilated; but the higher and
nearer to the superficies or top of the water that you would swim, the wider
must you hold open your hands, (as they do that swim on their bellies) the
Thumbs bending toward one the other; and the palm of the hand toward the
bottom; but he that strives to swim underneath, in the midst of the depth of
the water, it will be the safest way for him to hold down his thumbs a little,
that so he may as it were attract or draw the water that is before him, and
being attracted, may drive it back again; let his hands be bended backward, and
almost after the same manner with his Arms stretched forth strongly drawing to
them the water that is before, and then afterward driving themselves by the
last of their former motions, or extention; wheeling about outwardly, till they
be almost brought down to the knees; this is done by the striking out of the
Legs, as they do that swim on their bellies, but it is more proper to those
that affect Swimming at the bottom rather then then the top of the water.

We make use of the Swimming under water, when we seek after any thing lost
under water, or to transport or convey our selves secretly from one place to
another under water; or if we would help any one that is sunk and in danger of
drowning; In this case, at such a necessitated occasion, be cautious, and
venture not too rashly to go to the party that is drowning, whether it be above
or under the water; and suffer him not to take hold of you on any part of the
body; for if you do, you are gone, there is no remedy, you must sink with him.
This is to be executed as follows: if you will do such a noble courtesy for
a friend, let him first be somewhat stifled with the water, so that the
quickness of his sight may be somewhat weakened, that so he may not perceive
you; but how to know this, is difficult, yet it happens for the most part, at
the first time of his sinking; Then if you can either see, or know in what
place, do not put your self under water yet, nor come near above water within
twelve foot: then being under water, proceed very slowly, warily, carefully,
and by degrees, looking to him very exactly, that when he comes near you he
touch you not: and if you can possibly, take hold of the hair on the hinder
part of his head; his face being turned upward, then carry him to shore,
lifting up and down, rubbing him, and ayring his clothes, or wringing water
out: in this fatal mischance, if their be good store of people, take a cord or
string, and tie it to his body, and let those that stand on the shore (or if
the rope be too short) let some other in the water hold the end of it in his
hand, and upon the sign given by the other, let him pull him out steadily and
strongly: for the more exact performing of all which things, is requisite

SECT. XLIX. The rising from under the water.
A man may with much ease, when he is under the water, at his pleasure rise up
again; as was said before: as for this, you must do it in the same manner
almost, as the Tropica expedita, or showing of the Elboes and legs together,
one of the palms of your hands turned outward, and repelling or beating back
the water underneath; the other palm of the hands smooth and extended,
attracting or drawing the watet that is before: when you turn or rise up at the
end of your extension, the fingers of your hands must be extended or stretched
forward, and bend, and the palm of your hand being turned outwardly.

The flower and perfection of this remains as yet to be explained, viz.

SECT. L. Circular subnation, or Swimming under water circle-wise.
When you look for any thing that is lost, floating as it were above water
(which Spaniels do most exquisitely) you must encompass the bottom circlewise,
viewing several places, and that so Methodically, that sometimes if you cast
white pebbles, money, bones or horn-shoes, into the water, or any other heavy
bodies that tend naturally downward, you may take them up in the same order
that they were thrown in, not rising till they have them all. This is done with
a great deal of expedition, by Swimming under water circularly. It Is done by
the faculty of the hands, winding about the water with a great deal of
activity; winding them from the right to the left: if you intend to turn to the
right, if to the left, then the involution or turning of the hand proceeds from
the contrary part or side.

When you pass by any thing lost in the water by a straight jumping in, then
you correct your error by a circular motion; and in all Swimming under water,
you must have a care of going no lower, then he has light to show him his way;
for if the water is obscured and your eye likewise, this is a sign that you are
crept too far under the bank, or gone too deep, or under a cock-boat, or some
such thing, deceiving your sight of the beams of the light, and covering or
darkning the superficies or top of the water, to have erred not without danger;
Now the difficulty is how to escape, when you can neither see any thing, nor
call on any body, nor rise up, nor freely breath. The only and surest remedy
is, first to keep out of such thick obscure places: but if you are obscured so
through your hasty and speedy course, remember which way you came, and return
in a direct line backward, endeavoring to rise upward; for the light will
appear to you a great length: above all, be very careful that you breath not
under water; but if the enemy stand on the shore with their mortal darts or
arrows, and keep you under longer then you can well bear, then we have recourse
to

SECT. LI. The Nimbleness of the Dolphin.
This teaches you to rise up and go down; bobbing up your head a little, and
so draw breath, then down again with safety: which may be done by those that
are put to this extremity to save their lives, five hundred paces together
(chiefly in the Summer) and that with very little or no danger.

They that try this, with some of the forementioned kinds of Swimming forward
with their face downward, do presently sink themselves (the deeper, the safer,
so that they can but see) Swimming forward thus under water, till they can no
longer without prejudice and hurt to themselves, hold their breath. Then
proceeding by degrees, let them begin to rise; and when they see through the
clearness of the light that they are almost at the top, let them of a sudden
pop up their head; and having breathed a little, let them down again to the
bottom of the water; going forward according to their pleasure more or less:
and let them do this as often as the danger and present occasion requires. Thus
having related unto you these secrets with all possible brevity and
succinctness, viz. how a man may be safe and secure from receiving any danger
by the water when he is in or under the water, nay from any danger or enemy
that prosecutes and follows us on the shore; what remains now, but

SECT. LII. The last Act or posture in Swimming.
Although the longer or more you swim, you do it the better and with more
grace, yet after you have staid a sufficient while in the water, you must go to
shore, lest your members and joints, through the too nipping cold of the water
(as mine begin to be at present) be benumbed with the water; Therefore when you
are well washed, and all the parts of your body clean; return to the place that
is most fit and commodious for you (which ought to have been sought out before
you committed your body to the tender and soft footing of the water) and this
must be done, or at least I used to do it with my face upwards, on my back, or
belly, or side, or by a supine retrogradation, or returning on my back: being
upon the shore, wrap your self in your cloak; and having got a crust in your
hand, with your shoes slipped on, run about the green fields, leaping and
playing. The eating of bread belongs also to this Art very much: for after the
languishing digestion of the hungry Stomach, it gathers and raises up the
spirits within, removes the pains of the head (that are often the effects of
too long Swimming; it restores the heat, renews the color, recreates the
heart, and finally exhilarates or enlivens the whole body. These things have I
related to you at present with much have; and according to my time, I have
instructed you how to behave your self like a Proteus in the water, or A
Sea-God, to appear in several shapes, which you may soon attain to with
neatness and perfection, so you frequent the River of Thames twice or thrice a
day. As for me, I shall cordially rejoice, if my water-work has promoted you a
degree higher in the Art of Swimming. But I forget my self; Phoebus is gone to
bed (and he honors Swimming so far, as first to water his horses) and the
wearied hours of the day give place to the sable mantle of the night. Now it is
time to sound a retreat: and lest I should too much offend your weak Stomach by
being so long on the water, I Will return to my proper Element the Land. I am so
real hearted to this Nation, that I have penned down and directed several ways
how men may avoid drowning. As for that usual disaster that attends them by
Land, this is my Letany, Good Lord deliver them. Amen.

FINIS.

