THIS BOOK Makes appear the Claim, Pedigree, and Proceedings OF JAMES PERCY Now
CLAIMANT to the EARLDOM OF Northumberland, Humbly presented to both Houses of
Parliament.

Printed in the Year 16^^

THis Preface is only to tell the Readers that all new matters are still placed
in the Front of this Book, which seems Irregular; but read this with Patience,
and in time it may be Regulated, and put into a due Form.

In short I cannot nor must not forget Truth and Justice, nor the Actions of
just Men.

For Sir Thomas Percy Knt. was courted to take upon him the Title and Earldom
of Northumberland, but he refused it. because he knew himself to be Descended
from Sir Thomas Percy Knt. Lord Egermond, 2d. Brother to Henry Percy 3d. Earl
of Northumberland.

Captain Percy of Beverly did look after the Earldom of Northumberland, and to
preserve the name of Percy, but he left off his Claim, by reason he sound
himself to be Descended from one of the Brothers of Henry Percy 5th. Earl of
Northumberland, etc.

Now Sir Ingelram Percy Knt. was the 3d. Son of Henry Percy, 5th. Earl of
Northumberland, who had 2 Sons, viz.

1. Henry had Issue 3. Sons, James, William, Henry. James Claimant.

2. Robert, had Issue; 3 Sons, Robert, Thomas, and one more Alexander, Roger,
Francis,


depiction of half moon

God has not set the Half Moon in vain upon the Claimant, but the World may
look upon it to be the Almighties Candle to find out the true Heir-Male, James
Percy.

Now for Alexander Percy Gent. of Ireland, that rides in the Lifeguard, and
Mr. Roger Percy Shoemaker at Charing Cross; and Mr. Francis Percy Stone-cutter
in Cambridge, and his Brother a Tailor: I acknowledge them to be Cousins, and
Descended from the Sons of Robert Percy, my Great Uncle.

And by reason I know not which is the Eldest and nearest of Kin of the
Collateral Line.

Therefore ^ most humbly pray, That the Heralds may take notice, and help them
to find out the truth of Seniority.

For my Cordial Endeavors are, to preserve the Moon from being Misted or
Eclipsed any more.

HENRY PERCY, 5th. Earl of Northumberland, Married; and had Issue 3 Sons, viz.
I. Henry Percy, 6th. Earl of Northumberland, Married, and dyed without Issue.
II. Thomas Percy, Married, and had Issue; But when Josceline Percy the 11th.
Earl dyed; the Heirs Males of this Line were Extinct also. III. Sir Ingelram
Percy, Married and had Issue 2 Sons, (viz.) Henry, and Robert. Henry Percy,
Eldest Son, Married, and had Issue 3 Sons (viz.) James, William, and Henry; But
the 2 elder Brothers dyed without Issue-male Henry Percy, (Third Son,) Married,
and had Issue 3 Sons (viz.) Henry, James, and Henry: But the two Henry's dyed
young. James Percy, (the now Claimant) Married, and has 3 Sons, (viz.)
Anthony, Henry, and John. Anthony Percy, is Married, and has Issue, Henry
Percy, Grandson of James Percy the now Claimant.





Percy coat of arms with half moon

The following Account makes out this Pedigree fully, and at large down from
Henry Percy 5th. Earl of Northumberland, to the Claimant James Percy, his Sons,
and Grandson, Henry Percy.

A True Pedigree to prove the Claymant, James Percy, to be the second Son of
Henry Percy of Horton in the County of Northampton, who was third Son of Henry
Percy of Parvenham in the County of Bedford, who was the eldest Son of Sir
Ingelram Percy, Knt. who was the third Son of Henry Lord Percy, 5th. Earl of
Northumberland, By which Descent the Claymant is Cousin and next Heir-male to
Joscelin Percy the late and 11th. Earl of Northumberland, Deceased.
Percy coat of arms

HENRY Lord PERCY, Fifth Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne and Bryan, and
Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,

Who married Katherine, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Robert Spencer
Knight; by whom he had Issue.

1st. Henry Lord Percy, 6th. Earl of Northumberland; who Dyed without Issue.

2d. Thomas Percy Knight, who was Executed; had to Wife, Eleanor, one of the
Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Gwichard Harbottle Knight; by whom he had Issue,
Thomas the 7th. Earl of Northumberland, who was beheaded at York, and dyed
without Issue-male; And Henry the 8th. Earl of Northumberland, whose Issue is
incerted hereafter.

3d. Sir Ingelram Percy Knight, who was married, as by the Oath of Mr. Henry
Champion, who kept the Books and Records of the Percies.

Henry Lord Percy 6th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne and Bryan,
Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, who Dyed at Hackny near London
the day before the Calends of July 1537. leaving no Children behind him, The
Dignity of the Earl of Northumberland was vacant till the time of Edward VI.
John Dudly Earl of Warwick, Viscount Lisie, Lord Basset and Ties was entitled
Duke of Northumberland the 5th. year of King Edward VI. But when he was Dead,
Thomas Percy Nephew to this Henry by Thomas his Brother, who was Executed; In
the Reign of Qu. Mary, was restored to all the Honors of that Family.

Thomas Percy, Nephew to Henry 6th. Earl of Northumberland by his Brother
Thomas, when the stock of the Percies were fading; to their Relief was invested
to the Earldom of Northumberland, which the Earl of Warwick held before; and
thereby was the 7th. Earl of Northumberland of that Family, Lord of the Honors
of Cockermouth, Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne and Bryan;
Queen Mary bestowing those Honors upon him, and his Heirs Male; (and for want
of such Issue, Then to Henry his Brother, and his Heirs Male,) by her Letters
Patents, dated the first day of May 1557: and whatsoever else of the Ancient
Patrimonies of the Earls remained, Seized, or Forfeited: But if He should die
without Issue Male, Then it should go to his Brother Henry, and his Issue Male.
And although (to Honor him the more,) Queen Elizabeth made him Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter; Yet He, (unmindful of all these Benefits,)
Conspired with Charles Earl of Westmerland, to Depose, by Force, Qu. Elizabeth;
So by Authority of Parliament he was Condemned for High Treason, and as Chief
in the Conspiracy, was beheaded at York, 14th. year of Queen Elizabeth.

Who married Anne the Daughter of Henry Somerset Earl of Worcester, and had
Issue Male, Thomas, that dyed young, and 4 Daughters; Heirs Males Extinct, And

Henry Percy 8th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of Cockermouth,
Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne and Bryan; all which Honors
he enjoyed by virtue of the Letters Patents given by Queen Mary to his Brother
Thomas, and was Created Anno 1574. He was after accused of Treason; and being
in the Tower of London, slew himself with a Dag charged with Two Bullets,
(before his Cause was heard, or that he was Arraigned,) in the Month of July
1585.

ARMS Quartered as before, Who married Katherine one of the Daughters and
Coheirs of John Nevel Lord Latimer, by whom he had Issue, 1. Henry the 9th.
Earl. 2. Thomas, who dyed young. 3. William. 4. Sir Charles Percy Knight. 5.
Sir Richard Percy Knight. 6. Sir Alan Percy Knight. 7. Sir Josceline Percy
Knight. 8. George Percy Esquire


Henry Lord Percy 9th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth, and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne, and Bryan,
and (in his Mothers right,) Lord Latimer; He was Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, by Qu. Elizabeth, in the Year of our Lord 1593.

Who married Dorothy, Daughter of Walter Devereux, Earl of Essex; by whom he
had Issue, 1. Algernon, the 10th. Earl. 2. Lord Henry, who dyed without Issue.


Algernon, the 10th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of Cockermouth
and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne, Bryan and Latimer, Knight
of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord Admiral of England, and General
over His Majesty's Forces for his Expedition 1640. and one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council: He married Two Wives: by the former he had 4
Daughters; and by the latter Wife, 1 Son, (viz.) Josceline.

Josceline, the 11th. Earl of Northumberland, Lord of the Honors of
Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-payne, Bryan and
Latimer, Deceased;

Who married Elizabeth, Daughter to the Earl of Southampton, by whom he had
Issue 1. Henry, who dyed young. 2. Elizabeth, who married the Lord Ogle. (Heirs
Males Extinct.)


The Collateral Line.

Sir Ingelram Percy, the 3d. and youngest Son of Henry Percy the 5th. Earl of
Northumberland; who married, and had Sons and Daughters, as by the Oath of Mr.
Henry Champion, who kept the Percies Books and Records; where he found what he
testified upon Oath, at the Trial between Vtting Plaintiff, and Coppleston
Defendant; He had Issue, 1. Henry Percy, 2. Robert Percy,
and 2 Daughters.

About 1559. these 4 Children were (in the time of Troubles in Queen Elizabeth's
Days) sent out of the North in Hampers, to old Dame Vaux at Haraden in
Northamptonshire, and there were brought up, preserved, and provided for.
Therefore it is concluded by all, that Sir Ingelram's Lady, (the Mother of
those Children, (must be related to Dame Vaux's Family.

The Countess Dowager of Dorset, Pembrook, and Mountgomery, said, That if the
Claimant, James Percy, were her Kinsman, he must be descended of those Children
that were sent into the South in Hampers. [Note] There were but few Coaches in
those days. Margaret that married the first Earl of Cumberland, whom the
Countess of Dorset descended from, was Sir Ingelram Percie's own Sister. And
while the Claymant was with this Lady, enquiring and delivering Declarations in
Ejectment, the Estate was all-begg'd, as his printed Book makes appear more at
large.

That which wildernized the Claymant, was, the rending the matchings of the
Percies out of the Herald's Book, and likewise the Herald-painter left Sir
Ingelram quite out of the first Pedigree.

Henry, the eldest Son of Sir Ingelram married the Daughter of one Tibott, by
whom he had Issue, 1. James Percy, who dyed about the year 1654. in Ireland,
without Issue-male. 2. William, who died young. 3. Henry.
And 3 Daughters.

Henry Percy married Lidea the Daughter of Mr. Robert Cope of Horton in
Northamptonshire, by whom he had Issue, 1. Henry, who dyed young. 2. James. 3.
Henry, who dyed young.
1 Daughter, named Elizabeth.

James, the now Claymant, born 1619. of Henry and Lidea his Wife, who was 2d.
Son of Henry, who was first Son of Sir Ingelram, who was 3d. Son of Henry, 5th.
Earl of Northumberland, who was great great Grandfather of the Claymant James
Percy, who married Sarah the Daughter of John Sayer of Norwich, Gent. by whom
he has Issue, 1. Anthony Percy, married and has a Son (viz.) Henry. 2. Henry.
3. John.


depiction of half moon

UPon a tripartine Exchange, the Countries from Trent, Sir W. Churchil's
History; fell. 257.
to the Northward, was the Lot of the Percies, in Memory whereof the same
being in the Georgraphical Form of an Malf-moon, Crescent for their Cognizance

A short Abstract of the foregoing Narrative, co-temporizing down from Henry
the 5th. Earl of Northumberland, who had as before the following (Issue) 6th.
Earl of Northumberland, Henry eldest Son, who dyed without Issue.

Thomas second Son had two Sons, both Earls. 7th. and 8th. Earls, Thomas, and
Henry, first Cousins unto -- 9th. Earl, Henry, and his Brethren, second
Cousins unto -- 10th. Earl, Algernon and his Brother, third Cousins unto --
11th. Earl, Joscelin, fourth Cousin unto -- The Lady Elizabeth Percy married to
the Lord Ogle, 5th. Cousin unto --




Sir Ingelram Percy third Son had two Sons, viz. Henry, James, Henry. James.
Anthony, -- Henry.
Henry, John.

Robert.


This may satisfy all wise Men of the Truth of this Pedigree; As for the
Claymant James Percy, he does acknowledge the mistake of claiming under Sir
Richard Percy, who was born Anno 1573. And James Percy, who was Uncle and
Godfather to the Claymant, was born 1581. So by this Account Sir Richard must
have been a Grandfather at 8 years of Age. This is an impossible thing indeed.

But here lies the Mystery, and the very Truth of this matter; and it was his
Councels advice, to fix upon a wrong party, which (said they) would be the only
way to find out the right party; For the Matches of the Percies was rent out of
the Heralds book, and Sir Ingelram Percie's Name was quite left out of the
first Pedigree, which wildernized the Claymant, and the Councels too, which
forced the Claymants Council to tell the Lords in Parliamant, that the Cause
did not lie before their Lordships, but ought to be tried before the inferior
Courts first; and if the Law could not end it, then it was to return, and come
before their Lordships again, to debate and to determine: Since which time it
has been found out by a Verdict at Law, that James Percy, is the Legitimate
Son of Henry Percy and Lidia his Wife. And upon Petitions, as in the printed
Book may appear, The Kings Most Excellent Majesty has graciously condescended
that the Lords in Parliament shall determine the said Cause.

It is hoped that this just account will abate that mistake of Clayming under
Sir Richard; for the Lord Chief Justice Hayls said at the first Trial, That the
Plaintiff had proved himself Legitimate by Father and Mother, by Grandfather
and Grandmother, but had taken his Descent too Low, he must go a step or two
Higher. And the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford said to the Jury at that Trial
against Wright for Scandal, That the Plaintiff had proved himself Legitimate,
and therefore did not examine the third part of his Witnesses; but said His
Pedigree was fully proved at a Trial before that Court. So that the Plaintiff
ought to have had a Verdict then, when Mr. Henry Champion's Oath did perfect
and fixed the Pedigree as before-declared. And the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs,
at the last Trial against Blaickstone for Scandal, and the whole Court did own
the Pedigree of the Plaintiff, only said, The Declaration was naught. When in
Truth it was debated and allowed at the first part of the Trial; which is good
Cause of Error. As the Claymant has labored to find out the Truth, even so he
does most humbly pray, That all Wise, Learned, and Conscientious men may take
Courage, like the Lord Chief Justice Hayls and his Brethren, and strictly
inquire into the very bottom of the matter, and to set aside all mistakes, and
set up Truth, and maintain and speak cordially to and for Justice; this being
the only way to clear the Innocent and put a stop to Oppression. And the
Relieved (as in Duty bound) shall ever pray for his Majesty's long Life, and
the Prosperity of Him, His Realms, and Kingdoms.

The above Claymant had two Petitions read in Council, 21 July 1680. (and
rejected) It seems it was objected, that the Man whom the Claymant claimed
under must be a Grandfather at eight years old. It is hoped the account
aforesaid will justly satisfy and procure a right understanding at the second
hearing before the Lords in Parliament And there being no president, as the
Claymant is informed, that the Orders of this House do perpetually bar, where
the party has not been fully heard.

For Henry, 5th. Earl, had Sir Ingelram, -- who had Henry, and he had Henry, --
who had James the Claymant.
This Truth is as clear as the Sun at Noonday, and blows over the misty
mistake of Claiming nnder Sir Richard Percy.

It was the putting down of the Court of Wards, and setting up of Privileges
on all sides against the true Heir-male, and the general neglect of the Heralds
in the Collateral Line, and the treacherous Actings of his Solicitor, did
obstruct and delay all this time.

Moreover, the Lord Ogle that married the Lady Elizabeth Percy, has
endeavored to change his Name from Cavendish to Percy, and also to have
obtained an Act of Parliament to settle and confirm upon him (the aforesaid
Lord Ogle) all those Lands which are annexed to the Title and Earldom of
Northumberland; which Lands formerly were firmly settled upon the Heir-males of
the Percies for ever. -- See the Records and the Verdict exemplified, and pray
a stop may be put to the Lord Ogle's Act of Parliament, by reason the Lands are
begged, bought, sold and scattered. The undoubted Right, and next Heir-male of
the Percies in Blood, and so proved at Law, and therefore he most humbly and
earnestly prays, That an Act of Parliament may be had, to restore him to his
Birthright, Title, Estate, Pre-eminence, Privileges, Place and Seat of his
Ancestors, As it has been done heretofore to several of the Percies, the Earl
of Kent and others. This being the 11th. Year of the Claim of

JAMES PERCY. Who humbly Beggs, Prays, and Cries for speedy Justice.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of JAMES PERCY, Son of Henry Percy, Grandson of Henry
Percy, Great Grandson of Sir Ingleram Percy, Great great Grandson of Henry
Percy Fifth Earl, and Cousen, and next Heir-Male to Jocelin Percy, the late and
Eleventh Earl of NORTHUMBERLAND, Deceased.
SHOWS,
THat Your Petitioner has near upon Ten Years prosecuted his Birthright, and
still continues his Claim to the Title, Honors, Manors, Lands, Preheminencies
and Privileges, that the Rights belonging to the Heirs-male of the Percies
Family, as they are annexed to the Earldom of Northumberland.

That upon the first Address Your Petitioner humbly made to your Majesty, in
order to obtain his Right, Your Majesty was Graciously pleased to return for
Answer, God forbid Your Majesty should hinder an Heir, but that He should have
the Benefit of the Law.

That upon his Application to the House of Lords (after some short pleadings,)
his Council moved, thar the Cause might be left to the Law for his
Legitimation, that he might more Regularly come before their Lordships, which
was accordingly done.

That he has (pursuant to their Lordships order) obtained a Verdict,
exemplified under the Seal of your Majesty's Court of King's Bench, That He is
truly, and legitimately descended of the Blood and Family of the Percies of
Northumberland.

That upon Your Petitioners Humble Application by way of Petition to Your
Mamesty, praying your Royal Writ of Summons, to call Your Petitioner to Sit in
the House of Lords; Your Majesty's Gracious Answer was, That You thought it not
Convenient until the Petitioners Cause was Determined by the Lords.

That the Parliament being by your Majesty's Royal Prerogative again Prorogued,
it much encourages your Petitioners Opponents, and weakens your Petitioner in
his Dependencies, having been Published in the Gazet formerly for an Impostor,
whereupon, by the (contrivance of his Solicitor) the Lands were begged in the
Name of the Duke of Monmouth, and others.

That during the time Your Petitioner was prosecuting his Right at Law, the
potent Defendants put him off so long by Privilege of Parliament, till George
Fitz-Roy was Created Earl of Northumberland: And now it is divulged in Print,
that the Lord Ogle, has changed his Name from Cavendish to Percy: All which
forces your Petitioner to fly to Your Sacred Majesty for Relief, Protection
and Justice.

That it is the Opinion of your Petitioners Council, That your Majesty of your
own Princely Prerogative, without any Declaration of the Lords, may Restore
your Petitioner to his Birthright, Title, Honors, and Estate, that depends
thereon.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays your Majesty (in whom solely lies
the Creation and preservation of Honor and Nobility) to Declare your Royal
pleasure, for his Ascending the Sphere and Dignity of his Ancestors: Or, to
graut unto your Petitioner (that has groaned under Ten Years Oppression
without decision of his Claim) such Yearly Pension as may support him, until
his Cause come to a final Determination. And Your Petitioner shall Pray, etc.
JAMES PERCY.

THis Petition was presented into your Majesty's Sacred Hand the 18. of
December 1679. and Sir William Glascow, Master in waiting, ordered the
Petitioner to call for an Answer the 22th. Instant, which the Petitioner
accordingly did; but then found no opportunity to speak with him: The
Petitioner attended the 23. instant, and then Sir William returned this Answer
by his Maidservant, That he was buisie with some Friends, and that the King
would hear nothing until after Christmas-Eolidays.

That the Petitioner went to the Secretaries Office, to get this following
Advertisement to be entered into the Gazet, but it would not be allowed; which
did much dissatisfie your Majesty's Loyal Subject, to think that the True Heir,
looking after his Birthright, should be put into the Gazet for an Impostor,
when as he has proved himself at the Court of Kings Bench, by Twelve honest
Jurymen, to be the true Percy, and the only Heir-male to the House of
Northumberland. It is very sad, when a lost Dog shall find Entrance into the
Gazet, and a Just Man be kept out. The Advertisement refused, is as follows.

Advertisement.
WHereas the Lord Ogle is published in print, to have changed his Name from
Cavendish to Percy, upon his Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth Percy, James
Percy Esquire the true Heir-Male of the Blood of the House of Northumberland, that
has stood to justify his Claim about Ten Years, and has proved himself a
Legitimate Percy in the Kings Bench, does likewise publish to the world, that
he will justify his Right durante vitae, and hopes the World will not be
deceived by any Artifice; for he desires no more but a free and final
determination of his said Claim.

Fiat Justitia and ruat Coelum. James Percy.

Notwithstanding, your Loyal Petitioner verily believes your most Excellent
Majesty is much Mis-inform'd, yet your Petitioner had not published this
Advertisement, had not he found my Lord Ogle to have changed his Name from
Cavendish to Percy, printed in Mercurius Anglicus.

But now the Petitioner is resolved, (like Hester,) by Gods powerful
Assistance, and your Majesty's gracious Acceptance, to stand up for the Name of
Percy, as that Queen kneeled down to save her people.

King Darius took Daniel out of the Lions Den, and God (in a most Miraculous
manner) Restored your Majesty to your Kingdoms: And according to the
CoronationOath, and your Majesty's Royal and Gracious Act of Free pardon and
Indemnity, the Petitioner in Justice ought to be restored to his Birthright
and Title, or such an Immediate Allowance as is usual in such Cases, to keep
the White-Horse or Honor from starving, until his Case be determined according
to the prayer of the Petition.

The President the Lord Ogles Agents will insist upon, is as follows:

NOte, the Lady Agnes Percy, would not inter-marry with the Lord Josceline De
Lovaine, Son and Heir to the Duke of Brabant, the then Queen of Englands
Brother, without he assumed her Name.

The Reason was, There was not an Heir-Male then living of the Percies;
Therefore that was done purely to preserve the Name of Percy.

But now my Cozen (the Lady Elizabeth Percies Case) is not the same: For the
Heirs-Males of the Percies are not dead, as by the Claymants printed Book
appears.

But the Mystery of assuming the Name of Percy, is as follows

AS is the Settlement of Arundel-Castle, even so is the Settlement of the
Honor of Petworth and Cockermouth, and diverse other Lands, upon the
Heirs-Males of the Percies for ever: And all those Lands so Settled, and in the
Crown, the Rents and Fines can be Recovered no ways, but under the Name of
Percy; and the Tenants have over-thrown the Ladies Agents at two several Trials
upon the same Acount.

The Petitioner commits this Cause to the Kingsmost Excellent Majesty, the
Parliament, and Liege People of England, to judge whether or no this be a Fraud
intended, or not? Therefore, I humbly beg your Majesty's Pardon: For as the
Petitioner, has often demanded the Fines and Rents of the Tenants, and they
durst not obey, by reason his Pedigree was not then proved: But now his
Pedigree is proved, to be the true Heir-Male of the Blood and Family of the
Percies of Northumberland; that they stop all their Rents in their hands, and
Prepare those Fines that have been a long time kept from the true Heir-Male.

JAMES PERCY.

To the Right Honorable Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled.
The Humble Petition of JAMES PERCY.
SHOWS,
THat this is the 11th. year of the Petitioner's Claim to the (...) and Estate
belonging to the Earldom of Northumberland.

That your Petitioner has had several Trials at Law, where he is proved a true
Percy legitimate, and no Impostor, as once a Gazer published.

That through the high Privileges, Policy and Potency of the Opponents, and
Treachery of his Solicitor, and falling area ye of some of his Council; all
which occasioned Errors both particular and general.

That as William Percy, the Brother of the Claimant, was out up to obstruct
Proceedings; and now Francis Percy Stone. Cutter is cried up, who declared
himself to be the Grandson of Thomas Percy, that was in the Gunpowder-Plot,
down in truth was the Son of Robert Percy, the Petitioner's great Uncle.

He therefore prays, That a set day may be appointed, allowing 14 days time to
summon in Witnesses, so that the Pedigree may be fully proved, that (...) true
Decision may be made according to Justice, and that Truth may be preserved, and
Errors corrected. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. JAMES PERCY.

THat whereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty has been graciously pleased to
refer the Petitioner's Cause to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament,
to Hear and Determine his said Claim to the Earldom of Northumberland.

That the Right Honorable Lords were pleased to receive the abovementioned
Petiition of James Percy the Claimant, at the Bar of the said House of Lords
the 17th of November 1680.

That your Lordships will be further graciously pleased, to Call for the said
Petition, and cause it to be Read, and appoint a day for Trial, according to
the Prayer of the aforesaid Petition, so that the Pedigree of your Petitioner
may be fully Tried, with the two Writs of Error.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. JAMES PERCY.


Die Jovis, 25. Novembris, 1680.
WHereas JAMES PERCY Esquire has brought two Writs of Error into this House; In
One of which, the said JAMES PERCY is Plaintiff, and John Blackstone Esquire is
Defendant: And in the other, Robert Utting is Plaintiff, and Sir John
Coppleston is Defendant; Upon both which Writs, the Errors being assigned, and
Issue joined: It is this Day Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
PARLIAMENT Assembled, That this House will hear the Errors upon the said Two
Writs of Error Respectively, Argued by Council at the BAR on both Parts, on
Thursday the 9th. Day of December next at Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon.
Whereof the said John Blakestone, and Sir John Copplestone respectively, are to
cause Timely Notice to be given to the said JAMES PERCY for that Purpose.

JOHN BROWN, Cleric' Parliamentor'

The Councel's Opinion, to prove the Pedigree, manifests Errors, Removes,
Mistakes and Scandals; and makes a clear way to Justice.

Therefore the following Pedigree is prepared for the Right Houourable Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament at the Day of Hearing.

To the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The Humble Petition of James Percy.
SHOWS,
THAT this is the 11th. Year of Your Petitioners Claim to the Title and Earldom
of Northumberland.

That the 9th. Instant at 10. of the Clock, is appointed the day of Hearing,
before the Right Honorable Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled.

Therefore he most humbly Prays, that Your Majesty would be graciously pleased
to be present at the hearing of the Cause, and then Your Majesty will
understand how the Moon has been set under the horrid Black Cloud of
Oppression, and to see the Moon rise into the Serene Horoscope of Justice. And
Your Petitioner shall Pray, etc. JAMES PERCY.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of James Percy, Cousin, and next Heir-Male of Josceline
Percy, late and Eleventh Earl of Northumberland, Deceased.
Shows,
THat Your Petitioner has about Ten Years, waited for the Justice of the Laws
of Your Kingdom, at his Vast Charge; and still attends the Issue of his Claim.
And being informed, that the Lord Ogle is endeavoring an Interest, to get an
Act of Parliament, for Settling the Lands of that Earldom upon him, under the
Name of Percy. And Your Majesty having always declared Your Royal Pleasure,
That You would not wrong an Innocent Heir: And Henry the Fourth Earl of
Northumberland, and John Nevell Lord Mountague, being Presidents of
Restitution, when in Default.

Your Petitioner most Humbly prays, and hopes Your Gracious Majesty will be
pleased to consider his Case; and of Your Royal Wisdom and Justice, to Restore
him to the State and Dignity of his Ancestors; having proved himself at Law, a
True Percy, of the Family and Blood of the House of Northumberland. And Your
Petitioner shall Pray, etc.

THis Petition was Presented into the King's Sacred Hand, the 25th. of
November, 1679. and the Master in waiting, his Account was much like to that of
Sir John Berkensheds. So the Claymant's Case lies wholly before the Parliament.
And therefore, most humbly prays, That if the Lord Ogle goes on, and prevails
in their Act of Parliament, that there may be a Saving put into that Act, for
James Percy, the now Claymant, and his Heirs; according to the King's Gracious
Direction.

Moreover, That the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, will be
graciously pleased to call the Pedigree of the Claymant before them; and
according to a Verdict exemplifyed under the Seal of his Majesty's Court of
King's- Bench, to Report. So that, the King's most Excellent Majesty may be
fully satisfied; and the Claymant, James Percy, may at last be Restored to the
Place and Seat of his Ancestors, Earls of Northumberland.

Do Justice; Remove Oppression; Then GOD will Bless our King, Parliament, and
People, to the Amazement of England's Enemies, and Joy to all his Majesty's
Loyal Subjects.

All New Matters are still placed in the Front of this Book, as the Directions
further cites to.

TO HIS GRACE, THE Highborn Prince, JAMES, Duke of York.
Great Sir,
I Have Petitioned your Royal Brother, our Gracious KING, to be Admitted to
speak a few words: And in the like Nature, Petitioned your Grace; but was not
Heard.

Therefore, I have made bold to Print; and prays your Patient Perusal, and to
Act for Justice.

Justice will stop my Pen, and turn my Complaints into Prayers and Thankfulness.

James Percy.
London, October. 21. 1679. Potent Adversary's Practices, prevents my
Opportunities: For I had purposed, by God's Assistance, and Your Gracious
Acceptance, to have Presented the Book my self; and hoped to obtained the
Honor, to Kissed Your Graces Hand.




This is a further Addition of what has been done since the former Additions
was added to this Printed Book; and something of Moment, which was formerly
left out.
1. A Petition to the KING, and House of Lords. 2. A Petition to the House of
Commons. 3. A Letter to a Gentleman, that did pretend he could prevail much
with the Countess. 4. A Letter to the Lord Ogle: With other Arguments and
Reasons.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty, and the Right Honorable, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal.
The Humble Petition of James Percy, Cousin, and next Heir-Male to Josceline
Percy, late Earl of Northumberland.
Shows,
THat Your Petitioner put in his Claym, as Heir to the Title, Honors, Lands,
etc. of the Percies, as Rightfully and Legitimately Descended of the Ancient
and Noble House, Nine Years ago; and still continues the same, in hopes that
he may have Justice done him.

And therefore Humbly prays Your Majesty, and Your Lordships, to hear and
determine his Right, having proved himself a True Percy at Law. And he shall
Pray, etc. James Percy.

This Petition to the King, and House of Lords, was Presented the 17th. of
October, 1679. Mr. Walker the Clark said, That nothing of Private Concerns
would be received that Day.

To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament
Assembled.
The Humble Petition of James Percy, Cousin, and next Heir-Male to Josceline
Percy, late Earl of Northumberland.
Shows,
THat Your Petitioner having Nine Years claimed, and industriously prosecuted
his Right to the Honors, Lands, etc. of the House of Northumberland; and not
yet been able to obtain a Definitive Sentence, by reason of the Potency of his
Adversaries, and the Lord Ogle, (as your Petioner is informed) endeavoring to
carry away the said Honor, upon his Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth Percy.

Your Petitioner humbly prays the Benefit of his Birthright, and an
Englishman, to be heard to his Claim, before any Conclusive Bar by Act of
Parliament. And your Petitioner shall Pray, etc. James Percy.

This Petition to the House of Commons would have been Presented the same Day;
but one of the Clarks said, It was not proper to deliver it, till the Speaker
was Chosen.

As the Claymant feared, the other Proroguement would have done him Harm; so
this last Prorogation tends to his Advantage: For he has now time to go for
Ireland, to Inform, Encourage, and Direct his Eldest Son, Anthony Percy, to
stand up to maintain the Claim of his Father; Who declares, if any thing should
happen otherwise than well, or that he should Dye, he is the next Heir
apparent; and if his Issue fail, then to his Second Brother, Henry Percy; and
if his Issue fails, then to John Percy, the Youngest Son, and his Issue: And if
it shall please God, the Claymant, his Sons, and Grandchildren should all Dye;
yet there are Percies enough, which was the Children of Robert Percy, Second
Brother of Henry Percy, the Children of Sir Ingleram Percy, and-Grand-Children
of Henry Percy, Fi^^^ Earl of Northumberland: Which Henry and Robert, was sent
out of the North in Hampers, with two Sisters, to the Lady Vaux, in Queen
Elizabeth's Days: And this the Claymant has done, to prevent the Title, and the
Estate of the Perices, from being Smugled any more, as at this day.

Moreover, if His Majesty will not give the Claymant Maintenance, nor appoint
him a Match; yet it gives the Claymant opportunity to recruit again. As he
intended to Print no more; so by God's Assistance, he shall never give over his
Claim.

The 15th. Day, the Claymant carried his False Pedigree, and the True Pedigree,
to Sir William Dugdel again, and he did promise to stand up for Justice.

This to a Gentleman, that did pretend to prevail much with the Countess.
SIR,
I Have Received my Lost Son; He is found, and returned again: All Praises be
rendered to the Almighty God; who, in his good time, can send me Peace also: For
He is Greater, than they that oppose me. We intend to visit Branford, the
Latter End of the next week, to see if you can perform your Promise to me: And,
in the mean time, if you please to present this enclosed Book, with my most
Humble Service, to the Countess Dowager of Northumberland; and tell her Honor,
I would not have presumed to have given her this Trouble, but only that Truth
might be known, and to obtain a right Understanding.

Moreover, if her Honor will be graciously pleased to hear me speak, I could
Propound that, which would silence all our Differences.

For I am like my Cousin Henry Hot Spur, who chose to lose his Life, rather
than to yield to that, which would abate his Honor and Resolution.

But when I find Justice founded upon the Basis of Reason, then I shall, by
God's Assistance, be found like a Jonathan to David. In the mean time, I remain

Your very Loving Friend, James Percy.
London, June 14th, 1679. I Lodge at Mr. Curtis his House, in Windsor-Court in
Mugwell-Street, near Cripplegate.

I Write not as an Harbenger, to prepare Provisions, but as an Herald, to
proclaim Peace to the Countess, if she please. For their Act of Parliament
shall never pass Both Houses, without Justice be absolutely Buried alive in
this our Nation; Ezekiel. 46. Verse. 18. Moreover, the Scripture says, Curse ye
him, that removes his Neighbor's Landmark.




A Letter left at Suffolk-House, for the Lord Ogle, near Charing Cross.
My Lord,
EVer since the year, 1670. I have applied my self not only in Person, but by
Letters and Friends; as the Printed Lines sets forth: And with two of my
Youngest Sons, did upon the 24th of June, 1679. wait for an Answer; But found
Things not Performed, as was expected.

Now, My Lord, by your Marrying my Cousin, the Lady Elizabeth Percy, you are
become concerned: And since I can no ways come to the Speech of her
Grandmother, be pleased, that I may speak with you, of Differences past, and
to prevent Differences to come. God direct you, even as he did King Solomon,
and young Daniel, to do, Act, and stand up for Justice: For which, I have, and
shall leave no stone unturned, till I find it. According to this enclosed
Print, I am.

My Lord, Your Honors most Humble Servant, James Percy.
June, 26. 1679. And Mr. Gee did declare to the Claymant, under
White-Hall-Wall; That if they had thought, he had had an Estate to have
Supported the Title withal, they would have Owned him long ago. If he had not
been called from his Merchandising, by God's Blessing, he might have obtained
such an Estate of his own, as would have preserved a Percy from a Nevel's Lot.
For when Henry Percy, Fourth Earl of Northumberland returned, then was he
Created Marquess Mountague.

Mr. Champion, that kept all the Records, confessed, that there was above 4000 l.
per annum, to attend the Title, before old Mr. Rogers dyed; and then Canington,
and Rodaway Lands, returned to the Percies again. And the Agents now has no
other way, but to endeavor the Lands may be settled by Act of Parliament upon
the Lord Ogle, in the Name of Percy.

The true and real Intent of the Claymant, is to satisfy King and Parliament;
so as Fraud may be prevented, and a Royal Writ of Summons may be had, to call
him to that Seat and Place of his Ancestors, Earls of Northumberland.

James Percy (10 Years Claymant) prays for Justice.




To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, the Right Honorable Lords, Spiritual and
Temporal; and to the Noble and Worthy Commons of England, Assembled in
Parliament.
THis outside Sheet was really prepared to add to this Book, to undeceive
King, Parliament, and People; and to unmask the cunning Contrivances of
Politicians, who Published the Claymant, James Percy, in the Gazet, to be an
Impostor; setting forth a Pedigree of the Claymant's younger Brother, Mr.
William Percy; pretending to undeceive the People: But their real Design was,
to wildernize the true Heir, and amuse the World. Notwithstanding, the Claymant
has at the last, proved himself the next Heir, as by a Judgment and Verdict;
and recovered Cost, as by the Verdict exemplyfied under the Seal of his
Majesty's Court of King's- Bench: And therefore, with Courage, and a clear
Soul, demands the Place and Seat of his Ancestors, as the true Heir-Male of the
Percies, and Earls of Northumberland. And therefore, the Lord Ogle (that
Married the Lady Elizabeth Percy) ought not to Assume the Name of Percy, nor
have any Settlement of the Lands, which attend the Title. For the Agents did
put in a Bill to the Right Honorable Committee of the House of Lords, to be
made an Act of Parliament, for the Settlement of the said Lands: And also,
pretended to Indemnify the Trustees, But it is rather judged, the real
Contrivance of the Trustees, was merely to bring themselves off, from giving an
Account of the main Profits, and the great Wastes, that have been Committed ever
since the Death of Josceline, the late Earl of Northumberland; which on the
Twenty-First of May next, will be Ten Years. Not many of the Persecutions have
been of that long Continuance.

An Act of Parliament may be sooner stopped; but will be hard to Reverse, though
never so Illegally obtained.

This first Sheet, added to this Book, contains the last Petition to the King,
and a short Abstract of the several Trials.

The Last Sheet was an Account to one, that desired to be satisfied, by reason
the Agents had misinformed him: But now he is really Convinced.

The Second Sheet was likewise prepared for the last Session of Parliament, and
sets forth the several Petitions, Reasons, and Transactions in the Late
Parliament. Page 1, 2, and 13, 14.

The Three Sheets containing the middle of the Book, wherein he Petitioned the
the House of Commons for their Aid; not any ways intending to Relinquish his
Right in the House of Peers.

A Narrative of the several Trials and Proceedings in the King's- Bench, before
my Lord Chief Justice Hayles, and the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford. Page 3.

The double Trial, before the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs. Page 5.

A short Abstract of the Claymant's proceedings, ever since the Death of
Josceline Percy, late and Eleventh Earl of Northumberland. Page 9.

The Pedigree of James Percy, which proves him to be Cousin, and next Heir-Male
to Josceline, the late Earl, and Heir-Male of the Body of Henry Percy, the
Fifth Earl of Northumberland; Descended from Sir Ingleram Percy, his Younger
Son, who was Innocent, and his Issue remains untainted to this Day. Page 12.

THere was a Petition presented to the King and Council: But the Result of the
Board was, The Cause lay not before them, but before the Parliament.

And the Kings most Gracious Answer to the Claimants first Petition, was, God
forbid, we should hinder an Heir, but that he should have the Benefit of the
Law.

And now, his Majesty's further Gracious Answer is, to this Last following
Petition, Presented into his Majesty's sacred Hand, the 21st. of September,
1679. as Sir John Birkenhead did inform the Petitioner, this 24th. Instant.

1. As to the Writ of Summons, to Sit in the House of Peers, His Majesty
replies, He cannot Grant it; by reason the Cause had been before the House of
Lords: And that it must be Determined by them, before his Majesty could Grant
the said Writ of Summons.

2. As for that Act of Parliament, the Lord Ogle was indeavoring to obtain; His
Majesty was further pleased to say, That the Petitioner might put in a Proviso,
that there might be a Saving to the Petitioner, and to his Heirs; as the
Counsels learned in the Law, should Advise.

To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of James Percy.
Shows,
THat Your Petitioner has these Nine Years, industriously Prosecuted his Claim
to the Titles, Honors, Privileges, Manors, and Lands, etc. that of Right
descend to him, as Cousin and next Heir-Male to Josceline Percy, late and
Eleventh Earl of Northumberland.

That there was a Bill presented to the Right Honorable Committee of Lords, the
last Session of Parliament, for the Settling all those Lands by an Act of
Parliament, that of right attends the Title and Name of your Petitioner, upon
the Lord Ogle, who Married the Lady Elizabeth Percy, and would have Assumed her
Name: Which Act would have cut off the Right of the Heir-Males of the Percies
for ever.

Notwithstanding, Your Petitioners clayming the said Honors and Lands, etc. as
aforesaid; although his Claym has not been determined these Nine Years, as
abovesaid; and now going on in the Tenth Year of his Claym.

May it therefore please Your most Excellent Majesty, to give Command for Your
Petitioner's Summons to this present Parliament; by reason Your Petitioner has
proved himself the next Heir-Male in Blood, to the Percies of Northumberland,
as by a Judgment and Verdict exemplyfied under the Seal of Your Majesty's Court
of King's Bench. Moreover, The Extremes of the Law, which Your Majesty was
Graciously pleased to refer Your Petitioner unto, and the Potency of the
Defendants is such, that it forces your Petitioner to fly to Your Royal Majesty
for Justice. And he shall ever Pray, etc.

A short Abstract of the several Trials is here-unto Annexed, to satisfy Your
Majesty.
WHereas Your Majesty was Graciously pleased, to leave Your Petitioner to the
Law; therefore, the Petitioner humbly Presents these few Lines, to show what is
proved by the Law.

First Trial in the Year 1674. The Petitioner was Plaintiff, against John
Clark, Esquire Defendant, who was the Lady Elizabeth Percies Agent, for scandalous
Words he had spoken against the Plaintiff: At which Trial Judge Hales declared,
That James Percy, the Claymant and Plaintiff, had proved himself a true Percy;
Legitimate by Father and Mother, Grandfather and Grandmother; and of the
Blood and Family of the Percies of Northumberland: And he did verily believe,
that Your Petitioner was Cousin, and next Heir-Male to Josceline Percy, the
late and Eleventh Earl of Northumberland; only he was afraid, he had taken his
Descent a little too low.

Second Trial, was upon an Ejectment for Cannington-Lands in Somersetshire;
which Lands of Right, fell to the Heirs-Males of the Percies, after the
Heirs-Males of the Rogerses was Extinct: Doubtless, it was by Misinformation,
that Your Majesty was mistaken in Your Gift. And at that Trial, the Pedigree of
Your Petitioner was fully proved; and the Plaintiff ought to have had a Verdict
for the same: But Sir John Coppleston being made Defendant in the Case,
obtained 80 l. Cost; and does violently Prosecute the Claymant and Plaintiff,
for the same. Notwithstanding, the Defendants do wrongfully possess those
Lands, and receives the Profits; and preserved themselves all along by
Privileges, for many Years; to the utter Ruin of Your Petitioner, if not
timely prevented by Your Sacred Majesty.

Third Trial, Your Petitioner proved himself Legitimate again; And not the Tyth
of the Plaintiff's Witnesses was Heard at that Trial; by reason Judge Raynsford
stood up, and said, The Pedigree was sufficiently proved by the Former Trials;
as by the Judgment and Verdict exemplyfied under the Seal of Your Majesty's
Court of King's- Bench.

Fourth Trial, the Plaintiff was forced to pay 90 l for Clark's Cost, before
the Lord of Essex's Privilege could be got off, to go on to Trial: And then
the Defendant's Council did declare in Court, That they did own the Plaintiff's
Pedigree and Title; and yet would not suffer the Plaintiff's Writings to be
Read, nor his Witnesses to be Heard; which prevented the Plaintiff from
recovering the 10000 l. Damages, which was laid in the Declaration: And for
want of Justice, the Plaintiff lies under the Burden of an Eundred Marks
Costs. Which Trial ought to be Reviewed, and the Plaintiff Relieved.

He therefore Prays, and humbly Beseeches Your most Excellent Majesty, to
remember Your own Troubles; how God delivered You out of the Oppressor's Hand:
And even so be pleased to deliver Your oppressed Petitioner, out of the Hands
of his Powerful Opponants; so that, at last, he may enjoy his Birthright in
Peace, according to Justice. And if the Petitioner be delayed longer, he must
humbly pray Your Majesty for Maintenance, as is usual in such Cases, to support
him, till he has Recovered his Right, Title and Inheritance And Your
Petitioner shall further Pray, etc.

IT is Hoped, that Your Majesty will never Condescend, that the Lord Ogle shall
assume the Name of Percy; nor that the Percies Lands shall be settled upon him,
by Act of Parliament: For the Lady Lucy gave all her Lands to the Heir-Males of
the Percies for ever. God forbid, that ever such a Fraud should be Committed in
this Nation! Especially, when the true Heir-Male has proved his Pedigree.

Moreover, Your Petitioner remains Unmarryed: And further hopes, that by God's
Providence, and Your patron-like Care, such a Match may be obtained, that will
support the Title, and raise the Percies Name to its former Splendour.

THE Proroguing the Parliament, till the Thirtyeth of October next, forces the
Claymant to make this further Complaint: For its Consequence is as prejudicial,
as Privileges have been to the Plaintiff; and as much for the Advantage of the
Agents and Defendants: Who by Privileges, Delays, and Oppression, still keeps
Possession; and the true Heir still under Persecution. For this Prorogument
falls out as pat for the Defendants, as if it had been by their own
Appointment. Had the Parliament held to Sit on the 17th. Day, then had the
Claymant had time to have put in his Petition, in Obedience to the King's
Gracious Answer and Direction, to the Right Honorable House of LORDS, to have
been called into that Right Honorable House of PEERS; To have taken the Place
and Seat of his Noble Ancestors, Earls of Northumberland, according to his
Birth - right and Title; which would have been a Means to have prevented the
Act of Parliament, for the settling Percies Lands upon the Lord Ogle, that
Married the Lady Elizabeth Percy, and that he should not Assume the Name of
Percy; and that the Fraud intended, might be prevented. But now, the Oppressors
have gained this following Advantage; The Term will be a Week old, by that time
the Parliament Sits: so that, they hope, in that time, to contrive the Claymant
into a Prison; so that he shall not be able to attend the House, when they Sit:
If they obtain their Aims, then will the Claymant further Complain to the LORDS
and COMMONS, by fresh Petitions. And in the mean time, he has prepared these
Prints, to pre-admonish the World: And that Just Men may know, that James Percy
is the true and lawful Heir; and of right, ought to enjoy the Earldom of
Northumberland: and that the Estate must attend the Title. But cruel Oppression
still keeps Possession; which forces the Claymant, to cry out aloud, again,
again, and again, for Justice: and that Property, and Right, may be preserved.
For if his Innocent, and Just Cause, should be now neglected, your Children,
and Children's Children, may be Rejected another Day. I pray God, to direct our
King, Parliament, and People; that they may fore see Things so, as to preserve
the Cood, and prevent the Evils, to come.

AMEN.
To the Honorable, The KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BVRGESSES, Of The House of
Commons, IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.
The Humble Petition of James Percy, Esquire
Shows,
THat it is now almost Nine Years, since he put in his Claym as Descended of
the house of Northumberland, and next Cozen and Heir-Male to Joscelin late Earl
of Northumberland: All which time he has Vigorously and Industriously pursued
his Right, though against so great and unequal Force and Opposition, that he
has not been able to prevail: And therefore humbly prays Leave to bring the
State of his Case, and the Narrative of his Proceedings, before this Honorable
House, Imploring their Assistance, to Appear, Mediate and Interpose, for his
Relief:

And your Petitioner shall Pray, etc.

A NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE PETITIONER, Since His Petitions were
Dismissed by the Right Honorable, the House of LORDS, and his Case left to the
Law.
IN Trinity-Term, 1674. the Petitioner brought an Action in the King's- Bench,
against John Clarke, Esquire, for Scandal and Defamation he had thrown upon
your Petitioner: Where, upon Hearing, some of his Witnesses did not appear.
Nevertheless, your Petitioner went so far on with the Proof of his Pedigree,
and Lineal Descent from the Earls of Northumberland; that the Lord Chief
Justice Hales, said in open Court; That the Plaintiff (meaning your Petitioner)
had proved himself a True Percy, of the Blood and Family of the Percies of
Northumberland, legitimate by Father and Mother, Grandfather and Grandmother;
and that he did verily believe, your Petitioner was Cousin, and next Heir -
Male of Josceline Percy, late Earl of Northumberland: But was afraid, he had
taken his Descent a little too Low; and willed him, to come better Prepared
next Trial. Whereupon your Petitioner suffered a Nonsuit. A 1. The Reason of
the Mistake in the First Pedigree, was, that the Herald-Stainer left out Sr.
Ingleram Percy, the Great Grandfather.

2. Searching in another Herald-Stayner's Book, that had been lent out; the
said Book was returned, the Leaf where the Matches of the Percies Family were
set down, according to the Alphabet, being torn out.

3. Therefore, his Counsel did advise to fix the Pedigree upon Sir Richard
Percy; and if he was found the Wrong, it would be the means to find out the
Right; as it did effect, at last.


Mistake, I hope, all will Pardon, to one under those Disadvantages the
Claimant was; who was forced to Abscond in England for his Loyalty, (and Travel
for some Years) and had not an Opportunity to aquaint himself with the Family
of Northumberland, so as to be informed of his Pedigree. The Truth is, When he
came into England, to Claim his Honor and Estate; though he knew it was his
Right, yet it was hard for him to prove his Great Grandfather, as it would be
for most (perhaps) that Condemn him, Searching in another Herald-Stayner's
Book, that had been lent out; the said Book was returned, the Leaf where the
Matches of the Percies Family were set down, according to the Alphabet, being
torn out.
when a Family is so Dispersed, and the Pedigree of the Younger Sons neglected
by the Herald.

Upon a Second Action brought i^ ^^e Court of the King's- Bench, against Sir
John Copleston, Trustee for (...) Lady Clifford; Sir John sheltred himself
under the Privilege, so long as he could: When he was forced to a Trial, your
Petitioner proved himself Cousin, and next Heir-Male of the said Josceline
Percy, late Earl of Northumberland, as follows; For, the Claimant, James
Percy, was the Son of Henry Percy, Grandson of Henry Percy, Esquire, Great
Grandson of Sir Ingleram Percy, Great great Grandson of Henry Percy, Fifth
Earl of Northumberland; So as the Court willed him to proceed to the Title of
the Lands: Unto which his Counsel replied; That the Lands must attend the
Title; That the Deeds, Evidences Books of Entries, and the Records of the
Estate were in the Possession of the Defendants. So that, at present, they were
not prepared nor instructed to proceed further than the Legitimation, and
Lineal Descent of your Petitioner, Therefore, his Counsel did advise to fix the
Pedigree upon Sir Richard Percy; and if he was found the Wrong, it would be the
means to find out the Right; as it did effect, at last.
from the Noble Family of the Earls of Northumberland.

That upon the Thirteenth of June, 1676. your Petitioner brought his Action in
Guild Hall, London, against John Blackeston, Esquire, for Scandal and
Defamation: But the Defendant moved the Court of King's- Bench, that the Action
might be removed, and brought into that Court: And that a Trial might be there
had; which was ordered accordingly. And the Seventh of May they appointed to
Hear the Cause: The Petitioner humbly submitted to the Pleasure of the Court.
And your Petitioner, and the Defendant, having some few Weeks before the said
Time of the Trial, by Consent, attended the Master of the Office, and settled a
Jury: Your Petitioner prepared for a Trial, and brought up from many, and some
very remote Parts of the Kingdom, Sixty-five Witnesses, all in Court; whose
Travels to and fro, upon Calculation, amounted to above Four Thousand Miles;
and had Fourteen Learned Councels at the Bar: The Charges of all amounting to
about Four Hundred Pound. And thus prepared, brought on the Cause to a Hearing
the Day appointed: When imediately the Defendant's Counsel insisted upon the
Privilege of the Countess Dowager of Northumberland, in Protecting her
Servants and Agents; The said John Blackeston being Steward of her Courts, and
pretended Receiver of her Rents; and that he was upon the said Employment.
Whereupon all your Petitioner's Counsels refused to Plead, although the Court
would have Heard them, and proceeded to Trial of the Cause: But the Council
replied, They had no mind to go to the Tower; some of them having been there
before. And thus the Trial was put off.

Whereupon Mr. Justice Wild (hearing these Things) stood up, and said in open
Court; Fie, fie, Gentlemen! Is this a Time to insist upon Privileges? when you
forced the Plaintiff to a Trial, and have put him to so great Expense, Travel,
and Labor? You do but cast Cold Water upon your Cause. It is not the first time
this Cause has been before this Court.

When Mr. Blackeston was asked, Whether he went to London, to look after
Percy's Trial? he said, It concerns me not; for the Countess of Northumberland
is to bear me Harmless.

Upon the Fourteenth of May, 1678. there was a Trial had at the King's-
Bench-Bar, Westminster, for Scandalizing the Petitioner's Right and Title;
where-on a Verdict was given for Three Hundred Pound Damages to the
Petitioner, and Judgment obtained thereon: As by the said Judgment, exemplifyed
under the Seal of the Court, appears.

Lastly, That your Petitioner has been all a-long perplexed and troubled by
many Suits at Law, unjustly Commenced against him by the Agents of the
Defendants, or some of them; on purpose to Tire him out, and Ruin him by
Chargeable Defenses: For it is now almost Eight Years, since he began his
Claim. And therefore, Humbly prays this most High and Honorable Court, to
open some way for the Hearing and Determination of this his Just Claim; as it
shall in your Mature Wisdoms seem meet and convenient, for the Preserving
Property and Right.

This further Complaint since the Late PARLIAMENT was Prorogued and Dissolved.
Percy is Plaintiff;

Blackeston the Defendant.

In Banco Regis, Mich. Term.

MR. Blackeston being Steward to the Lady Elizabeth Percy, and the Countess
Dowager of Northumberland, being her Guardian; the said Blackeston stood upon
the Countesses Privilege; until, upon another Occasion, the Duke of Monmouth,
by an Order of the House of LORDS, took off the Countesses Privileges, as to
the Guardian-ship.

Then Mr. Blackeston sheltered himself under the Earl of Essexes Privilege;
until the Plaintiff put his Petition into the House of LORDS, that Mr.
Blackeston might not be Privileged by the said Earl.

Upon which, the Earl agreed with the Plaintiff's Counsel, That if the Ninety
Pound Costs, that was unpaid upon the Nonsuit between Percy Plaintiff, and
Clarke Defendant, were paid; that then Mr. Blackeston should not stand upon
Privilege, but go to a Trial; which he accordingly did, in his Majesty's
Court of King's- Bench. Before which time, in the said Term, the Plaintiff's
Council informed the Court, what the Earl had agreed unto.

Then the Lord Chief Justice stood up, and said to the Plaintiff; That the Earl
of Essex did promise upon his Honor, to set aside his Privilege; and that the
Plaintiff should have a Trial against Mr. Blackeston this Term, if the
Plaintiff paid Mr. Clarke's Costs first: And we do promise, the Plaintiff shall
have a fair Trial.

The Plaintiff thereupon paid the said Ninety Pound Costs into the Court
accordingly.

Monday the Eleventh of November, the Plaintiff brought on his Trial: The
Declaration being read, Counselor Scroggs opened the Cause; and upon a Word in
the Declaration, there was some Debate: But it was waved, the Declaration
allowed, and the Scandalous Words in the Declaration proved.

Mr. Attorney General moved, that the VVitnesses might be heard, to prove the
Pedigree upward; it being the better way to Satisfy the Court, and to Inform
the Jury: And withal, said; That his Clyant had no better way to prove his
Pedigree, but by his Action of Slander: For he has delivered Declarations in
Ejectment, in several Countries; and the Lands are all in great Persons Hands,
which still delay him by Privileges. Then was the Pedigrees delivered to the
Judges.

But the Lord Chief Justice said; What need we trouble the Court, to Examine
all these Witnesses, if there be no Lands? Therefore, let us see first, what
Lands there are, to make good the Declaration. The Plaintiff produced Records
out of the Tower, and other Places; which made out, That the Lady Lucies Lands
in Cumberland, and other Countries, were settled upon the Heirs-Males of the
Percies for ever, upon the Payment of Three Hundred Pound to the KING, etc. and
Quartering the said Lucies Coat of Arms with the Percies.

Here the Defendant's Counsel started up an Attainder, which the Plaintiff's
Counsel was not ready to Answer; the Plaintiff's Solicitor having made no
Provision against the said Attainder; being confident, that Attainder could not
Hurt nor Prejudice the Trial. And this caused the Jury to be withdrawn.

The Jury appeared three several Times in this Cause; which was occasioned by
the Delays and Privileges, which the Defendant sheltred himself under. The
Plaintiff paid all the Jury, and the Ninety Pound was to be continued in Court,
till there had been a Fair Trial: But upon a Motion of the Defendant's Counsel,
there was a Peremptory Rule granted, to take the Money out of Court; which was
accordingly paid to the Defendant.

The Second Part of the Trial should have been had in Michaelmass-Term, 1678.
while the Witnesses were in Town: But the Trial of Mr. Stayley prevented it; So
that, the Plaintiff's Trial was put off till Hillary-Term following, viz. 27th.
January, 1678.

The Defendant's Counsel moved the Court the first Day of Hillary-Term, for a
New Jury, and a longer Time; pretending, they had but Seven days Notice: When
in Truth, the Defendant's Attorney had a Months Notice by the Plaintiff, and
Twelve days Notice by the Plaintiff's Atturneys Clark. Upon which the Court
gave a Rule for Seven days longer, and for a New Jury; which was Appointed
accordingly.

Then the Defendant's Counsel afterward moved the Court for a longer Day, by
reason that their Writings were mis-placed by the Fire in the Temple; which
further Day was granted, till Thursday, the Sixth of February; and no Costs
considered to the Plaintiff, for keeping his Witnesses in Town all that Time,
notwithstanding the Plaintiff's Counsel moved for Costs.

Note, The Lord Chief Justice Hales, in the Case of Percy Plaintiff, and Clarke
Defendant: The Defendant's Counsel moved the Court for Seven Days time,
pretending they were not Prepared: And the Rule of Court was to pay Thirty-Five
Pound to the Plaintiff, to maintain his Witnesses in Town for that time; which
was paid.

Now, on the Sixth of February, 1678. the Trial came on again: The New Jury did
appear; the Declaration was read; and Councellor Scroggs opened the Cause, as
he did before. And one of the Witnesses was called to prove the Words: And when
he appeared, the Court acknowledged, he had proved the Words sufficiently
before. And the Defendant's Counsel made no Objection against the Declaration.

So the Trial was to go on, where it broake off: The Records of the Patents in
Queen Mary's time; one for the Barony, and the other for the Earldom, produced:
And he that was the Clark, that Examined them, appeared; but was not suffered
to prove them upon Oath.

Note, The aforesaid Clark of the Rolls not appearing upon the last Trial, was
the Cause of withdrawing the Jury.

Then when the Court saw the Plaintiff was ready to Answer to their Objections,
declared, That the Plaintiff was Descended Paramount the Attainders: And did
own, the Attaint could not hurt the Plaintiff.

Then Mr. Attorney General moved, as at the first Part of the Trial, That the
VVitnesses might be Examined, to prove the Pedigree.

VVhereupon, the Defendant's Counsel started up an Act of Parliament,
concerning the Exchange of Lands, between King Henry the Eighth, and Henry
Percy, the Sixth Earl of Northumberland, and others.

The Plaintiff's Counsel replied; Here is the same Act, with several Savings:
That Saving of the Lady Lucies Lands was read, till it came to Sir John Melton.
Then

The Lord Chief Justice replied; This does not concern you: There are no Lands,
but are all given away by that Act of Parliament.

The Plaintiff humbly replied; The Melton's could not Claim, so long as there
was an Heir-Male of the Percies living. And the Lady Elizabeth Percy, keeps in
Possession of the Lady Lueies Lands; to which she has no Right, as she is the
Heir-Temale: For her Agents had Two Trials against the Tennants, and she was
Overthrown in both. Therefore, the Plaintiff's VVitnesses ought to be heard,
that his Pedigree may be fully proved: This will wash the Scandal clear off the
Plaintiff, from that Brand of an Imposture set forth in the Gazet; And present
the Claimant's Cause fairly to the KING, and the House of LORDS.

The Lord Chief Justice said; What will you prove the Pedigree for, when there
are no Lands to support the Title?

The Plaintiff replied; And what have we to do with Lands, if we do not prove
the Pedigree?

The Plaintiff prayed, That the Saving might be Read, concerning Somersetshire
Lands; for which Sir John Coppleston is Trustee: Which Lands were begged of His
Majesty; and kept under pretense, that there is no Heir-Male of the Percies
living. The Lady Elizabeth Percy, claims no Right therein: But if she were in
Possession of the Lands, she would endeavor to keep them; as they do by the
Lands, claimed by the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff also prayed, The Record might be Read, concerning the Lands the
Duke of Monmouth had Recovered at a Trial, against the Countess of
Northumberland; under pretense, there was no Heir-Male of the Percies (which
was not allowed by the Court to be read); although the Duke was pleased
sometime to say, He had no Right to those Lands, if there was an Heir-Male of
the Percies living.

The Plaintiff produces the Patent of Restitution, in Edward the Sixth's Time,
to Thomas Percy, the Son of Sir Thomas Percy, that Rebelled. Likewise, the Two
Patents of the New Creation, of the Barony and Earldom, to Thomas and Henry;
Granted by King Philip, and Queen Mary.

And an Act of Parliament, in Queen Elizabeth's Time; which Act, if it had been
Read, it would have Encouraged the Plaintiff's Counsel, to have pleaded an
Abatement to that Act, profusely Condescended unto by Henry Percy, Sixth Earl
of Northumberland; in the Time of King Henry the Eighth, when the said Earl had
no Heirs-Males of his own Body.

Two Orders of the House of LORDS: The First in King Charles the First, his
Days: Then Resolved upon the Question, Nemine Contradicente; That no Person,
that has any Honor in him, and a Peer, may Alien, or Transfer the Honor to
any other Person. Resolved, etc. That no Peer of this Realm can Drown or
Extinguish his Honor, (but that it Descend to his Descendants) neither by
Surrender, Grant, Fine, nor any other Conveyance to the KING.

The Second in King Charles the Second's Time; Resolved, and Adjudged, That no
Fine Levied, or at any time here-after to be Levied to the King, can bar such
Titles of Honor, or the Right of any Person, claiming such Title under him,
that Levied, or shall Levy such Fine.

Moreover; Charles 2d. Act of Oblivion.
The KING's Gracious Act of Free Pardon, Oblivion, and Indemnity at Breda; If
it Extended to Rebels, then well may Royalists claim their Birthrights.

By the Pedigree from Henry, the First Earl of Northumberland, to Josceline
Percy, the Eleventh Earl of Northumberland: After every Rebellion in the
Head-Line, there were still New Creations and New Restitutions in Blood, to the
Heirs-Males of the Head-Line, that was Attainted: If so, then great Reason the
Collateral Line, that proves Innocent; should claim their Birthright, after
the Head-Line is spent. Therefore, it is requisite, the Pedigree should be
fully proved up to his Great-Grand-Father.

The Defendant's Counsel replied; We own your Pedigree, and your Title: But
would not suffer any more of the Writings to be Read, nor the Witnesses to be
Examined.

The Plaintiff replied; What will the Owning signify, if you will not suffer
him to prove his Pedigree? If you will not examine the Witnesses, be pleased to
Confirm what you own, by a Rule in Court.

The Lord Chief Justice thereupon said; Confirm, or not Confirm, the
Declaration is naught: Discharge Blackeston from the Suit of Percy. Whereupon
the Plaintiff was Nonsuited: And the Costs are Taxed to 100. Marks, without
any Consideration of the Plaintiff's vast Charge he was put to, by the
Defendant's Delays, and Puttings-off by Privileges: As by this, and the
former Trials does appear.

And the Plaintiffs own Counsel are of Opinion; That there is no Relief in this
Case at Law, but by Act of Parliament: And therefore, has prepared his Bill;
And prays, It may find Admittance.

A Short ABSTRACT of the Claymant's Proceedings ever since the Death of
Josceline Percy, late Earl of Northumberland.
1. UPon the 11th. of October, 1670. the Claymant Landed in England: First
applied himself to the Senior Countess Dowager of Northumberland; And she was
pleased, to send him to the Junior Countess: And then it was Reported, she was
with Child.

2. The Claymant did then forbear, till Time made out to the contrary. And on
the Third Day of February, 1671. he put in his Caveat and Claym, as follows:

James Percy, Esquire as Cozen, and next Heir-Male of the Right Honorable Josceline
Lord Percy, and Earl of Northumberland, lately Deceased, does Claym the Title,
Style, Honor, and Dignity of Baron Percy, and Earl of Northumberland, Cum
pertinentijs; and the Annual Rent or Fee of Twenty Pound, wherewith the said
Dignity and Honor was, and is Endowed, payable by the Sheriff of
Northumberland, out of the same County: And humbly desires a Legal Trial of his
Right herein; and that no Grant in the interim may be made thereof, being his
Inheritance and Birthright. Dated under my Hand, this Third Day of February,
1671.

JAMES PERCY.
Copia Vera, Entered into the Signet-Office, at White Hall.
3. He met with Mr. Henry Champion, and Mr. Orlando Gee, at Dr. Lamplughs; and
prayed them, to inform him of his Great-Grand-Father: But they rather took
Advantage of his Ignorance. But, Mr. Henry Champion did very honestly upon his
Oath, at Sir John Coppleston's Trial, declare, That Sir Inglexam Percy was
Married, and had Sons and Daughters; which did not only time, but fix the
Claymant's Pedigree. Sir Ingleram Percy being left out of the First Pedigree,
did much Wildernize the Claymant.

4. The Claymant petitioned the KING, and his Gracious Answer was; God Forbid,
we should hinder an Heir; but that he should have the Benefit of the Law.

5. Also, he Applied himself to the Earl Marshal, supposing to have been
Relieved by the Court of Honor; but his Expectations failed there.

6. Then he Applied himself to the LORDS, Spiritual and Temporal, Assembled in
Parliament; and they likewise, upon the Motion of Sir Francis pemberton,
Sergeant at Law, Counselor for the Plaintiff, dismissed his Petitions; and so he
was left to the Law.

7. Then his Solicitor advised the Claymant, (by reason the Court of Wards was
Dissolved by an Act of Parliament, 12. Car. 2. c. 24.) to Sue by way of Quo
Warranto; and Presented it to the then Attorney General, but was not allowed:
Whereupon no Inquisition, post mortem, was, or could be obtained, after the
Deaths of the Two last Earls of Northumberland; viz. Algernoone, and Josceline;
which, if it might have been had, this Claymant, without doubt, or question,
would have been found by the Jury, to have been the Cousin, and next Heir-Male
to Josceline, the late Deceased-Earl of Northumberland.

8. Then the Claymant applied himself to Sir Edward Walker, the KING's Herald
at Arms; who was very Rough at first; but at last, was more Complyant; and did
direct the Claymant in his Pedigree. And on the Day that the Pedigree was
Finished, the Claymant went to show it him; and found him so ill, that he Died
the next Day: And therefore, was prevented of his further Assistance.

9. The Claymant's Solicitor abused him, and caused several Lands to be begged
by several Persons, in the Name of the Duke of Monmouth, when he was in France:
At his Return, the Claymant went to Windfor, to tender his Respects to him; and
to prevent Differences, being loath to contend against a Person of his High
Quality. And he most Graciously Complied, and told the Complaynant; That he
should have a Fair Trial at Law: And if the Claymant proved himself Heir-Male,
God forbid, he should hinder him. Upon which, the Plaintiff returned with great
Joy; posted away into Northumberland, and delivered Declarations in Ejectment,
upon those Lands the Duke had Recovered of the Countess, upon pretense there
was no Heir-Male of the Family of the Percies Living. But when the Claymant was
bringing the Trial on, Privilege was fet up: Whereupon, the Claymant went to
Mr. Rosse, the Duke's Secretary, to know, why it was so, when the Duke did
promise, He would not stand upon Privileges; but a Fair Trial should be had?
Mr. Rosse Replied, The Duke could not set aside his Privilege. To declare, how
many Persons, and how often the Claymant has been put off by Privileges, would
be too tedious for the Reader.

10. When the Guardianship came to the Senior Countess Dowager the Claymant
writ to her, and Craved her Answer; and sent his Servant with the Letter, to
Sion-House: And her Answer was, That she would not return any Answer in
Writing. The Claymant writ also to the Junior Countess, and sent Friends to
Intercede. He likewise writ to Mr. Champion, and to Mr. Gee, and Mr. Clarke
several times: And at one time, before the Trial with Mr. Clarke, they would
have owned the Plaintiff, to set him up; but broke off upon Terms: Although the
Plaintiff was forced to suffer a Nonsuit; yet that Trial, and the Opinion of
the Lord Chief Justice Hales, convinced Sir Edward Walker, and the World. And
this Clause is put in, merely to satisfy the World; Because some say, The
Countess has reported, what she would do for an Heir-Male, of a true Percy.
Others report, That the Claymant is so Stout, that he scorned to Apply himself
to them. The Claymant has Submitted beyond Reason, Law, and Equity; God
himself is the Claymant's Witness: For, he has set to his Seal a Cressant; a
Badge, which belongs to the Percies Family, which he was Born into the World
with; and is Descended of a Family, of near Thirty Generations: For William
Lord Percy, was the Fifth Generation, and came in with William the Conqueror
into England. And consequently, the Claymant is by Matches, from Henry the
Fourth Emperor, and of the Royal Blood of England, Legitimate by Father and
Mother, Grandfather and Grandmother, great Grandfather and great
Grandmother; as by the Oath of Mr. Henry Champion, in open Court: Whose great
Grandfather, Sir Ingleram Percy, was the Third Son of Henry Percy, Fifth Earl
of Northumberland.

11. It is to be observed, That at that very Trial, the Judgment and Verdict
was Exemplified, under the Seal of his Majesty's Court of King's- Bench: When
the Plaintiff, James Percy, had proved his Father Henry Percy Married Lydia
Cope, his Mother, at Horton in Northamptonshire; and that they had two
Children, Henry and Elizabeth, both Elder than the Plaintiff. This did abate
the Scandal of Bastard and Imposture: And my Lord Chief Justice Rainsford,
stood up, and said; Gentlemen of the Jury, This is enough to prove the Claymant
Legitimate: We know his Pedigree, and that it must be heard before others. It
is humbly supposed, he meant, before the KING's most Excellent Majesty, and the
Right Honorable, the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.

Therefore the Complaynant, after almost Nine years Prosecution of his Right,
is forced, in order to satisfy all Impartial Readers, to present this his Case
to the Public View: If by any means (for the Honor of Justice, which
Establishes the Throne, and every Freeborn Subject in his Right) he may be
Restored to the Place and Seat of his Ancestors; there being many Presidents in
his own Family, that of the Earls of Kent, and others of the like Nature.

The PEDIGREE.
HEnry Percy, First Earl of Northumberland, Created by King Richard the Second;
Had Issue Henry, called Hotspur: Both Father and Son Attainted. Left Issue Male.

Henry Percy, Grandson, was Restored by King Henry the Fifth; and made the
Second Earl of Northumberland. Left Issue-Male.

Henry Percy, Third Earl of Northumberland, taking Part with King Henry the
Sixth, was Slain. Left Issue-Male.

Henry Percy, Fourth Earl of Northumberland, after the Surrender of John Nevel,
Lord Mountague, was Restored; and was Slain, in Performing his Duty for King
Henry the Seventh. Left Issue-Male.

Henry Percy, Fifth Earl of Northumberland, left Issue Three Sons, viz.

1. Henry Percy, 6 Earl, Dyed without Issue. 2. Sir Thomas Percy, 2. Son, was
Attainted, and Executed, in his Brother's Lifetime. Left Issue-Males. Sir
Thomas Percy, First Son, Created Seventh Earl of Northumberland, by Queen Mary,
after John Duke of Northumberland was Beheaded: And left no Issue-Male. Sir
Henry Percy, Second Son of Sir Thomas Percy, that was Attainted, as abovesaid,
in King Henry the Eighth's Time, and was the Eighth Earl of Northamberland, and
left Issue-Males. [Note, the Mistake:] Sir Richard Percy was this Henry Percy's
Son. So that, Sir Richard is found too Young by the Great Pedigree, to be the
Clavmant's great Grandfather. Henry Percy, 9 Earl of Northumberland, left
Issue-Male. Algernoon Percy, 10 Earl of Northumberland, left Issue-Male.
Josceline Percy, 11 Earl of Northumberland, Dyed, and left no Issue-Male.



3. Sir Ingleram Percy, Third Son, left Issue-Males. Henry Percy, Eldest Son
and Heir, left Issue-Males. James Percy, First Son, Dyed without Issue-Male.
Henry Percy, Second Son, left Issue-Males. Henry Percy, First Son, dyed Young,
left no Issue. James Percy, the now Claymant, second Son, has Three Sons.



It is to be observed, The Herald-Stainer in the First Pedigree, did leave out
Sir Ingleram; and likewise at another Herald-Stainers, where the Claymant found
out the best In elligence: There he found that Leaf wanting of the Marriages of
the Percies, which the Alphabet Directed unto; which much obstructed the
Claymant's Endtavours.

More-over, It is said in Printed Books; That Thomas Rebelled about the first
Difference in Religion: But judicious Men judge, it was the Profuseness of his
Brother, in endeavoring to give away that, which in Law and Equity he ought
not to do: Doubtless, this did Aggravate. And upon this Consideration, was the
Lands given back to the Sons. And if the Issue of a Rebellious Son be Restored,
great Reason the Innocent should Enjoy his Birthright.

And whereas there are diverse Lands annexed to the Title, and settled upon the
Heirs-Males of the Percies for ever; which Lands are wrongfully Possessed by the
Females: And that by the Fraudulent Practice of his Solicitor, other Lands are
Begged, Bought, Sold, and Exchanged: So that, no Decision can be had by Law.
Therefore humbly prays, As he is yet a Commoner, and a Freeborn Subject of
England, that he may be Relieved by Act of Parliament, as is usual in such
Cases.

By doing Justice in this your Day, may prevent the like Troubles from falling
upon some of yours another Day.

He humbly remains a Faithful Servant to God, to the King, and to his Country.

For the want of the Court of Wards, and the Court of Honors, forced the
Claymant to Publish these Complaints.

James Percy.

(...) This Following Account, I hope, will satisfy You, and the whole World.
Worthy Sir,
Consul Tooker informs me, that you declare, that if you were satisfied in my
Pedigree, you would use your uttermost endeavor for Justice and Truth: Sir,
When I Lodged at Doctor Chamberlines, you came to me, and informed me of
William Percy; I then took two Witnesses, and went to him, and said, Cozen, I
know my self to be next if Kin to Earl Percy that is dead, but cannot make out
my great Grandfather; I pray tell me, whom do you Claim under. He said, My
Fathers name was Henry Percy, and my Mothers Name was Mary Varnun, that lived
with Madam Cope in Northampton- Shire. James replied, My Fathers name was Henry
Percy, and my Mothers name was Lydia Cope, and Dame Cope her Mother, was my
Grandmother: William replied, Certainly you are my brother; for I was told I
had a brother living, but where he lived, and what became of him, I never heard
till now. Col. William Ayrs said, What Henry Percy was your Father? and whose
brother was he? William replied, he was the Earls brother, as the Agents told
him; for he knew nothing but what they told him? James Percy replied; but my
Fathers Elder brothers name was James Percy, and was my Godfather, and he
never had but one Daughter: and James my Uncle, and Henry my Father were the
Sons of Henry Percy of Pavenham in Bedfordshire, and my Grandfather was sent
out of the North in Hampiers to old Madam Vaux in Northamptonshire, when the
Percies were in trouble in Queen Elizabeth days, and it is my Grandfathers
Father I cannot find, which would fix the Pedigree: Insomuch, as the Counsels
were at a stand; but was of Opinion, that by fixing on a wrong Person, was the
only way to find out the Right. Note, that the aforegoing is enough to satisfy
any reasonable man, that James Percy and William Percy must be brothers; for
Henry Lord Percy was never Married. Now Henry the Father of this James was
Married to Lydia Cope in the year 1614, as by the Register Book, and this True
Claymant James Percy was born 1619. And there was Henry and Elizabeth, both
elder than James; then what signifies William the Son of Mary Varnun, who was
born in the Year 1627: which proves him an Aprentiship Younger; but if he
proves his Mother Married to our Father, then he ought to go by the Name of
William Percy; and if not Married, then to go by the Name of William Varnun. I
should never have uncovered my Fathers Nakedness, had not my brother (and
wicked Agents, and men hard of belief) forced me to it; therefore mark well the
following practices.

1. When James Percy the Claymant was at a loss, and could not find his great
Grandfather, then the Agents put William Percy to Claim under Henry Lord
Percy, Algernoon the Tenth Earls brother.

2. When James Claimed under Sir Richard Percy, then they put out a Pedigree,
pretending to undeceive the people; and there my younger brother is pretended
to descend from William Percy the elder brother of Sir Richard Percy; so
cunningly placing of the Younger brother, before the Elder, the more to
wildernize the elder brother, and amuse the World.

3. When the Trial was to be had against Clark, then they would have owned the
Claimant James Percy, and set him up in all have; as the Book relates more at
large, at the Trial before Judge Hales.

4. Further; to keep the Elder brother James Percy in darkness, the Leaf in the
Heralds book was rent out, concerning the Matches of the Percies.

5. The Herald that drew the first Pedigree left Sir Ingleram Percy out; yet by
Judge Hales direction, and Sir Edward Walkers, and the help of Friends, the
Truth was found out at last according to the Counsels direction;
notwithstanding their setting him forth in the Gazzets to be an Imposter.

6. When he first went into the North, to deliver declarations in Ejectments,
James Percy the Claymant, was poisoned at New-Gastle; and, at York, was
arrested on two several Actions of 20000l. each Action: and for the bits and
half Trials, I have at vast Charges and pains obtained, I refer you to the
Book, wherein is not a Tyth of the Complaints and Wrongs done and Committed by
the Agents.

7. Remember how Clark dyed in the North, and how Mr. Champion dyed in the
South, who did to his power blindfold the Truth; Note also, after Clark's
Trial, I went to Mr. Champions house at Thistle-worth, and told him, That God
would revenge my innocent Cause; for certainly there would a Curse attend such
horrid practices so unjustly continued against the True Heir that was owned by
Judges and Juries: and all wise men that understand what they read, may easily
discern Truth from Falsehood: and to that end doubtless, the great God has set
to his Seal, the Half Moon, (a badge belonging to the Percys) a Crescent or
Mole upon the True brother, and Heir of the Percies. Now if men will be of such
hard belief, God will show Wonders, before Truth shall be Overthrown and
Trampled under Foot. This acount, I hope, will confirm your Judgment, and
cause you to embrace the Truth.

Take these further Arguments and Reasons.
MR. Henry Champion ownes, that Henry Percy that lived with my Lord Bacon, was
the right Heir, had he lived; and that William was his Son: So Mr. Bushel and
Mr. Fleetwood would often tell me, the Claymant James Percy, that they were
fellow servants with my Father, Henry Percy; and have often heard Joscelin
Percy, and the rest of those Eight brethren, call Henry the Father of James
Cozen, and were wondrous familier when they met at my Lord Bacons; Had that
Lord continued in prosperity, Henry Percy his servant, had not known so much
misery, nor James Percy ( Henry's Son) had not run through the Gantlets of
extremities. Mr. Champion could have done Justice at that meeting at Doctor
Lamplues, if he had pleased; but he rather takes advantage at the Claymants
weakness. We shall say no more of him, but he that blows out his Neighbors
Candle wilfully, may want light justly, before he dies.

Furthermore, it is well known, that Henry Percy, the Father of James and
William, took his wife Lydia, and her Children, and carried them to Dunington
in Lincolnshire, and there left them; and then took Mary Varnun (the Servant of
Dame Cope) and carry's her to London; at which old Henry the Nineth Earl was
Angry; if things had been right, he would have scorned to have seen William to
have been brought up by the Parish. Had Justice Scroggs suffered the Witnesses,
to speak at the Trial, it would have been sufficiently proved, that James Percy
and Henry Percy were brothers; and the Son's of Henry Percy, that was sent out
of the North in Hampiers, and was so owned by Henry the Nine Earl, and his
seven brethren, and did often visit each other.

Furthermore, Algernoon the Tenth Earl, did own James, the Uncle in Ireland, to
be the next Heir, if his Brother Henry Lord Percy, died without Issue Male of
his Body, [ Note, Josceline was not then Born] and sent James Percy, the Uncle
of James the Claymant, 100 l. into Ireland; and likewise, did often own James
Percy, the Trunckmaker; and give him money, and acknowledged, That he was the
next Heir-male, if his Son should dye, and leave no Heire-males of his Body.

Moreover, Henry Lord Percy (brother to Algernoon) the tenth Earl, did declare
on his Deathbed, that James Percy a Trunckmaker, was the next Heir, if his
Brothers Son should die.

And also Joscelin the eleventh Earl beyond Sea, did declare, upon his
deathbed, That James Percy the Trunck-maker in Ireland, was the next Heir-Male,
if he were living; and Cried out, Oh that he were here now. And as for William
Percy, alias Varnun, he was never owned by any, but Mr. Champion, who
endeavored to act the part of Jacobs Mother; Had Henry Percy (the Father of
James the Claymant) lived in these times, he needed not to have Fled for his
Crime: Could James Percy have had a fair Trial, he would have printed no more.

But, when you came first to me, I showed you a Mold like a Half Moon upon my
Body, (born into the World with it) as has been the like on some of the
Percy's formerly; now, search William Percy, and see if God has marked him so;
surely, God did foresee the troubles, although the Law takes no notice: But God
makes a true decision, even as he was pleased, to make Esau hairy, and Jacob
smooth; if I (like old Father Isaac) could not See (through the mist of
Ignorance, and misguidements of Politicians) the right road of my Pedigree; yet
now by Providence, I can (like old Tobias) see perfectly the Rebeccaical
Actions, that has been practiced against me, and how they endeavor to steal
away my Birthright, and my Blessing too.

And since it is your desire, to be satisfied, be pleased patiently to hear a
little of my Solicitors Treacherous Practices, as Mr. Champion was pleased to
say to me in the Temple-Walks: Mr. Percy, who helped you to your Solicitor? I
replied; I believe your self, or the Devil sent him to me.

This Solicitor Mr. Tho. Swayne, persuades me into Articles; then carries me
down to Pimborne in Dorset-shire, to his own House, pretending to carry me to
old Mr. Roger's of Canington in Somersetshire; saying, He did not doubt, but
upon reasonable terms, to prevail with the old man, to put me in possession of
the Estate, in his life time. But when he had put me to so vast Charges, then
he pretended, he might get his Brains beat out; for he was informed, he was an
Old Cross Fellow, and therefore he would not go. The next Project he had, was,
That I had great Persons to deal withal; and I must get Courtiers that were in
the Kings Favor, and he was well acquainted with them; but he would apply
himself first, to the Lord Newport, and propound a Match for one of his
Daughters, to my Eldest Son; but instead of the Match, the Lord Newport had
begged the Lands, for the Duke of Monmouth; when in truth, the Duke was in
France; and Cannington Lands was begged by other Courtiers, by the Contrivance
of the Solicitor; unknown, and altogether against the Opinion or Consent of
James Percy, the Claimant; and when the Solicitor saw the Clyant so enraged;
says he, The Lord of Newport can do what he pleases with the Duke of Monmouth;
so that the Duke upon the Match, should return the Lands again. But when Percy
would not be satisfied, then Swayne would meet with him at my Lord Newport's
Lodgings, at Whitehal: Percy met at the Hour appointed, ( Swayne being then
with the Lord); but Percy was denied. The next day, Swayne gave Percy a Letter
to the Lord, to satisfy himself. The Lord answered him, Mr. Percy, You must
believe your Solicitor. But being earnest with my Lord, he replied; Mr. Percy,
If you will trust to me, I will be your Faithful Friend: But the Truth is, I
dare not appear publicly for you, I am so near related to that Family.
Whereupon Percy replied; Nay, my Lord, if you dare not appear publicly for me,
I dare not trust you privately: So prayed God to Bless him, and took Leave to
depart.

Then Swayne the Solicitor, contrived three Suits at Law, against Percy his
Clyant, which lasted Three Years; and Percy cast Swayne in all the three
Actions, but could not catch him for his Costs.

And now the Duke of Monmouth has Sold those Lands that was begged, and was
worth Nine or Ten Thousand Pound per annum, for Twelve Thousand Pound: But Six
Thousand for the Duke's part; and the Lord Newport, and others, had the
Remainder; as the Claymant is informed.

Note, In that Act of Parliament, which Henry Percy, Sixth Earl, was so
profuse, in Letting long Leases to his Servants, Tenants, and others; and
Exchanging those Lands, which of right he ought not to do: Yet there was many
Savings in that Act, which was settled upon the Heir-Males of the Percies for
ever; which would not be suffered to be read at the Trials. But Learned
Counsels were of opinion, That his settling the Lands in the Crown, was to
ingratiate himself in the King's Favor; questioning not, but that the King
would Restore all the Lands again to the Sons of Thomas that Rebelled, and was
Executed in the Lifetime of his Brethren: And his Sons was a Bar to Sir
Ingleram Percy, the Younger Brother; or else, Sir Ingleram, without all doubt,
had been immediately Seized of the Estate, after the Earl, his Elder Brother's
Death: For Thomas his Attaint, did not prejudice the Elder Brother, nor hurt
the Younger Brother; He only Corrupted his own Line. Now, Mr. Clark, Mr.
Champion, and Mr. Gee, did make use of their time; and by Favor, possessed
themselves of most s of those Lands, as the several Leases and Lives were
expired: And to continue those Lands, in policy they set up William Percy;
thinking they might please him, as they do Children with an Apple.

Had the Agents sent me Money, so often as they did William, they had done
well; but opposing me (the True Heir) against their own Knowledge, they have
done very unjustly: For Mr. Orlando Gee well knows, I made my Claim at
Petmouth, in the Year 1654.

I am your Cordial Friend. J. P.
SIR,
I Have, according to my Promise, given you a true Account; as I did at first,
when I was ignorant, and could not make out my Great Grandfather, to fix my
Pedigree. But when Mr. Henry Champion, at Sir John Coppleston's Trial, was
forced upon his Oath; then he confessed, that Sir Ingleram Percy (who was hid
from me before) was Married, and had Sons and Daughters. Mr. Champion knew
this, when the Letters and Money was sent to my Brother William. I wonder, a
Wife Man as you are, should be so deceived by him: And the World may wonder at
me, that have traced their Treacheries, and dissembling Actions; and found them
out so, as it will continue to their shame, another Day. Had the Agents been
true to themselves, they should have acted the Honest Part; as Mr. Champion was
once about to do, at my first Coming over. For, he came to me, and said; Mr.
Percy, Will you own the Old Servants? I replied, According as they shall
deserve. And then Mr. Gee came to me, and said; Was you the Man, that came to
Petworth, in the Year 54? And with the Circumstantial Remembrances I gave,
silenced him. Truly, I am ashamed to declare their unworthy Actions, and what
they have forced me to. Now, suppose they had proved Mary Varnon Married; yet I
was seven Years elder. But to put up a poor indigent Man, a Journy-man-Glover,
and Christening his Children, to deceive the World; and to slight the true
Heir, because I was a Trunck-maker: The Trade is Good; and by God's Blessing,
it has given me Bread in the Extremity of my Travels, till I obtained the
Merchandising Trade: And can make my Three Sons Freemen, and Merchants of
London, and Dublin in Ireland, and of Norwich in Norfolk; and have likewise
Trained them up to Handycrafts: So that, if they fail in the Mystery of
Merchandising, they may (with God's Blessing) Live upon their Ingenuity.

Yet, one word more, in my Father, Henry Percy's behalf, by way of Comparison.
There was one of the Female Sex, that was addicted to Venery; and a Person of
Quality, being over seen, had to do with her; and she laid the Child to him,
though some other might have got it: And such People are not much to be blamed,
for getting the best Father they can, for the Child.

To conclude: I must not forget to tell you, what the Agents are doing now
amongst the Tenants, as I am informed: They call all their Courts for the Lord
Ogle, by the Name of Percy; and informs all the Tenants, That James Percy (the
Ten Years Claymant) is Run away: But by God's Providence, I remain at Mr. Ralph
Carter's House, a Trunck-maker in Fleet Street, over against Serjeant's- Inn:
where the Messenger may find James Percy, to Serve the King's Royal Writ of
Summons upon.

Since I saw you, I presented a Petition into the King's sacred Hand: And His
gracious Answer to the Master of Request, was, as at the Beginning, when I
first Petitioned the King; whom God Bless with long Life here, and Eternal
Happiness hereafter. You will find the Petition and Answer, in the First Sheet
added to this Book. If a Tinker was taken in his Travels, a Laborer from under
his Hod of Mortar, and a Sawyer out of the Saw-Pit, to Enjoy their Birthright
and Inheritance; then, Why may not James Percy, the true Heir to the Earldom of
Northumberland, be called from a Trunck-makers House, to take his Place and
Seat, in the Right Honorable House of PEERS; according to his Birthright and
Title.

YOu was pleased to tell me, That Disgust was taken against me, for the Verses
I sent to the Countess. I must confess, I writ them in a great Passion; because
the Countess would not vouchsafe to speak with me, but peept through the Window
at me. And because I begun with a Verse, I will end with a Verse; by reason the
Countess shall see, I am still the same Man: And so, leave the Cause to GOD, to
the KING, Parliament, and People, to Judge, whether Pought to lose my
Birthright, for so small an Offense, as these following Verses.

Wealth is the Giant grown so high,
That can a Percy now defye:
Though, like David, with Sling and Stones,
Shows Great Champion's Blood and Bones.
Saul seeking Asses, Kingdom mes;
James seeks his Right, finds Foes too Great.
Pray God give me a Zealous Heart,
That I may seek the Better Part:
Then shall I Sing his Praises clear;
Scorn to peep through a Window here.
This is done, that it shall be said,
A Percy Lives, though Josceline's Dead,
Resolved I am, to spend my All,
Before a Percy's Name shall Fall.
If the before said Verses gave Offense, I hope these following Verses will not.

An Impostor is a Base Name;
By doing Justice, clears the Shame:
And blows away the Clouds so high;
Makes Truth shine clear, as Sun in Sky.
I trust in God, that can Restore,
If not on Earth, to Heavens Shore.
FINIS.


THE CASE OF JAMES PERCY, The true Heir-Male and Claimant to the Earldom of
Northumberland,
To the Honorable Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses; And to the Committee of
Grievances, in PARLIAMENT Assembled.
The Humble Petition of JAMES PERCY, Cozen and next Heir-Male to JOSCELIN
PERCY, the late and Eleventh EARL of NORTHUMBERLAND, Deceased.
SHOWS,
THAT your Petitioner was the Son of Henry Percy, who was the Son of Henry
Percy, who was the Son of Sir Ingleram Percy, who was the third Son of Henry
Percy, Fifth Earl of Northumberland: By which Descent your Petitioner is
Entitled to the Earldom of Northumberland, and to several Baronies, Honors,
Manors and Lands, which to the Earldom and Baronies have been and still are
annexed; your Petitioner having proved his Pedigree, questions not but by your
Assistance to make appear they are, or should be his Right, and Just
Inheritance, as Cozen and Heir-Male to Joscelin late Earl aforementioned: And
therefore ought to fit in Parliament, and enjoy the Place, Seat and
Pre-eminence of his Ancestors, with the Dignities to him so descended, and do
of Right belong: And therefore prays his Bill may be be made an Act to settle
the Title and Estate together again, that Property and Right may be had
according to Justice.

That at his first coming to Claim, your Petitioner petitioned the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, who was graciously pleased to say, God forbid We should
hinder an Heir, but that he should have the benefit of the Law.

That your Petitioner applied himself to the Lords in Parliament, where he then
could not prove his Great Grandfather, which forced his Council to tell their
Lordships, That the Claimants Cause lay not before them, but ought to be Tried
at the Common Law first; and when the Cause had went through the Inferior
Courts to prove his Pedigree, and if the Law could not end it, then the Cause
ought to come before their Lordships again, to Hear, Debate, and to Determine.
And at that time his potent Adversaries did publish in the Gazette, that your
Petitioner was an Impostor; and at their Courts did declare to all the Tenants,
that the Claimants name was not Percy, but that he was a Bastard; and that
Henry Percy whom he declared was his Father, they could prove was never
Married: Yet they have made all the Waste imaginable, cutting down Woods,
pulling down Castles, over-working of Lead-Mines and Coal-Mines; and not only
so, but it cast the Petitioner out of Favor in the World, that His most
Excellent Majesty was pleased to give the Title one way, and the Land several
ways; which has not only multiplied Enemies, but by their Power, Policy and
Privilege, has put off your Petitioner near Eleven Years.

Therefore your Petitioner renders this following Account, that his Just Cause
may be known, what hard usage he has found at Law. That the first Trial was in
the year 1674. against Mr. John Clerk, the chief Agent, for scandalous words,
who sheltered under Privilege a long time; and before the Trial, they offered
to Own him, and to assist the Claimant James Percy with their Books, Pedigree
and Records, but would not be bound to perform: Then the Plaintiff perceived it
to be a baffle for a longer delay, and there were no good Faith in them; then
said the Plaintiff, Currat Lex, I will have the Trial if it be but to wash the
dirt off, which the Gazette and your evil practices have thrown upon me: And at
the Trial, the Attorney would suffer a Nonsuit, without the consent of his
Client; at which the Lord Chief Justice Hales seemed not to be satisfied, but
stood up and said, That James Percy the Claimant and Plaintiff, had proved
himself a true Percy, legitimate by Father and Mother, Grandfather and
Grandmother, and of the Blood and Family of the Percies of Northumberland; and
did verily believe, that the Plaintiff was Cozen and next Heir-Male to Joscelin
the late and 11th Earl of Northumberland, only he was afraid he had taken his
Descent a little too low: And the Jury at a Treat which Mr. Clerk the
Defendant gave them, said to Mr. Clerk, You are beholden to Mr. Percy for
suffering a Nonsuit, for truly we must have given a Verdict for the Plaintiff,
his Cause was proved so clear: and the Damages was laid in the Declaration
10000 l.

The second Trial was upon an Ejectment for Cunnington and Rodoway Lands in
Somersetshire, which Lands of right fell to the Heirs-Males of the Percies,
after the Heirs-Males of the Rogers was extinct: Doubtless it was by
misinformation his Majesty was mistaken in his Gifts: And at that Trial the
Pedigree was fully proved up to the Plaintiffs Great-Grandfather Sir Ingleram
Percy, youngest Son of Henry Percy 5th. Earl of Northumberland, by the Oath of
Mr. Henry Champion, who was Steward to the Earls of Northumberland, and
declared at that Trial, that he found in the Books and Records of the Percies,
that Sir Ingleram Percy was married, and had Sons and Daughters: so that a
Verdict ought to have been had for the Plaintiffs Pedigree at that Trial also.
And Sir John Coppleston did not only shelter under Privilege, but when the
Writs of Error were put into the House of Lords, he then sued the Plaintiff in
the Court of King's Bench, and got Cost, and broke the Privilege of Parliament.

The third Trial was against one Mr. Wright, for the like scandalous words,
where your Petitioner proved his Legitimacy again, and not the Tithe of his
Witnesses were examined; for the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford stood up and
said, Gentlemen of the Jury, we need not trouble the Court to examine more of
the Plaintiffs Witnesses, by reason his Pedigree was fully proved before, at a
former Trial at the Bar of this Court: And when the Jury brought in but 300 l.
Damages, the Lord Chief Justice was angry, and told them they had undervalued
the Plaintiffs Cause; (the Judgment exemplified under the Seal of the Court,
makes appear the same.)

That the fourth Trial against John Blakeston Esquire who was likewise an Agent for
the Lady Elizabeth Percy, and kept her Courts, and did declare the like
scandalous words, and gave it in all his Charges to the Jury and Tenants, to
take special notice thereof: And at the Trial on Monday the 11th of November
1678. the words were proved. The Declaration was allowed, after some debate
upon a nice word, which was amended: But the Council for the Defendant started
up an Attainder in the Case, which the Plaintiffs Council was not prepared at
that time to remove that. Objection, but the Trial was put by at that time, and
the Jury was withdrawn, as the Plaintiffs printed Book declares more at large.
But the second part of that Trial was upon the 6th of February 1678. a new Jury
upon the motion of the Defendants Council did appear, and the Plaintiffs
Council did clear that point concerning the Attainder, by reason the Plaintiffs
Council made appear to the Court, that James Percy was descended from the Body
of Henry Percy, 5th. Earl of Northumberland, of Sir Ingleram Percy his youngest
Son, and that the Collateral Line was never Attainted; and therefore ought to
enjoy the Title and Estate of his Ancestors Earls of Northumberland. Then the
Defendants Council and the Court did own the Plaintiffs Title and Pedigree, but
said there was no Lands to support the Title: then the Plaintiff prayed, that
the Court would confirm what they owned by a Rule in Court; whereupon the Lord
Chief Justice Scrogs stood up and said, Confirm or not confirm, the Declaration
is naught, discharge Blakeston from the Suit of Percy; notwithstanding the vast
Charge the Plaintiff had been put to, by the Defendants sheltering under the
senior Countess of Northumberlands Privileges: And when the Duke of Monmouth
had set aside her Privileges, then he sheltered himself under the Lord of
Essex his Privilege: And when the Plaintiff had made his complaint to the
House of Lords, the Lord of Essex did agree with the Plaintiffs Council, that
if Mr. Clerk's Cost was laid down in Court for his security, the Defendant Mr.
Blakeston should not stand upon Privilege, but go on to Trial: Then the Lord
Chief Justice Scrogs stood up and said, Mr. Percy, if you will lay down the 90
l. Mr. Clerk's Cost in Court, the Lord of Essex will not insist upon
Privilege, and we do promise you shall have a fair Trial: Whereupon the Money
was tendered accordingly, and the 90 l. was got out of Court before he had
notice by his Attorney Mr. Hancock, or before the Trial was ended. And in truth
the 90 l. the Opponents ought not to have had, by reason the 90 l. Cost ought
to have been set aside upon their own Demurrer. Moreover it is to be noted,
that Sir George Jeffreys was Council for the Plaintiff at the fore part of the
Trial, and had taken 40 s. a Retaining Fee, and 3 l. a Pleading Fee, and had
the Petitioner's Breviate; but at the latter part of his Trial, pleaded against
the Petitioner, notwithstanding the Plaintiff tendered him new Fees, and
complained of him in Court. All which caused the Plaintiff to Appeal to the
Parliament by two Writs of Error, to have the Errors argued, and his Title to
be brought to an Issue, to be called to the Place and Seat of his Ancestors,
according to his Birthright.

That the Kings most Excellent Majesty has been graciously pleased to referr
your Petitioner to the Lords in Parliament, to hear and determine his said
Cause; and to that purpose, he has been at vast Charges in renewing his two
Writs of Error, after every Prorogation; and his Attorney has received 60 l.
only for the Kings Hand, besides all other Charges which far exceeded. And his
said Attorney did promise your Petitioner, to get all his Breviates in a
readiness against the Trial, but did altogether fail, as the printed Petition
hereunto annexed makes appear. Moreover he told your Petitioner sometime
before, that he could have had a hundred Goineys to betray your Petitioner; and
some other of your Petitioners Council have been tempted with Bribes, but they
were so Just as to refuse.

And now the Agents have surprised your Petitioner, for they knew the Error
must have been proved against the Plaintiff Mr. Blakeston; so that they would
not take their Cost for that days disappointment, according to the prayer of
the printed Petition, but have obtained the Writ of Error to be dismissed the
Lords House, without any fair Hearing: so that all they have done, and do, is
by way of surprizal, to tire the Claimant out of his just Right.

He therefore most humbly beseeches the Honorable House of Commons, as he is
yet but a Commoner, that for the Glory of God, the Honor of our King and
Kingdom, to stand up for Justice, so that Property and Right may be preserved,
and the Oppressed may be relieved, for this is the 11th. year of your
Petitioners Claim: And intercede with the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the
Right Honorable Lords Spiritual and Temporal, not to suffer a Loyal Subject to
be overpowered, but that his just Claim may be heard with patience, and
determined in Justice; and that your Petitioners Bill may be made an Act, to
restore the true Heir to his Birthright, and that the Title and the Estate that
is now dispersed into several hands, may be forthwith settled by an Act of
Parliament. And he shall ever pray.

Near 300 l. the two Writs of Error have cost, for putting into Parliament,
continuing and renewing after every Prorogation, and now they have Execution
upon Blakeston's Writ of Error, before the Case is heard.

The Attorney General said, Mr. Percy, Now you have no where to Appeal but to
Heaven: But if Justice be not done on Earth, we may fear Gods Vengeance will
come from Heaven: Therefore the Petitioner is forced to Appeal to those
Worthies in the House of Commons for Justice, and therefore he has annexed the
printed Petitions.

To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty; And to the Right Honorable Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in PARLIAMENT Assembled. The Humble Petition of JAMES
PERCY.
SHOWS,
THat after your Petitioner's Complaint against his Attorneys, James Hooton,
Edward Fyfield, and John Hancock; Mr. James Hooton, one of your Petitioner's
Attorneys, understanding the Complaints against him, sent the Writings by his
Man, which came too late; out of which Papers his Breviates ought to have been
drawn, which does testify the Truth of your Petitioner's Complaint, and what
he offered to confirm upon Oath before your Lordships.

Therefore your Petitioner most Humbly prays, That the two Writs of Error may
be continued between Percy Plaintiff, and Blakeston Defendant, and Utting
Plaintiff, and Coppleston Defendant; and that his Council that he has Retained
formerly, may be allowed your Petitioner to argue the said Cause: that is to
say, Sir William Jones, Sergeant Pemberton, and Sergeant Simpson, and that a
new day may be ordered now his Witnesses are in Town, and desires no longer
time then his Council may well consider: And further prays, That a moderate
Costs may be taxed, upon account of the Attorneys Negligence. And your
Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. JAMES PERCY.

It is hoped, that the Neglect of the Attorneys shall not destroy a man's
Birthright, Title and Inheritance.

Your Petitioner's Cause being before your Lordships to hear and determine,
therefore humbly prays, that a new day may be Ordered, before his Witnesses be
dispersed.

To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, in PARLIAMENT. The Humble Petition of
JAMES PERCY.
SHOWS,
THat this annexed Petition, fairly writ, was presented at the Bar of the Lords
House the 10th. Instant.

That your Petitioner is at a vast Charge in keeping his Witnesses in Town,
waiting for an Order, and a Day appointed, according to the prayer of the said
Petition.

He therefore prays, That your Majesty would be graciously pleased to call for
the said Petition, and cause it to be Read; and that a short day may be
appointed, that a fair Hearing may be had, to find out the Truth, and that
Justice may be done accordingly: And let it not be said in England, that the
Innocent are punished, and the Guilty go free: But call to mind how merciful
God has been, in Restrring your Majesty; Even so in pity Restore your poor
distressed Subject. And he shall ever pray, etc. JAMES PERCY.

This Petition was presented into his Majesty's Sacred Hand, the 15th. of
December 1680.

To lose such an Opportunity as offered on Thursday last, and now to trouble so
good a King so often, doubles your Petitioner's sorrows.

And that which adds to your Petitioner's misery, is, that he cannot dispose of
his Witnesses, till a positive Order be had; for which he humbly prays.

Note these three following Presidents.
I. THe Lord of Newport begged the Percies Land of the King, for the Duke of
Monmouth, when the Duke was in France: but at the Duke's return, Percy the
Claimant waited upon the Duke, to know his pleasure; and told him, That my
Solicitor had betrayed me, for the Percies Lands were begged without the
Claimant's consent or knowledge. Then the Duke replied, Mr. Percy, you shall
have a fair Trial at Law: And moreover he did promise he would not stand upon
Privilege: but when Percy was ready for a Trial, then Trumpt up Privilege.
And Mr. Ross the Duke's Agent said, the Duke could not set aside his
Privilege: But the Duke said, if Percy proves himself Heir, I have no Right;
and forth with sold his Interest for an inconsiderable Sum of Money.

II. The Lord Ogle, that married the Lady Elizabeth Percy, would have assumed
the name of Percy; and put in a Bill to be made an Act to settle the Lands upon
him by Act of Parliament.

III. And it is reported that the Lord of Essex desired that some of those
Lands might be settled upon him by Act of Parliament.

By this account the Lands are yet unsettled: Ergo then great reason it is,
that the true Heir-Male of the Percies Bill should be made an Act of
Parliament, to settle the Name, Title and Estate together again, according to
the first settlement confirmed by his Ancestors.

Now your poor distressed and oppressed Petitioner humbly and freely offers,
for the obtaining of Justice, and for the full satisfaction to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and the Right Honorable Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
those Honorable and Worthy Members of the House of Commons in Parliament
assembled, (if it be required and thought convenient, he being very unwilling
to offer any thing that might give the least offense, but rather submit to
their grave and mature Wisdoms) these Proposals following.

James Percy the Claimant and Plaintiff, will pay into the hands of any
Trustees that shall be appointed to receive the Money in Trust for Mr. John
Blakeston's Costs, provided he likewise lay down the 90 l. taken by surprise
out of Court before the Trial was ended.

And Mr. Vtting's Cost likewise shall be paid, for what Sir John Coppleston
claims; provided likewise that Sir John Coppleston pay the 10 l. down, which he
got when he ventured the Breach of Privilege of Parliament: provided the whole
Merits of the Cause may have a fair Hearing and Determination before the Lords:
And if the Plaintiff and Claimant James Percy, does not prove himself to be the
right true and next Heir-Male in Blood of the Percies of Northumberland, then
let them take all the Money, and the Plaintiff will freely acquit his Claim for
ever, and remain till death a Loyal Subject, and James Percy.

Although his Witnesses be dispersed, a Weeks time will bring them to Town
again, upon the sight of an Order.

For the Claimant James Percy (by Birth) ought to enjoy the Place, Seat and
Privilege of his Ancestors, Earls of Northumberland; but now he dares not
appear, till an Order be had.

Therefore he most humbly prays, That a fair Hearing may be had, and that a
true decision of his just Cause and Claim may be made, according to Justice: so
that the Innocent may be preserved, and that the fraudulent practices not just
may march off with shame: For Heroic Actions glorifies God, Honors the King,
and makes all the people shout for joy.

God has been pleased to make a true decision himself, which may be a
president; for he sent the Claimant from his Mothers Womb with a Crescent into
the World, which is Gods Ensign of Truth, and the very Badge belonging to the
Percies Earls of Northumberland. In witness to this Truth, I have set to my
Hand and Seal, this 3d. of January, 1680/1.

JAMES PERCY. depiction of half moon

To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of JAMES PERCY.
SHOWS,
THat it is a great grief to your Petitioner's Soul, to trouble your Sacred
Majesty so often, in looking after his Just Right; yet cannot help it. by
reason his Opponents are of so great Power, Policy and Force.

That notwithstanding his Petition to the Right Honorable House of Lords,
presented the day after his Hearing should have been had, the Opponents got
that Writ of Error dismissed the House, well knowing the Errors would have been
confirmed against them.

That thereby they have an opportunity to take out Execution against your
Petitioner, and so to stop his further public appearing.

That if that Writ be not recalled into the Lords House again, your Petitioner
can in no wise expect a fair Hearing, nor a just decision of his Cause.

Therefore your oppressed Petitioner most humbly prays, That your Majesty would
be graciously pleased to see Justice done herein, and that a new Day may be
appointed, according to the Prayer of that Petition that is now before the
House of Lords; or that your Sacred Majesty will be graciously pleased to call
your Loyal Subject, by your Royal Writ of Summons, to take the Place and Seat
of his Ancestors, Earls of Northumberland, he having proved his legitimate
Descent and Pedigree at several Trials at Law.
This Petition was presented into his Sacred Majesty's hand Jan. 3. 1681.

All great and dubious matters the Children of Israel presented and laid open
before Moses: Even so the Claimant has done to his Majesty all along, knowing
that in the King solely lies the creation and preservation of Honor and
Nobility.

But the King referred the Cause to the Lords to hear and determine; and now
the two Writs of Error are dismissed the Lords House, without hearing the said
Cause.

Now the Claimant James Percy finding himself overpowered, is forced to
Appeal, and humbly prays for Justice: As Prerogative belongs to the King, so
Property and Right belongs to his People.



FINIS.
To the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty; The Humble Petition of JAMES PERCY.
SHOWS,
THat Your Petitioner most Humbly Beseeches, and Earnestly Prays Your
Majesty's Pardon, for that Omission on the Ninth of December last, which was in
truth altogether the Neglect of his Attorney, as his Printed Petition sets forth.

That Your Petitioner Humbly presents these two Books, that your Most Excellant
Majesty may see the real endeavors of Your Petitioner; and the first Book was
Prepared for the Right Honorable Lords Spiritual and Temporal, to inform their
Lordships: And the second Book is prepared to make his Complaints known to the
House of Commons; (...) that They ^ay intercede in his Just Cause with Your
Royal Majesty, and the Right ^onourable Lords in Parliament.

Therefore Your Majesty's Loyal Subject and Petitioner most Humbly Prays, That
Your Royal Majesty will be Graciously pleased, Patiently to Read, and Seriously
consider the Printed Complaints, and do Your Poor distressed Petitioner
Justice, in restoring him by Your own Princely Power, Prerogative, and
Clemency: He having at Law, fully proved his Pedigree: And therefore has
prepared a Bill, that it may be made an Act of Parliament, and most Humbly
Prays Your Majesty's Royal Assent thereunto. And that Your Majesty's Royal Writ
of Summons may forthwith call Your Loyal Subject, from the House of Prison, to
the House of Peers: And there to take the Place and Seat of his Ancestors,
Earls of Northumberland.

When King Pharao took Joseph out of the Dungion, Then God filled Pharao's Barns
with his Blessings. To which God Annex long Life, and a Prosperous Reign.

And Your Petitioner shall Pray, JAMES PERCY.

This Petition was presented into his Sacred Majesty's Hand Jan. the 17th.
1681. And did endeavor to present the two Books mentioned in the Petition; But
a Gentleman stepping betwixt the King and my self, pusht me away; so that I
could not Present the Complaint prepared for the House of Lords, against the
day of Hearing: Nor this Complaint which is prepared for the House of Commons,
( my Opponants are great and Numerous,) which forces the Claimant to Pray for
Justice.

An Affidavit made by JAMES PERCY, Claimant to the Earldom of NORTHUMBERLAND.
WHereas Mr. James Hooton, did undertake the Carrying in two Writs of Error in
Parliament, between James Percy Plaintiff, and John Blackeston, Esquire Defendant,
for Scandalous Words, and in Ejectments for Lands, Robert Vtting Gent. Lessee
of the Plaintiff, and Sir John Copleston Defendant; And the aforesaid Mr.
Hooton did receive Writings of Percy the Claimant long before the day of
Hearing before the Lords; And did promise to fix all the Claimants Breviats, so
as they might be ready for some Lords, and for the Council: But when the
Claimant should have been prepared for his Counsel, then Mr. Hooton could not
be found till the very Morning the Hearing should have been had; then he
meeting the Deponent James Percy, at Fetter-lane-end in Fleet Street, and said
whither are you going? Percy told him, I am a going to make my Complaint
against You, for keeping my Writings, and not making my Breviats ready for my
Council: And when James Percy had made his complaint in Parliament, and offered
to make Oath before their Lordships to Confirm the truth: And when the Lords
Commanded to withdra^* then Mr. James Hootons Man came into the Lobby, and
there delivered the Writings to the Deponent, upon the 9th. of December 1678.
Moreover the said Hooton, said some time before, that he was offered a Hundred
Guinneys to betray the said Deponents Case.

And on the 7th. of January 1681. The said Hooton came to the Deponants
Chamber, and desired to see those Writings that belonged to those Writs of
Errors, and did Write something out of them; saying, He had not kept a Copy of
them, which he ought to have done; but said He had enough now to do his
business: and further said, there was one sheet wanting: Which shows how
careful he was of his Claimants Cause; And yet threatens he will Sue the
Claimant for Defaming him in his Practice.

JAMES PERCY.
Jur' 18. die January 1680. coram me Magistro Canc' John Hoskyns.
The Deponant Humbly Prays for speedy Justice, and that he may be forthwith
called from the Prison of King's Bench, into Parliament, to take the Place of
his Ancestors, Earls of Northumberland, according to his Birthright, and that
the two Writs of Error, may be Re-manded back, and the Execution stopped. For his
Witnesses continue still in Town: Hoping by your Mature Wisdoms, to obtain an
Order for a new day of Hearing; for which he Prays, as by his Petition all
along appears.

An Affidavit made by JAMES PERCY Claimant to the Earldom of NORTHUMBERLAND.
WHereas Adlard Welby Gent. is Attourny for John Blackston Esquire Def. this
Deponent James Percy on the 21^h. instant, went to Mr. Welby, and offered an
Agreement: And whereas Cost of 70 odd l. is demanded of me the Plaintiff, the
Deponent demanded 90 l. which was but tendered into Court upon my Lord Chief
Justice Scrogs's promise that the Lord of Essex would not insist upon
Privilege, and that the Deponent JAMES PERCY should have a fair Trial: the
Money was not intended for the L. of Essex really, but it ought to have been
remanded back again to the Plaintiff JAMES PERCY; for that 90 l. costs
pretended for Mr. Clark, was Sued for by Capt. Biggerstaff that married the
Relict of Mr. Clark; And that 90 l. Costs ought to have been set aside upon
their own Demurrer; therefore Mr. Welby Replied, I must complain in Court: The
Writs of Error ought to have been heard, debated, and determined by the Right
Honorable Lords in Parliament; But it was blown over, as by the Printed
Complaint, (prepared to present to the Honorable House of Commons appears) But
it is hoped the Writs of Error may be Re-manded back into Parliament, to have a
fair Hearing: Or if the Plaintiff and Deponent be forced to pay the 70 odd
Pounds Cost; then the 90 l. ought to be Refunded to the Deponent,

JAMES PERCY.
Jurat. 22. die Jan. 1680. John Hoskins.
IT is very hard for a man to be kept out of Possession, and his Opponents
manage all their Suits at Law against him with his own Estate; and that will
not serve their turns, but they covet to get from the Claimant by Fraud, so
that they may totally Ruin and disable him from prosecuting his Birthright.

JAMES PERCY, (the true and lawful Heir-male to the Percy's Earls of
Northumberland,) has found more Injustice and Hardships here in England, than
the Children of Israel found in Egypt, when they made Brick, and were forced to
gather their own Straw to burn them.

When Joseph's good Works were forgot, then his Brethren suffered; But now the
PERCY'S good deeds are forgot, their lawful Successor suffers in Prison; And
therefore earnestly prays for a speedy Deliverance. My great Pains, and Charge
in Printing, is really intended rightly to inform the world, thereby to remove
Oppression, and to revive justice.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of JAMES PERCY.
Shows,
THat Your Petitioners Opponents have obtained their Desires, for your
Petitioner is in Prison

That Your Majesty was Graciously pleased to say, God forbid that We should
hinder an Heir, but that he should have the Benefit of the Law; And to that end
Sir John Berkenhead was sent by Your Majesty to the Attourny General.

That Your Petitioner has proved his Legitimacy and Pedigree, at four several
Trials at Law, whereof one is exemplified under the Great Seal of Your
Majesty's Court of King's Bench, (where Your Petitioner is now a Prisoner) upon
that Writ of Error the Lord Chief Justice Soroggs so wilfully gave the Cause
away, after Your Petitioner had fully proved his Pedigree, and to be Descended
from the Body of Henry Percy, fifth Earl of Northumberland, and Cousin and next
Heir-Male to Josceline Percy, late and eleventh Earl, deceased.

Therefore He most Humbly Prays that Your Most Excellent Majesty would be
Graciously pleased to Order the Lord Chancellor forthwith to call (by Your
Majesty's Royal Writ of Summous) Your Petitioner from the House of Prison, to
the House of Peers, to take the Place and Seat of his Ancestors Earls of
Northumberland, as it is his Birthright and Title proved at Law: God in his
Justice and Mercy restored Your Majesty to Your Crown and Kingdoms: even, so
let Your Majesty in Equity and Pity Restore Your poor Distressed Subject, And
Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc. JAMES PERCY.
THis Petition was offered to His Majesty the 24th. of January 1680/1. and His
Majesty was pleased to say, He would not receive it; But said, You may go where
You please; Which Saying was taken for an Answer to that Petition presented the
17 of January; Wherein it was to be understood, the Petitioner had prepared his
Complaints for the House of Commons. (It is to be noted,) That the Gentlemen
who attended the King, said, Yonder is the E. of Northumberland with a
Petition; why should Your Majesty trouble Your self with it? had You not one
the other day? reject it. I have found His Most Excellent Majesty has been
inclinable to Justice all along, but still is obstructed by one means or other:
But the plain Truth is, His Majesty would not be seen to give and ungive at his
own pleasure, His Majesty being mistaken in his Gifts; Therefore was
Graciously pleased the Lords should Hear and Determine the said Cause; And to
that purpose, did come down to the Bar in the House of Lords to hear the Cause
Himself; but was disappointed, (as by the Petitions and Affidavits appear.) But
the said Cause having been continued a long time at such a vast Charge; and
then to be slightly blown over without a fair Hearing, all the World much
admires; For the clearing up of the Pedigree, would have confirmed the Errors.

Therefore Your Petitioner Appeals to the Honorable House of Commons; And most
Humbly and Earnestly prays your Assistance, to enquire the Reason why, and how
the Writts of Errors came to be dismissed; And that they may be Re-manded back,
that a fair Hearing may be had according to the Prayer of the Petitions; Or
that You will be pleased to cause the Heralds to enquire into the Truth of the
Claimants Pedigree; And that He may be called from the Kings Bench Prison, to
the House of Peers, to take the Place and Seat of his Ancestors, Earls of
Northumberland. And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc. JAMES PERCY.



Right Honorable,
I Am your Cousin, (though a Prisoner) descended from the Body of Henry Percy
5th. Earl of Northumberland; By which Descent I am Cousin and next Heir-male to
Josceline Percy your Father the hite and 11th. Earl of Northumberland,
Deceased. A Prison is a Grave for Men alive; But when Naboth was stoned to
death, then Ahab took possession of the Vinyard, 1 Kings 21.18. And walking in
the Garden among the Beds of Pleasure, then God sent his Prophet Elias, to tell
Ahab of his Transgression, (notwithstanding he was a King.) Ezekiel 46.18. When
Belshazzar wac quaffing in the Gold and Silver Vessels of the Temple, then
appeared the Handwriting upon the Wall, Dan. 5. When your late Husband the
Lord Ogle went about to assume the name of Percy, and to have the Percies Lands
settled upon him by Act of Parliament, then God called him to Account;
Therefore let Your Ladyship do Justice speedily, and submit to Truth in Time,
for fear God calls You to Account also. I believe Your Servants and Agents have
rendered Me to You to be a Monster, and not a Man; Be not too subject to Believe
Them, but see with your own Eyes, and hear with your own Ears; and admit Me into
Your presence, for I have something to offer that will add Fame to Your Honor,
and Rank You with those Two Worthy Women of our Family, the Lady Agnes Percy,
who preserved the Percies Name, and the Lady Lucy, that settled her Estate upon
the Heirs Males of the Percies for ever; And for ever that Estate must attend
the Title; And the Fines can never be recovered but by the true Heir-Male of
the Percies Mr. Gee can inform You (if he pleases,) how I was at Petworth in
the Year 1654. And then, and there made my Claim as I do now; And before Mr.
Clark's Trial, Your Agents, with their Council, would have owned Me to be the
next Heir, and would have assisted Me for the Title with their Books, Pedigree
and Records: And also how I met with Mr. Champian and Mr. Gee at Doctor
Lampley's House, and there made out my Pedigree clear, only I could not find
out my Great Grandfathers Name; First, it was a very hard Name; And Secondly,
Mr. Champian kept it secret till he was forced to declare upon his Oath, that
Sir Ingelram Percy was Married, and had Sons and Daughters, at Sir John
Coppleston's Trial for Cannington and Rodaway Lands in Somersetshire. Thirdly,
The Heralds had altogether neglected the Collateral Line of the Percies. Now
all my Aim is really to beget a right understanding, so that I may remain,

Your Ladyships Real, Cordial, and Faithful Kinsman, and most Humble Servant,
JAMES PERCY.


What I have to declare to your Ladyship is not convenient to be committed to
writing, but assure your self it really tends to your present Welfare, and
future Peace and Prosperity.

An Answer will find me in the Kings-Bench-Rules, at the Written Table at
Captain Dancer's House in Lombard Street, near the Bowling-green, in the
Borough of Southwark.

This Letter was presented the day of the date hereof; and the Claymant has
printed it, that the world may see that a true Percy is not ashamed of his
Innocent and Just Cause, nor afraid of his Potent Opponents; For he whom I
trust in, is greater than they, 5 Eccles. ver. 8.
NOw in these our days there is no Prophet God, Michaia, Elijah, nor
Interpreters of Dreams, like Joseph and Daniel, that dares presume to speak to
Kings as they did in those days.

Therefore James Percy, the true Heir male of the Percies, Earls of
Northumberland, humbly makes bold with the Prophet Ezekiel, cap. 46. ver. 18.
Moreover the Prince shall not take of the Peoples Inheritance by oppression,
but he shall give his Sons Inheritance out of his own Possession, that my
People be not scattered every man from his Possession.

The King's Most Excellent Majesty's Gracious Answer was to the Claimant's
first Petition, in 1670. God forbid that we should hinder an Heir, but that he
should have the Benefit of the Law: And to that purpose His Majesty ordered Sir
John Berkenhead (Master of Reequests then in w^iting* to go to the Attorney
General, to know why he refused to sign the Co-warrant which the Claymants
Solicitor, Mr. Thomas Swain presented to him to sign? But the Attorney General
said, He could not sign Percie 's Co-warrant, by reason that he was of Council
for the Countess of Northumberland: And the Court of Wards being put down did
much ^^dernize the Claimant in his Proceedings, and to less than nine several
Persons have stood upon and been sh^^ter'd under Privilege, which has been
the cause of delay all this time.

And from that time Mr. Swayn (the Claymant's Solicitor) began to play the
Devil with two sticks; for whilst James Percy was prosecuting the Law, and
delivering Declarations in Ejectments in the North, the Solicitor had
contrived the business so, as the Title and Lands were begged, disposed and
scattered before the Claymant returned, and then pretended the Co-warrant, with
other Writings, was lost, which cost a considerable Sum of Money, and then
arrested his Clyent James Percy in three several Suits at Law, which continued
three years; But the Solicitor Swayn was overthrown in all the 3 Actions;
moreover the Claymant James Percy was (...) those travels poisoned at
New Castle, arrested at York in two Actions of 20000 l. each Action* and then
durst not proceed at Law, but let the Actions fall, and paid 40 s. Cost, a poor
satisfaction for a night and two days Imprisonment, and maintaining my two Men
and three Horses, besides the Charge of spunging Bums; And the Actions were in
the Lord of Essex, and Mr. Clark, and others Names: And to fill up the measure
of malice, they published in the English Gazette, and the French Gazette, That
the Claymant was an Impostor; And Mr. Blackston said in all these Courts, That
the Claymant's Name was not Percy, but declared him to be a Bastard; with many
more scandalous wordr, which were proved at that Trial before the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, notwithstanding he discharged Mr. Bla^kston and Sir George
Jeffreys at that Trial, took Fees on both sides, so the Claymant James Percy
was clearly bought and sold, and proved to his Damage 12000 l. Besides, it was
the occasion of this his present Imprisonment, upon the Writs of Error that
were so strangely dismissed the House of Lords without any Hearing;
notwithstanding the renewing and continuing after every Prorogation, cost in
all above 300 l. And now the Claymant James Percy has used all ways and means
possible, (as by his Petition and public Prints appears) and cannot proceed
further without the Assistance of the Honorable House of Commons. His Majesty
is much troubled, and the Claymant really believes that His Majesty had a
cordial Desire to hear and see the Cause determined, as by His coming up to the
Bar of the House of Lords, that day the Hearing should have been had. Besides,
His Majesty may perceive, I shall never leave my Claim, till Justice be done,
by reason I now know it is my Right by Birth and Blood, and that the sole power
of creating and preserving Honor rests in His Royal Breast, as Flowers in the
Crown: And by the Coronation Oath, the King cannot take Titles from one Peer,
to give to another Peer. But as God has in mercy restored His Majesty to His
Crown and Kingdoms, even so ought the King in Justice to restore every Loyal
Subject to the Birthright, Title and Inheritance of his Ancestors. It was very
hard at first for the Claymant to find out the Name of his great Grandfather,
by reason he was in his Childhood brought up amongst his Mothers Relations; And
in the troublesome times (he being a Royallist) was forced to abscond and
travel for many years, (...) But the Adversaries did wildernize the Claymant,
in hiding his great Grandfathers Christian Name from him: For Sir Ingelram
Percy was the Claymant James Percie's Great Grandfather, and youngest Son of
Henry Percy 5th. Earl of Northumberland; and this Collateral Line was never
attainted; and therefore ought to be restored according to Henry Percy the 5th.
Earls Patent, and not under the Patent of the New Creation by Queen Mary for
Thomas Percy, 2d. Son of the 5th. Earl, was attainted, but Sir Ingelram Percy
3d. Son was Innocent, and so has his Issue continued to this day: And
therefore prays for speedy Justice: Justice removes oppression, Glorifies God,
Honors the King, Rejoices the People, puts an end to your troubles, and
ratifies Peace, for which the Petitioner prays.

For Henry Percy, 5th. Earl, Great Great Grandfather, had Sir Ingelram Percy,
Great Grandfather, who had Henry Percy Grandfather, and he had Henry Percy
Father of the Claymant. JAMES PERCY.



