A perfect RELATION of the Proceedings of both ARMIES Since the beginning of the
Battle on Sunday at one of the Clock, to Tuesday at night, being fought
between Banbury and Brackley, in the County of Oxford.

Likewise declaring what prisoners of note are taken, with the true estate of
both Armies at this present.

The Names of the Prisoners.

The E. of Lindsey, General of the Field. The L. Digby, Col. Stradling. Coll.
Vavasor, Commander of the Guard and Standard. Col. Lunsford.
Likewise how the Kings Standard was taken by his Excelencies own hand, ten
pieces of Ordnance and many Colors, besides 3. or 4. thousand men ^laine.

Reported to the House of Commons by a Post which came from the Army.

London, Printed by T. F. for T. V. October. 27. 1642.

A true relation of the true Proceedings of both Armies, with the manner of the
Battle which begun on Sunday last.
HIs Majesty having received intelligence that Windsor Castle was fortefied by
the Parliaments forces, to oppose the Cavaliers and other ill affected persons
which are about his Majesty, for which cause his Majesty altered his intended
course and retreated from his Quarters back toward Warwick, but in his
retreat back it was his (...) to meet with the forces raised by the great
Council of the Kingdom, for the defense of the true reformed Reformed
Protestant Religion, his Majesty's sacred person, the privileges and rights of
Parliament, the Laws of the Kingdom, with the Liberty and propriety of the
Subject, all which is in great danger of being involved under the slavery of an
arbitrary power plotted and contrived by a party of popish recusants, ambitious
and prelaticall Cl^argy, Lordly projectors, and deboyst Cavaliers, with other
traiterous Delinquents, who for the advancement of their own destructive
stratagems, have at once attempted to destroy both King and people, as will
appear by this ensuing relation.

The Armies being met (notwithstanding that it was Sunday) they began a bloody
conflict, it being about one of the Clock in the afternoon when the two
Armies met, in a plain Champaine Field, between Banbury and Brackly, in the
County of Oxford, and being come within the reach of one another, they began to
charge each other with their Field pieces, doing great Execution, thus they
continued fighting for the space of 5. hours, during which time the two Armies
drew toward each other with a softly march, till they came within Musket shot,
then Blood and slaughter triumphed in revenge, and Death was toiled with
killing, for this bloody conflict continued till Monday Morning, the victory
enclining to neither party, in the Morning the Beacons were fired whereupon the
Country roast and joined with the Lord Brooks, who was upon march from Warwick
to aid his Excellence, being arrived he found his Excellencies army engaged
between the Kings two divisions, for Prince Robert (who as yet had not joined
with his Majesty) fell upon the Rear of our Army, where he found reasonable
opsition, but when the Lord Brooks began to draw nigh, Prince Robert wheeled
his men about and fronted the Lord Brooks betwixt whom grew a bloody battle
for the space of one hour, but Prince Robert finding himself to weak
retreated back and joined with the retreating, Body of the King, during which
time both parties fetched off their dead, there they beheld a Field which erst
was clothed in the livery of the Spring, translated to a terene Golgotha,
buried with mangled carkases of those which War had ravished of their natural
being.

These dismal lights did not dismay him tho, for with a resolute courage he
joined his forces with the ma^ne Ba^talia, and in courageous manner began
another battle with them, in the first onset they behaved themselves so
valiantly that the Kings army lost their order, from whence grew such a
combustion, that our forces obtained a great victory over them, as shall be
declared in the ensuing relation.

The Kings army having lost their order, our Forces pressed upon them very
furiously and cut them off without the least mercy, rooting the whole Army and
forcing them to retreat, to secure themselves from our furious charges.

In which conflict there was slain near 3000. or more, only there was taken
by our forces these men of quality, namely the Earl of Lunf^, and Colonel
Vavasor his Son, the Lord Digby, Colonel Lunsf^rd, and Colonel Stradlin,
with diverse others.

Also we took his Majesty's Standard, and as it as credibly reported his
Excellency took it with His own hand, and with his Sword won it from the
Standard bearer.

Likewise we took ten Pieeces of Ordnance from the Cavaliers, and J know not
how many Colors, the bearers whereof diverse were slain, and others taken
Prisoners, we doubt not but by Gods blessing to give a period to these
troubles, and to appease the Cavaliers, and to free his Majesty from all those
that daily conspire His ruin and destruction.

This is but an entrance or a beginning of what must follow, without GOD of his
abundant mercy curb them in their full cariere, and give a period to those
bloody Broils, which that He may speedily perform, let us all with one heart
and one voice, lift up our hearts and prayers to God, which has hitherto
miraculously preserved us from dangers past and present, and to desire a
Blessing upon our future endeavors, which we doubt not to obtain, since it is
His quarrel and His cause which we have Covenanted to maintain to the hazard
of our Lives and Fortunes.

FINIS.

