A PERFECT CATALOGUE OF THE PEERS Of the Realm of ENGLAND VIZ. Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons now sitting in this present
Parliament, began at Westminster the 8th day of May, in the 12th year of the
Reign of our Gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second, etc. 1661.

According to their Dignities, Offices, and Degrees, with the names of the
Judges, and others called thither for their Assistance, and Officers of their
Attendances.

Together with the ancient Statute for placing the Lords in all Parliaments
and other Assemblies and Conferences of COUNCILS.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Brooks, and are to be sold by most Book-selsellers in
LONDON, 1661.

THE NAMES of the LORDS TEMPORAL In this Present PARLIAMENT, Begun at
Westminster the 8th day of May, in the 13th, year of the Reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the II. 1661.
Dukes of the Blood Royal.
JAMES Duke of York and Albany, Lord High Admiral of England. Rupert, Duke of
Cumberland. These take place in respect of their Offices. Edward Earl of
Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England. Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord
Treasurer of England.
DUKES.
GEorge Duke of Buckingh. Charles Duke of Richmond. George Duke of Albemarl,
General of the Armies.
MARQUESSES.
JOhn Marquess of Winchester. Edward Marq. of Worcester. William Marq. of
Newcastle. Henry Marquess of Dorchester
EARLS.
MOuntague Earl of Lindsey, Lord High Chamberlain of England. Which take place
in respect of their Offices. James Earl of Brecknock, Lord Steward of his
Majesty's Household. Which take place in respect of their Offices. Edward Earl
of Manchester, Chamberlain of the Household. Which take place in respect of
their Offices. Awbrey Earl of Oxford. Algernon Earl of Northumberl. Francis
Earl of Salop. Charles Earl of Deroy. John Earl of Rutland. William Earl of
Bedford. Philip Earl of Pembrook and Mountgomery. Theophilus Earl of Lincoln.
Charles Earl of Nottingham. James Earl of Suffolk. Richard Earl of Dorcet.
William Eart of Sarum. John Earl of Exon. John Earl of Bridgewater. Robert Earl
of ^eicester. James Earl of Northampton. Charles Earl of Warwick. William Earl
of Devon. Basil Earl of Denhigh. George Earl of Bristoll. Lionel Earl of
Middlesex. Henry Earl of Holland John Earl of Clare. Oliver Earl of
Bullingbrook. Mildmay Earl of Westmerland. Thomas Earl of Berks. Thomas Earl of
Cleveland. Edward Earl of Mulgrave. Henry Earl of Monmouth. James Earl of
Marlborough. Thomas Earl of Rivers. Henry Earl of Dover. Henry Earl of
Peterborough. Henry Earl of Stamford. Henry Earl of Winchelsey. Charles Earl
of Carnarvan. Mountjoy Earl of Newport. Philip Earl of Chesterfield. John Earl
of Thanet. Jeremy Earl of Portland. William Earl of Stafford. Robert Earl of
Sunderland. James Earl of Sussex. George Earl of Norwich. Nicholas Earl of
Scarsdale. Henry Earl of St. Albans. Edward Earl of Sandwich. Edward Earl of
Clarendon. Arthur Earl of Essex. Thomas Earl of Cardigan. Arthur Earl of
Anglesey. John Earl of Bathe. Charles Earl of Carlisle.
VISCOUNTS.
LEicester Viscount Hereford Francis Viscou^t Mountag. William Viscount Say
and Seal. Edward Viscount Conway Baptist Viscount Cambden. William Viscount
Stafford. Thomas Viscount Falconberge. John Viscount Mordant.
BARONS.
JOhn Lord Nevill of Aburgavenny. James Lord Tutchett of Awd. ley. Charles Lord
West De La Ware. George Lord Berkley of Berkley Thomas Lord Parker of Morley,
and Mountegle. Francis Lord Dares. Conyers Lord Darcy of Darcy. William Lord
Stourton of Stourton. William Lord Sandis De Le Vine. Edward Lord Vaux of
Harrowden. Thomas Lord Windsor. Thomas Lord Wentworth. Wingfeild Lord Cromwell.
George Lord Bruce. Philip Lord Wharton of Wharton. Francis Lord Willoughby of
Parham. William Lord Pagit of Beaudesert. Dudley Lord North. William L. Shandos
of Sudeley John Lord Carey of Hunsdon. William Lord Peter. Dutton Lord Gerard
of Gerards Bromley. Charles Lord Stanhope of Harrington. Henry Lord Arundel of
Wardour. Christopher Lord Roper of Tenham. Robert Lord Brook. Edward Lord
Mountague of Boughton. Charles Lord Howard of Charlton. William Lord Gray of
Warke. John Lord Roberts of Truro. William Lord Craven of Hampstead John Lord
Lovelace of Hurley. John Lord Paulet of Hinton St. George. William Lord Maynard
Thomas Lord Coventry of Aylesborow. Edward Lord Howard of Escrick. Warwick Lord
Mohun Percy Lord Herbert of Powis. Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Francis
Lord Seymour of Trow. bridge, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. Thomas
Lord Bruce of Wharlton, Francis Lord Newport of High areall. Thomas Lord Leigh.
Christopher Lord Hatton. Henry Lord Hastings of Lough-borough. Richard Lord
Byron. Richard Lord Vaughan. Charles Lord Smith of Carrington. William Lord
Widdrington. Humble Lord Ward. Thomas Lord Culpeper of Thoresway. Isaac Lord
Astley of Bramford. Richard Lord Boil of Clifford. John Lord Lucas. John Lord
Bellasis. Lodowick Lord Watson of Rockingham. Charles Lord Gerard of Brandon.
Robert Lo. Sutton of Lexington Charles Lord Kirkhoven of Wotton. Marmaduke Lord
Langdale of Holme. William Lord Crofts. John Lord Berkley of Stratton Denzill
Lord Hollis of Ifeild. Frederick Lord Cornwallis of Eye. George Lord De La-Mere
of Dunham Massey. Horatio Lord Townsend of Lynn Regis. Anthony Lord Ashley de
Winborn Saint Giles. John Lord Crew de Stene.
The Names of the ASSISTANTS in the House of PEERS.
Sir Robert Foster Knight, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Harbotle Grimston
Baronet, Mr. of the Rolls. Orlando Bridgman, Knight and Baronet, Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas Matthew Hale, Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Thomas Mallet
Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench. Thomas Twisden Knight, one
other of the Justices of the Kings Bench. Wadham Windham Knight, one other
Justice of the Kings Bench. Robert Hide Knight, one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas. Thomas Terill Knight, one other Justice of the Common Pleas.
Samuel Brown Knight, one other Justice of the Common Pleas. Edward Atkins
Knight Barons of the Exchequer. Christopher Turner Knight Barons of the
Exchequer. Jeffery Paliner Knight, Attorney General. John Glynne Knight
Sergeants at Law. William Wild Knight Sergeants at Law. Edward Nicholas as
Knight, chief Secretary. Masters of the Chancery attending according to the
direction of the Lord Chancellor.
The Officers attending there.
The Clerk of the Crown. The Clerk of the Parliament. The Usher of the black
Rod. The Yeoman-Vsher.
The placing of the Lords in Parliament, and other Assemblies, and Conferences
of Councils as established by Act of Parliament, 3 H. 8. 10.
FOrasmuch as in all great Councils and Congregations of men, having sundry
Degrees and Offices in the Commonwealth, it is very requisite and convenient
that an Order should be had and taken for the placing and sitting of such
persons as be bound to resort to the same, to the intent that they knowing
their places, may use the same without displeasure or let of the Councils.
Therefore the Kings most Royal Majesty although it appertains unto his
Prerogative Royals, to give such Honor, Reputation, and placing to his
Counselors, and other his Subjects as shall be seeming to his most Excellent
Wisdom, is nevertheless pleased and contented for an Order to be had and
taken in this his most high Court of Parliament, that it shall be Enacted in
manner and form as hereafter follows.

None shall sit on either side of the cloth of Stave.
1. That no person or persons of what Estate, Degree or Condition soever, he or
they be (except only the Kings Children) shall at any time hereafter attempt or
presume, to sit or have place at any side of the Cloth of Estate in the
Parliament Chamber, neither of one hand of the Kings Majesty, nor of the other,
whether the Kings Majesty be there personally present or absent. 2. Every
person which shall have the office of Vicegerent Ecclesiastical of the grant of
the K. Highness, The Kings Vicegerent.
his heirs or successors shall sit and be placed in this and all Parliaments
hereafter, to be holden on the right side of the Parliament Chamber, and upon
the same Form that the Archbishop of Canterbury sits on, and above the said
Archbishop and his successors, and shall have voice in every Parliament to
assent or dissent, as other the Lords of the Parliament. 3. That next to the
Vicegerent shall sit the Archbishop of Canterbury, How the Bish* are placed in
Parliament.
and then next to him on the same form and side the Arch Bishop of York, and
next to him on the same form and side the Bishop of London, and next to him on
the same side and form, the Bishop of Duresme, and next to him on the same side
and form the Bishop of Winchester, and then all other Bishops shall sit and be
placed on the same side after their ancienties as it has been accustomed. 4.
That, The Lord Chancellor The Lord Treasurer The Lord President of the Kings
Council. and The Lord Privy Seal.
Being of the Degree of Barons of the Parliament, or above, shall sit and be
placed as well in this, as in all other Parliaments hereafter to be holden on
the left side of the said Parliament Chamber, on the higher part of the form of
the same side above all Dukes, except only such as shall happen to be the Kings
Son, the Kings Brother, the Kings Uncle, the Kings Nephew, or the Kings
Brothers or Sisters Sons. 5. That the Great Chamberlain The Constable The
Marshal The Lord Admiral The Great Master or Lord Steward The Kings
Chamberlain, etc.
shall sit and be placed after the Lord Privy Seal, in manner and form
following, that is to say, every of them shall sit and be placed, above all
other personages, being of the same Estates or Degrees, that they shall happen
to be of. The Kings Secretary.
6. That the Kings chief Secretary, being of the Degree of a Baron of the
Parliament, shall sit and be placed before and above all Barons, not having any
of the Offices aforementioned; and if he be a Bishop, that then he shall sit
and be placed above all other Bishops, not having any of the Offices
aforementioned. 7. All Dukes Marquesses. Earls. Viscounts. and Barons.
not aformentioned not having any of the Offices aforesaid shall sit and be
placed after their Ancienty, as it has been accustomed. 8. That if any person
or persons which at any time hereafter shall happen to have any of the said
Offices of Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings
Council, Lord Privy-Seale. Or Chief Secretary,
who is under the Degree of a Baron of the Parliament, The Places of great
Officers under the Degree of Barons.
by reason whereof they can have no interest to give any Assent or dissent in
the said House, that then in every such case, such of them as shall happen to
be under the degree of a Baron, shall sit and be placed at the uppermost part
of the woolsacks, in the midst of the said Parliament Chamber, either there to
sit upon one form, or upon the uppermost woolsack, the one of them above the
other in Order, as is above rehearsed. Places in Trial by Peers.
9. That in all Trials of Treasons by Peers of this Realm, if any of the Peers
that shall be called hereafter to be Triers of such Treasons, shall happen to
have any of the Offices aforesaid, that then they having such Offices, shall
sit and be placed according to their Offices, above all the other Peers that
shall be called to such Trial, in manner and form as is above mentioned and
rehearsed. 10. That as well in all Parliaments, and in all other Assembles and
Conferences of Councils. The Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
Presidents, the Lord Privy Seal, the great Chamberlain, the Constable, the
Marshal, the Lord Admiral, the Grand Master, or Lord Steward, the Kings
Chamberlain, and the Kings chief Secretary, shall fit and be placed in such
order and fashion as is above rehearsed, and not in any other place.
FINIS.

