Helps to the ASSURANCE OF GOD'S LOVE: Whereby a true Believer may, with the
help of Gods good Spirit, know that he had a Being in the Love of God before he
had a Being in the World.

To which is Added, A spiritual Touchstone for the trial of the Sincerity of
our Love to God.

By Samuel Pack Preacher of the Gospel.

London, Printed by T. M. for the Author, 1673.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe sense of Gods love is that which is a Saints Heaven here in its
inchoation, and shall be their Heaven hereafter in its Consummation. The more
thou have of the clear discoveries of Gods love in thy heart: The more will thou be (from thy heart) discovering thy love to the God of Love; The brighter
the love of God does shine in thy Soul (notwithstanding thy sins committed
against this loveing God, the more will thy heart burn against thy Sins which
thou have committed against this God of love; the deeper draught thou have of
the assurance of Gods everlasting love to thee the more will the waters of
Marah, even the bitter waters of affliction be sweetened unto thee; the more thy
heart is lifted up in contemplation of that fullness of comfort and joy which
the God of love, in the riches of his love has laid up for thee in another
world, the more will thou be lifted up above and weaned from an inordinate love
unto, or delight and complacency in the inticeing vanities of this world; and
foramuch as this love of God in Christ is that sea and sun, that mine and
fountain from whence through Christ we are Partakers of those Glorious
Privileges of Election by God, peace with God together with adoption,
perseverance, and an interest in the new Covenant, which contains in the
Bowels thereof Effectual calling and Pardon of Sin and a participation of the
Spirit in all his saveing influential operations, I have therefore I say in the
first place laid down 12 characters of Gods love to believers. And now, Reader,
I have given thee a hint of that which is contained in the sequel of this
discourse, I think it not amiss to discover to thee the occasion of the
Publishing these few sheets, which is first from some fears and Jealousies that
are upon my Spirit, that God is comeing in some cloudy dispensation; Rev. 10.1.
And when God shall be pleased thus to wrap himself up in a cloud, Then nothing
will comfort a child of God like the shining face of of Gods love in Christ,
and an interest in that Rainbow of his Covenant, in which Covenant he has made
over himself in all his Attributes, for (...) Protection and Consolation in a
day of Trial: Another cause of my Publishing these lines is the mistakes that
are both in the wicked and the Godly about their interest in the love of God,
wicked men they ground their hopes of an interest in Gods-love upon their
outward enjoyments, because they Prosper in the world, and all things go well
with them as to their outward concerns; which outward Prosperity is so far from
being an evidence of Gods Everlasting love, that it is rather (being
unsanctified) a sign of his hatred and displeasure; and as for Gods people
they are under a great mistake on the other hand, apprehending their outward
afflictions, to be signs of Gods hatred and displeasure, whereas those outward
afflictions (being Sanctified) are signs of Gods everlasting love; now for the
sakes of such afflicted Jobs who under bitter trials are ready to cry out he
counts me for his enemy, I have undertook this work, that they may drink
those waters of Marah with more comfort; when they know that these afflictions
are laid on them by one that has an everlasting love toward them. The last
reason of my Publishing those evidences of Gods love, and Election, and
Adoption, is not (I hope) because I would be in Print; neither because I look
upon these Sermons to be more worth, than other Sermons that are never like to
come to the press; but because several Precious Souls that heard me, when I
did Preach upon those words in the 1 Ephesians the latter part of the 3 verse,
Who has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ,
etc.) did earnestly desire me to write them out those uses of trial or
examination, whereby they might be assured, that they had an interest in those
spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, etc. which we then reduced to
these 12 heads: 1. the Love of God, 2. Election, 3. Adoption, 4. an Interest in
the New Covenant, 5. Spiritual wisdom, 6. Perseverance in grace 7. Pardon of
Sin, 8. Sanctification of our Nature; 9. Justification, of our Persons, 10. the
Acceptance of our Duties, 11. Supportation under and Consolation in our
Sufferings, 12. Glorification. And as I handled these Particulars before
mentioned, I laid down some trials where we might know, whether those Spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ, were ours, and seeing God is so ready
to fulfill the desires of them that fear him; I think it is our duties in our
Places, to lay out our selves to the utmost of our abilities to fulfill the
desires of Gods People; especially when they desire that which may conduce to
the honor of God and the good of their precious Souls: what is it that brings
more honor unto the God of Heaven, then (...) holy, the humble, and cheerful
walking of his people while they are here on earth? and what is it that will
cause a believer, to be more holy, humble and cheereful, than to know that he
has an interest in those spiritual blessings which are more worth than 10000
worlds? Now that Gods people may know that they are interested in those
spiritual blessings, I have laid down many trials to evidence our interests in
each of them, that so if a believer cannot experience one trial he may
experience another, and if those poor labors of mine do find as good
acceptance with thee, now they are in thine eyes, as they did with the people
of God when they had them in their ears, I shall be the more Encouraged, to
Publish the evidences of our interest in those other spiritual blessings which
we have before mentioned.

And if thou gainest any Comfort by my Poor endeavors, let God have the glory
from whom Proceeds every good and perfect gift; and let the Poor Penman be a
sharer in thy prayers, who is thy servant for Jesus sake.

Samuel Pack.

Twelve Discriminating Characters.
Whereby A poor Mourner in Sion, for want of the Evidences of Gods Love, may
know that he had a being in the love of God, before he had a being in the World.
1. IF thou art one that can assure thy self, that thou have an Interest in
the Love of God, thou art one that have in experimental Knowledge of this God
of Love. If thou art one that have a Practical obediential Know^edge of God,
then thou may ^omfortably and upon good grounds ^y, that God loves thee; but
it is not every Knowledge of God that will Characterize a person to be an
object of Gods love; for if we look into 1 Romans 21. we may see that there were
some that had a rational confused Knowledge of God in the book of the
Creatures; and yet we see in the latter end of the Chapter, they did rush into
the greatest Abominations imaginable. A Knowledge of God in the book of the
Creatures (only) will not keep the Creature from committing the greatest sins
against God; But thou that would Know upon sure grounds that God loves thee,
see if thou do know God in his power, as to Fear him; in his Mercy, as to
Love him, and his faithfulness to believe him. And if all the Attributes of God
have such an influence upon thee, then I dare tell thee for thy comfort, that
thou may assure thy self that God Loves thee: For Christ who is Truth it
self, says, John. 10.14. That those sheep of his whom he knows with a
Knowledge of Approbation, they know him with a knowledge of Love and Obedience:
But if thou art one that do not fear God for his Greatness, nor love him for
his Goodness, nor believe him for his Faithfulness; but in straits and
troubles, can allow thy self in taking indirect courses with Saul and
Ahaziah, 1 Samuel 28.7. 2 Kings 1.2.
it is a sign thou have at (Present) but little grounds to hope that thou art
an object of Gods Love.

2. Thou that would know whether thou can assure thy self of the Love of
God, examine thy self whether thou have received from God those peculiar
favors, which he does give only to those who are the objects of his Love. Now
there are special favors which God bestows only on his own peculiar people:
Ezekiel. 11.19.20.36.25, 26, 27.
Those special favors are A new Heart, and a new Spirit; an heart of Flesh, a
saveing knowledge of himself; a self-loathing for Sin, and an enlightened
understanding, and the fear of God, and Love to God, and Sincerity before God,
and all the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God. Now these are the special
favors which God bestows only on those that are the objects of his Love. Oh
my friends, take heed you do not build your hopes of Interest in Gods love upon
the sandy foundations of outward enjoyments. Many are ready to look upon their
outward enjoyments, as Health and Strength, Peace, and Safety, and the blessing
of God on their outward enjoyments to be infallible signs of Gods love; whereas
indeed those outward things are many times instead of being signs of Gods Love
(being Unsanctified and Misimproved) are signs of Gods Reprobateing anger. But
if God have bestowed those other favors upon thee before mentioned, then thou
may be sure that God Loves thee. The Love of God does in a providential way
extend it self to all his Creatures; But his everlasting Love, and his choycest
and endeared affections, these amongst the sons and daughters of Adam, are
only partakers of, to whom God has given a new Heart, and such a practical
Knowledge of himself, together with all the gifts and graces of his Spirit.

3. If thou art one that can upon good grounds assure thy self that thou art
an object of Gods Love, then this Love of God has been of an attractive nature
to draw thee to all thy Dutys both Relative and Religious, as we have it in
Jeremiah. 31.3. I have loved thee with an Everlasting Love; therefore with
loving Kindness have I drawn thee. My friends, I beseech you try what influence
the Love of God has upon your Hearts, in the drawing of you to those duties,
which are the most contrary to corrupt nature; and the most loathsome to the
flesh: After that Christ had manifested his love to Zacheus, and told him that
Salvation was come to his house, then he could take shame to himself, in the
acknowledgement of his Extortion. If thou can assure thy self of the Love of
God, then the Glory of the God of Love will be thy ultimate End in all thy
duties; And when thou perceivest pride, or self, or vainglory creeping into
thy duties, oh how is thy soul perplexed and disturbed. But on the contrary, if
thou art one that do that which is thy duty, but art drawn thereto by wicked
ends, thou have but little grounds to assure thy self that thou art in the Love
of God; If thou art conversant in religious duties, toward God, or charity
toward men; and art drawn thereto by Pharisaical vainglorious ends; It is
then high time for thee to look about thee, for that hopes thou have of the
Love of God, is but (...) delusion of the Devil; therefore see if it be Love to
God, that makes thee give to the Poor, and desire after communion with God,
that draws thee to hear the Word of God and to pray unto God. If it be so with
thee, thou may go home with comfort, for I dare warrant thee from the Word of
God, that God has loved thee with an everlasting Love; and that thou had a
being in the love of God before thou had a being in the world; for though a
wicked man may be contented to be found in the outside of duties, for such
self ends as he proposes to himself; yet there being enmity in his heart
against God, it is impossible he should propose Gods glory as his main and
ultimate end: Therefore if thou art brought to propose Gods glory as thy
ultimate end, it is an infallible sign that thou art an Object of Gods Love.

4. Another sign of the Love of God manifested to the Creature is, when we are
fruitful in our places, to draw others unto Jesus Christ, as well as to bring
forth the fruits of an holy conversation our selves. After that the Spouse had
been setting forth the excellency of the Love of Christ, and had been begging a
kiss of her beloved, she was so taken with his love, that presently she cries
out, Can 1.2, 4.
Draw me, we will run after thee; draw me in the singular, we in the Plural
will run after thee: A person that has tasted of the sweetness of the Love of
God, waits all opportunitys to say with David, Come and see what God has done
for my soul: oh says the soul, I was by nature an enemy to God, and not only
so, but I had enmity in my heart against God; And blessed be his name that was
pleased to bring down that enmity by shedding abroad his love in my heart. Thus
the object of Gods Love will endeavor to bring others in Love with this lovely
object the Lord Jesus Christ: in Hosea 14. after that God had (in the 4. verse)
manifested the freeness of his love to believers, we may see in the 5. and 6.
verses, that God will be as the dew upon Israel, and that he shall grow as the
lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, by which is meant nothing else but
the fruitfulness of it.

5. That Soul that has the Love of God shed abroad in it is insatiably
desirous of more of it; a David that has tasted the sweetness of the Love of
God, he can in a sense thereof cry out, Psalm. 4.6.4.51.8
Lord lift thou the light of thy countenance upon me, and Lord, restore unto me
the Joy of thy Salvation. It is reported of the Lyoness, that when she has
once tasted of man's flesh, she will never be satisfied without more of it: and
when a Soul has once tasted of the sweetness of the Love of the lion of the
Tribe of Judah, by feeding upon his flesh by Faith; he will never be satisfied
without more of it. Now if God should put them to their choice (as he did
Solomon) and ask such, whether they would have the shinings in of Gods
countenance, or the pleasures of sin: Oh, say, such Souls, Give us the
sweetness of thy love in Christ! But suppose a Soul be asked, whether it would
have the Love of God or the pleasures and profits of the World; oh says the
Soul, the profits and pleasures of the world, are but glistering vanities, that
are empty of what they promise, and inticeing with what they have; and God can
quickly take the world from me or me from the world: But if I have once the
love of God I shall enjoy it for ever: for, neither death nor life, Romans 8 38,
39
nor Angels nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor highth, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Now my friends, I
pray see whether you have these sharp appetites after more of the love of God,
then it is indeed sign that you are objects of the love of God; a true Believer
that has tasted the sweetness of the love of God, is ready to say as Rachel did
in another case, Give me Children, Genesis 30.1.
or else I dye; so says the Soul, give me more of the love of God, or else my
life will be a burden to me. Oh says the soul, I am compassed about like
Jehosaphat, with Moab, Ammon, and mount Seir; sin, the world and the Devil; the
father torments my Spirit, and the children my flesh; and being now in this
deplorable state, if God will not revive my soul with the sweet cordials of his
Love, what comfort can I have in my life? Now if thou art thus breathing after
more of the love of God, it is a sign thou have it already, or else thou
would prefer any thing before it: but if on the contrary thou can with
Herod prefer an Herodias; sinful pleasure before the love of God; and with
Saul, prefer the love of the people of the world, before the love of God; or
with Demas, prefer the profits of the world before the love of God, Mat. 14.9.
1 Samuel 15.30. 2 Timothy 4.10.
it is a sign thou never yet have had it shed abroad in thy heart.

6. Would thou know whether thou can assure thy self of the love of God,
then see whether God does exercise thee with Afflictions, and sanctify
afflictions unto thee; as unsanctified Prosperity is no certain sign of the
love of God, so neither are unsanctified Afflictions; for Ahaz was under great
afflictions, and yet an object of Gods hatred, and God is pleased to Stigmatize
him to the world, 2 Chronicles 28.22.
to be that King Ahaz. In which God does as it were point with the finger,
saying, this is that incorrigible wretch that would not be wrought upon by
Afflictions. But if thou art exercised with Afflictions; and those thou art
exercised with draw thee nearer unto God, and make thee mourn that thou
should provoke thy loving-tender-hearted father, to lay such strokes upon thy
back; and that if thou were put to thy choice thou had rather be rid of thy
Sin, than of thy afflictions and not be rid of thy sins also; it is a sign that
thou art an object of Gods love; This is cleared up from the 3 of the
Revelations, compared with Psalm. 94. (...) In the Revelations, afflictions are
made a sign of Gods love, those whom I love I rebuke and chasten, in that 94
Psalm. we may see, when afflictions are signs of Gods love, and that is, when
they are teaching Afflictions; when in Afflictions God teaches us to know the
evil of sin, in its cursed nature, which is the meritorious cause of all
Afflictions: In a word, when Afflictions are so sanctified as to make us love
God more, hate Sin more, and contenm the world more, and to desire to lie down
patiently under the hand and will of God, and say with Ely, it is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do what seems good in his sight; and with Hezekiah Good is the word
of the Lord; good is this affliction from the hand of my good God, and that it
is the grief of thy soul, when thou do find a contumacious will, thwarting
the will of God, and this reluctance in thy will to submit to the will of God
under afflicting providence is thy burden; then I say it is a good sign, nay,
an infallible sign, that God does exercise thee with those afflictions in love
to thy precious Soul. Indeed it is too ordinary for Gods people, yea his
beloved ones, to look upon Afflictions as signs of Gods anger; but though it be
so with some, yet it is not so with all. I knew a gracious woman in Cambridge
was wont to say, that if God should not be pleased sometimes to afflict her,
she should fear he had forgot her: and truly, I think, if there were more of
this gracious submissive frame of Spirit amongst Christians, in making a right
construction of the dealings of God toward them, it would put a period to
those murmurings and complaints, and that uncomfortable deportment that does so
much predominate even in Gods beloved ones when they are under Afflictions.

7. If thou would know whether thou art an object of Gods love, then see if
God does give thee Communion with himself in dutys; an object of Gods hatred
may enjoy the ordinances of God; but only true Believers can enjoy Communion
with the God of Ordinances. Can. 2.4. The Spouse tells us, that when her
beloved brought her into the banqueting house his banner over her was love;
which in the original is the house of wines, and is therefore very fitly
translated banqueting, because wine is frequently used at banqueting: and
that which is comprehended in the words is mainly this, that when believers are
found diligently attending on the means of grace, God will at one time or
other, in one degree or other, manifest himself and his love toward them. The
world is compared to a sea, and Gods people in the world are like the disciples
on the sea, tossed with the waves of afflictions and temptations, and Christ
apppears to them spiritually as he did to the disciples corporally, but they
are ready to cry out as the disciples did, it is a Spirit; oh says a Soul, I
had a little comfort in such an ordinance, but I am afraid it is but a Spirit,
delusion; but at length Christ speaks so powerfully to the Soul, by the
operations of his holy Spirit, that the Soul knows it to be the voice of
Christ. And then with the disciples it gladly receives Christ into its Soul,
and when Christ does thus communicate himself, he does then manifest his
endeared affection to it: oh but methinks, I hear some poor Soul ready to say,
truly here is but little comfort for me, for if Gods communicating himself to a
Soul in the manner you have been speaking be a sign of Gods love, then God help
me, my case is bad enough, for I do not find such communications of the graces
and comforts of the Spirit to my Soul. God knows I come time after time to hear
the word, and I go to prayer, and I receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
but I come with a dead heart and a dull Spirit, and so I go away again and have
none of those quickening influences of the Spirit reviving and refreshing of my
Soul. God does not make me joyful in his house of prayer, which makes me fear
that I am none of those whom God loves. Poor Soul, do thou utter this
mournful language, in a formal complementing way, or is it the language of a
Nathaniel? does it proceed really from thy heart* then take this for thy
comfort and carry it home with thee, and let it be as a cordial to revive thy
poo^ drooping Spirits. That God has already communicated himself to thy Soul:
or else thou would never desire after communion with him in duty. As a wicked
earthly minded Ahab (having never so much of the earth) is sick with vexation
of Spirit, for want of Naboths vineyard; so a Godly, Heavenly, Heaven born
Saint (though it does enjoy communion with God) it is dissatisfied, because it
thinks it has not so much as others: a stone cast up into the air will never
rest till it comes to the earth which is its center, so God being the center of
a gracious Soul, it is restless without communion with him, but on the
contrary, if thou can go from one duty to another and sit down satisfied with
the bare performance of the duty; and yet art flattering thy self that thou art
an object of Gods love; I tell thee thou art but feeding on the east wind, and
carrying lie in thy right hand, for there are one that can assure themselves of
he love of God, but they have such Revelation of God to their Souls, ^s does
fill them with Heavenly ^oys: Or make them be dissatisfied without those
comfortable discove^es of God to their Souls.

8. Would thou be assured of ^he love of God through a suffering Christ, then
see if God has given ^hee an heart to desire to suffer for Christ: when Christ
has helped the ^oul by an eye of says, to see what ^reat things he will suffer
for his sake, does as the Apostle says, constrein ^he soul to expose it self,
to the ^reatest sufferings for the cause of God, when he shall be pleased to
all him to it. When the love of God ^omes to be shed abroad, in the ^eart by
the holy Ghost, it will make a Soul say (with Paul) that it glories in
tribulation; when the Soul comes to be inflamed with the love of God, many
waters of affliction from God, nor floods of persecutions from men cannot drown
it: oh says the soul, how can I show my love enough to God, that has showed
so much love to me? But on the contrary, if thou art one that will suffer
nothing for God, thou can not upon any sure grounds assure thy self, that
Christ has suffered any thing for thee to purchase the love of God.

9. Would thou know thy interest in the love of God, then see if thou do
hate sin. For it is inconsistent, for the Revelation of Gods love to the soul,
and the manifestation of the souls love to sin, to be in the soul at one and
the same time: nothing gives such a mortal wound to sin, nor makes it bleed to
death sooner, in the soul, than the manifestation of the love of a wounded
Savior that did bleed for the soul. My Friends, you may take this for a
certain truth, that proportionably to the love of God that is manifested unto
you, such will be your hatred of sin that you commit against God, as a woman
that has experienced much of her husbands love, it makes her violent against
her husbands enemies, so a believer having experienced much of the love of God,
sets his soul the more against sin which he knows is Gods greatest enemy: oh
says the Soul (that has the love of God shed abroad in it) how can I hug this
sin in my bosom that did pierce my dear and loving Lord Jesus to the heart,
how can I hide this sin as sugar under my tongue, which did cause the tongue of
my Lord Jesus to utter those bitter cries, and heart rending expressions, with
his eyes full of tears, and his heart full of lamentations; My God my God why
have thou forsaken me? when God has once discovered the freeness of his Love
unto his people, they quickly say with Ephraim, what have I to do any more with
Idols? but if on the contrary thou love and delightest in sin, and art ready
to extenuate it, it is a sign that the love of God is not shed abroad in thy
Soul.

10. If thou art one that can really experience the love of God in and to thy
Soul, thou art not only brought to hate sin, because it is such an enemy to
that God who has manifested so much love to thy Soul, but God has really
destroyed Sin in thy Soul, it being thine enemy as well as his. I shall
endeavor to set it forth by a similitude, and how God does manifest his love
to his people by destroying their corruption, suppose a man were walking on the
way with his wife, and she straying out of the way should be surprised by a
company of bloody cutthroats, and having took away or defaced her ornaments
they should go about to murder her; now though her husband could stand still
awhile and see his wife somewhat roughly handled, (that she might take heed
another time how she strayed so far from him) yet when he sees them about to
murder her, then his bowels yern toward her, and though she were in a fault
yet still she was his wife, whereupon he goes to her rescue, destroys those
enemies of hers which otherwise would have destroyed her; and thus he shows his
love to his wife. Truly my friends thus it is, a true believer has God for his
husband, while we are in this world, we are walking on the way to heaven
enjoying the presence of our heavenly busband; but the allurements of the flesh
and the world are apt to draw us aside out of the way (when we are off from our
watch). And presently we (like David) are surprised with sins and devilish
lusts, which do quickly rob us of our comforts, making us to stand in need
(with David) to cry, Restore unto us the joy of thy Salvation: and God seems
to take but little notice of us, but when our spiritual enemies shall go about
to take away our spiritual life (for it is in the nature of predominating
corruption, that it would in time eat out the very life and power of Godliness)
and so to expose us to eternal death. Then is the time for our Spiritual
husband to show his love to his poor spouse, in destroying those enemies; and
thou that can assure thy self of the love of God, thou rejoycest more when
God does manifest his love in destroying thy corruptions than in all outward
enjoyments whatsoever. But if on the contrary thy corruptions grow and thrive
as much as ever, thou have no ground to assure thy self that God loves thee.
When Christ manifested his love to his spouse in incourageing of her to duty,
Cant. 2.14, 15. Oh thou that art in the clifts of the rock, in the secret
places of the stairs, let me hear thy voice, let me see thy countenance, for
sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. Pray mind what follows, Take
us those foxes, those little foxes which corrupt the vines or spoil the vines,
for our vines have tender grapes: by those foxes we understand as well sin in
the heart as heretic in the Church; which sins the soul rejoices in the
destructions of, which have got an evidence of Gods Love.

11. Another sign of our interest in the love of God is, if we have received
spiritual life from the God of life and love; this we may see in the 16 of
Ezekiel comparing the 6. verse with the 8. In the 8. verse we have the
impulsive cause of our spiritual life, and that is the love of God, thy time
was the time of love. In the 6. verse we have the effect of the Love of God
toward us, and this is spiritual life, I say unto thee live. So likewise in
the 2 Gal. 20. see how the Apostle makes out his interest in the love of God;
says he (speaking of his spiritual life) I live, yet not I, but Christ that
lives in me; and the life that I now live is by the faith of the Son of God
who loved me and gave himself for me. Now my friends I beseech you draw out
your hearts before the Lord, and deal faithfully with your own souls, and see
whether you can say with Paul, that the life that you now live is by the faith
of the Son of God; then indeed you may comfortably read on the verse and say,
who loved me, and gave himself for me; till we have received spiritual life
from Christ, we can never assure our selves of the love of Christ, nor any
benefit by the death of Christ. And so in the 2 of the Ephesians. we may see, that
our spiritual life is an effect of the great love of God toward us in Jesus
Christ. Says the Apostle in the 4. verse, According to the great love
wherewith he has loved us. In verse the 5. Even when we were dead in sins has
he quickened us together with Christ. Now let us see whether the Spirit of life
in Christ has made us free from the law of sin and death. Now we know that the
difference between a dead man and a living man is this; A dead man has not his
use of his senses, (as hearing, seeing, feeling, tasting, smelling) but a
living man has the use of all or some of them. Now soul, would thou read the
love of God in thy spiritual life, then see whether thou have thy spiritual
eyesight; has God anointed thy eyes with spiritual eye salve, and made thee
see in some measure the beauty of holiness and the excellency of Christ, the
worth of Gods favor, the vanity of the world and the loathsomness of Sin, so
as to loath thy self for Sin. now as dead men having no sight, can see no more
beauty or brightness in the Sun, than in a dunghill; so a Person dead in
trespasses and sins can see, nor Brightness or Splendour, Beauty, or Luster, in
the Sun of Righteousness. But if thou art one that can experience the love of
God in raising thee from the death of sin to the life of Righteousness, thou
can no longer say (with the daughters of Jerusalem) What is thy beloved more
than another beloved; Cant. 5.
but thou will be ready to say (with the daughters of Sion) my beloved is white
and Ruddy the chiefest of ten thousand. Cant. 5.10.
And as this spiritual life does convince a man of the Excellency of Christ, so
likewise of the ugliness of Sin: Now soul, see if thou have this spiritual
feeling: we know that as a dead man cannot see so he cannot feel; though you
should ^ay a millstone upon him he is sensible of no more weight than if it were
feather, but a living man is quickly sensible of a little weight: so is it with
one spiritually dead in trespasses and sins, he feels no weight in his Sins
though they be heavier than the whole creation, though sin be so heavy that it
is a burden to God, good angels, and good Men, and wicked Angels, and the whole
creation; yet a wicked man that is spiritually dead feels no weight therein:
but if thou have this spiritual life thou art made sensible of the burden of
Sin, whether in action, in thought, or in word, and thou have much trouble upon
thy spirit for those sins, which a wicked man would make nothing of; and if it
be so with thee, then go home with comfort, thou art one that may say that
God has loved thee with an everlasting love and that God has manifested his
love to thee in raising thee from the death of sin to the life of righteousness.

12. And lastly, would thou know whether thou art an object of Gods love?
then see if God be the highest object of thy love, for though Gods love to us
do not flow from our love to God (for says John, 1 John. 1.9.
we love him because he first loved us) yet our love to God is an infallible
symptom, and glorious effect of Gods love to us; for though God does not love
thee because thou love him, yet till thou do love him thou have no ground
to believe that he does love thee; now in regard that Gods beloved ones are so
ready to question their love to God as well as Gods love to them, I intend to
insist upon this Particular by it self, and all that I shall say to it at
Present is this, that if thou art one that love God, thou do love the
People of God, and the ordinances of God, and wilt not sit down satisfied in an
ordinance, without communion with God in the ordinance, and thou have an
implacable hatred of sin: now my friends see if it be so with you, does your
love to God thus manifest it self?

But if it be otherwise with thee, instead of hateing sin you love it, instead
of making communion with God your end in duty, you make self, pride, and vain
glory your end: If instead of letting your thoughts dwell upon God, you are
dwelling upon the world and vanity; you can have but little well-grounded hopes
that you love God, and consequently that God loves you; for says the Apostle,
we love him because he first loved us; in which words we have, first an effect,
Secondly a cause; the effect is our love to God, we love him; Secondly the
cause, God loves us: and says Jesus Christ the Wisdom of the father, I love
them that love me; we must not think the meaning of the holy Ghost in that
Scripture is to make our love to God the cause of Gods love to us, but the
evidence of it. Now my friends, I beseech you gather up all again; and see
whether you can experience in your own souls that you have a true knowledge of
God and the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God, and whether this love of God
does constrain thee to duty: And whether thou art a fruit-baring Christian, and
do, in the place in which God has put thee, endeavor to bring others to
God; and examine thine unsatiable desires after more of this love of God; and
examine whither God does sanctify afflictions unto thee, and give thee
communion with himself in duty; and art thou made willing to suffer for God,
and art thou made to hate sin; and has God destroyed thy enemies which are thy
sins: and see if thou have received spiritual life from God, and have a Sincere
love to God. Now to conclude, if thou find none of these marks in thy soul
of Gods love, thy case is sad, I would not be in thy Condition for ten thousand
worlds: yet though I would discourage thee from going on in thy Sin, because a
constant persisting in a course of Sin, is a dreadful Sign of Gods hatred; yet
I dare not discourage thee in thy attendance on the means of grace because
those are Gods lattices through which he does flourish himself, Can. 2.9. Or,
as we have it translated, show himself unto poor souls: therefore thou that
can experience nothing of the love of God; I beseech thee as thou tendrest
the good of thy precious and immortal soul, be constant in attending on the
means of grace; thou know not how soon God may dart in such beams of his
love to thy soul through the thick glass of Gospel ordinances, as may make thee
cry out with the spouse, stay me with Flagons, strew me a bed with Apples, for
I am sick of Love. And for you that can say you have had experience of the love
of God; and can say of a truth that Christ has kissed you with the kisses of
his Lips, and that his left Arm has been under your neck, and his right Arm
has embraced you; you that can say that the time was when You did sit under
the banner of my beloved with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to your
taste; you that can say, that the time was when God did flourish himself unto
your Souls, through the Lattice, and the Sun of Righteousness did shine upon
your Tabernacle; That God did so manifest himself unto your Souls in all or
most of his Ordinances, that it may be you did not know whether you were in the
body or out of the body, (as Paul says) your hearts have been forewarned and
affected with the presence of God by the influence of his Spirit; Now it may be
you walk in darkness and have no light, instead of that sweet communion you had
with God in duty; it may be there may be nothing but deadness, and dullness of
heart, and indisposition of Soul to duty; It may be instead of that shining in
of Gods love unto your Souls, you may (with Job) apprehend God to be your
Enemy, and be ready to say that God does set a print on your Heels and on your
Feet, and sew up your iniquities in a bag, and seal up your sins, Job 13.24,
26, 27. you that could formerly say (with David) come and see what God has
done for my Soul, it may be, are now ready to say (with Job,) have pity upon as
oh our friends, for the hand of the Lord is upon us, Job 19, 21. and with the
Church in the Lamentations, Is it nothing to you all you that pass by? Behold
and see if there be any sorrow like my sorrow, Lam. 1.12. which is done unto
me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce Wrath. Oh woe
is (...) us, for the Day of Comfort and Consolation is passing away and the
shadows of the evening and morning are stretched out Now poor souls, you that
are thu^ in Hell upon Earth for want o^ comfort and consolation from Heaven,
give me leave to speak two or three words to you, in order to the reducing you
to you former comfortable estate; yo^ that are thus afflicted and to^sed with
Tempest, and not comforted; it will be your prudenc^ and it does highly concern
you to take notice what wind hat^ brought this Tempest, which ha^ filled your
Souls with such clouds of despondencies: for either the East Wind of sinful
Security, or the North Wind of pinching Adversity, or the South Wind of
unsanctified Prosperity, has undoubtedly raised these storms in your Souls,
which for some time and in some measure make an interposition between the
comfortable rays of the Light of Gods Countenance and thy poor soul. For the
first, see if the east wind of sinful security has not raised this Tempest of
dejection and despondency: though God does greatly delight to secure his
people from the God of this world, yet his people will find but small comfort
in their sinful security before God, whilst they be in this World; though God
does so watch over a believer that he shall never be overcome by temptations,
yet for want of watchfulness in a believer, God may suffer him to be exposed to
Temptation; though a true believer cannot lose the God of comfort and
consolation, yet he may for a time lose the comfort and consolation of his God:
if the blasting East wind of carnal security make the ears thin and empty, no
wonder if thou art not filled with the south wind of comfort and consolation;
if David and Peter think their mountain so strong that they shall not be moved,
to deny the Fountain of their Comfort and Consolation, God will most certainly
deny them (for a time) the Comforts from the Fountain. Again in the next place,
see if the south wind of unsanctified prosperity have not blown up these storms
of sanctifiing Adversity; for Gods end in imbittering our beloved outward
enjoyments (by denying us his comforting presence) is to make his consolations
more sweet unto us, and us more earnestly to labor after the enjoyment of
them: when Gods beloved ones have too much delight in, and too much love to the
world, so as to undervalue the heavenly manna of Gods love; then the God of
love will manifest his delight in, and love to his people, in leaveing them (as
to his comforting presence) (with the prodigal) to seed upon the husks of
outward enjoyments, till they are brought to see the incongruity, that is
between the empty, inticeing, transitory vanity of this World: and their
sublime and immortal Souls, which can receive no real comfort from, or any
satisfactory delight or complacency, in any thing but what is of its own
nature. For (...) the soul of a believer merely as it is a Creature, is an
immortal substance and the very breath of God; and therefore no wonder though
the creature find such an insufficiency of comfort in all outward enjoyments,
they being so much below and unsuitable to its nature. And that I take to be
the reason why Solomon says Prove. 14.13. that in the midst of laughter the
heart may be sad; the fading, earthy, mortal body may laugh in the enjoyment of
fading, earthly, momentany things, and yet the heart and soul may be sad for
want of something of its own nature for to take delight and complacency in. Now
let us draw to Conclusion; in a word there must be an assimulation between the
Object of delight, and the Subject delighting it self in that object. As for
example, a fish of a cold and moist nature delights in the passive element of
water, being of its own nature; But the Salamander being of a fiery nature
delights in the active element of fire: So a true believer, being a new
creature, born of God by regeneration, cannot but mourn in the bitterness of
his soul, when it does consider how the fleshy part has prevailed against his
Spiritual part (being off from his watch) as (with Michal) to send away his
blessed King David (as to his comforting presence) and have left nothing but an
Image of outward Enjoyments in the room thereof. And if Gods beloved Sampsons
will be solaceing of themselves in the laps of the deceitful Dalilahs, you can
expect nothing but that those sweet Syrene-like songs should end in the
shipwreck of their spiritual Joys: Having provoked God, to deliver them up
(with Sampson) to the Philistines, to cut off the seven locks of their spiritual
strength, and leave them in the hands of their spiritual enemies, that will by
(filling of their Souls with horror and vexation of Spirit) do their utmost, to
keep those from heaven whilst they live, which they see they cannot keep from
heaven when they dye. And now I come to the North wind of affliction, which
does often make Gods David's cry out, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and with
Gods Jobs to look upon outward afflictions to be signs of Gods anger and
displeasure; whereas indeed as well the North Wind of sanctified afflictions as
the South Wind of sanctified prosperity blowing upon our gardens, will make our
spices flow forth, will make us to be much in exercising the gifts and graces
of the spirit of God in us. Now, soul, see which of these winds it is that has
blown up this dreadful storm in thy soul? if it be the East Wind of sinful
security, or the South Wind of unsanctified prosperity, or the North Wind of
adversity? And indeed as sin is the meritorious cause of affliction, so
affliction makes a soul apprehend it self to be a greater sinner than others,
when it is more afflicted than others. And the Devil has a great hand in this,
for as he persuades the^ that their prosperitis is a sign of Gods love, so he
persuades Gods people, that afflictions are signs of Gods hatred. If the people
of God did but know the gracious end God has in afflicting them, they would
never look upon them to be signs of his displeasure: For Gods ends in
afflicting his people are to glorify his wisdom in their Direction, and his
holiness in their Sanctification, and his power in their Supportation and
Preservation, and that they might be more conformable to Christ their head, and
that they may hate sin the more, and contemn the world the more, and long after
heaven the more, and that they may be in the better capacities to sympathize
with Gods people in their suffering, when they are under the like afflictions,
and to make heaven the sweeter to them, by making the world bitter. Now soul,
thou that art under these clouds, and tossed with these tempests, and not
comforted, be sure to look often into the waters of the sanctuary upon the
bended knees of thy soul, and there thou shall see the Comet that has made the
interposition between the shineing rays of Gods love and thy poor soul; and
when thou have found out this Achan that troubles the camp, that made thee flee
before the men of Aie; and after thou have conquered Jericho, and by Gods
ministers sounding of the Gospel-Trumpet beat down the walls of the cursed
Jericho of the Kingdom of darkness in thy soul; when thou have found out the
Achan that would preserve any of the cursed thing, be unpotant with thy blessed
Joshuah, which brings his true Israel into the land of promise, that he would
pass the sentence of death, on this thee vish Achan, that first stole thy heart
from the God of comfort and consolation, and then stole from thee the sweet
consolations of thy God: Oh soul, let not the Silver or Gold of
worldly-mindedness which lies hid in the midst of Achans tent, let not any
external profit that thy sin may bring thee in, make Achan fair ever the
better; but seek diligently for it, for it lies hid in the midst of the tent
where it might be the least suspected; and see if Achan has not been a troubler
to thee by stealing something else besides the wedg of Gold, see if he has not
got a cloak of Shinar or a Babylonish garment of self-righteousness.

My meaning is this; look diligently into thy heart, see if thou art not ready
to be prideing of thy self in thy dutys, and having had great Inlargements in
prayer, art thou not ready to think that that duty (as it comes from thee) is
more likely to find acceptance with God, than those poor broken expressions of
thy friend, whom it may be thou contemnest as not having such abilities, as
thou have. Now soul, if thou can find this in thy heart, then thou may say
there is the Babylonish garment, which the old man the unregenerate part, the
cursed Achan has stole, and by which God was provoked against thee; but if thou
can say of a truth upon serious self-examination that it is otherwise with
thee, and that thy heart does not condemn thee of stealing these wedges of
gold, that thou have not an inordinate love to the world, and that thou have
not stole the Babylonish garment of spiritual pride in duty; and through grace
thou can say; that neither the East Wind of sinful security, nor the South
Wind of unsanctified prosperity, nor the North Wind of Pinching adversity have
brought these clouds over thy soul; then comfort thy self with this, that it
will not be long ere the Sun of righteousness will dispel those thick and foggy
mists of dejection and despondency with the resplendent rays of his love and
favor Mal. 4.2. it will not be long before God will say to thy Soul, oh thou
afflicted and tossed with tempests and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy
stones with fair colors, and thy foundations with saphires, Isaiah. 54.11. it
will not be long before the Lord will say unto thee thy maker is thy husband
verse. 5 though now thou look upon thy self, to be a cast-off and a refused
Creature; it will not be long before God will say unto thee by his Spirit in
his promises verse. 7. though for a small moment he hide his face from thee, yet
with everlasting kindness will he have mercy upon thee: And though now in the
extremity of thy grief, thou may seem to thy self and others, to go on
frowardly, or to turn aside, be worse by thy troubles, yet says God, I have
seen his ways and will heal him, I will lead him also and will restore comfort
to him and to his Mourners Isa. 57 17, 18.
; and though thou may possibly think God long, and say as Sisera's Mother did
in another case, Judge. 5.28. Why tarry the wheels of his Chariot: yet know this
for thy comfort, that when the seasonablest time is, Cant. 2.8. Thy beloved
will come leaping over the Hills, and Skipping over the Mountains, in so much
that the greatest opposition shall not hinder him, when the seasonablest time
is for him to come with comfort to thy soul; therefore soul, wait patiently,
for the vision is for an appointed time, and he that shall come will come, and
will not tarry; and Gods ends in staying so long before he comes with comfort
to thy soul, may be to make comfort so much the more sweet; and welcome to thy
soul, and to make thee the more wide and capacious vessel, to contain so much
the more comfort and consolation; and it is no small ground of comfort, that
God has made thee willing to wait so long for comfort, from a right object and
in a right way: it may be a ground of comfort to thee that thou art not with
Saul, seeking comfort from a musical instrument, or going to the Devil for
comfort, 1 Samuel. 16.23.28.7. Or that thou art not with Cain seeking comfort
from riches, Genesis 4.15.17. the next news you hear of Cain after his trouble of
Mind was he was building a city: it is ground of comfort that thou art not with
Ahitophel and Judas making a halter thy comforter; and therefore comfort thy
self with this, that God has made thee willing to wait on him for comfort in
his own way; and remember therefore this soul, that Gods time to comfort thee
is the best time, and howsoever those various revolution^ in thy soul, those
thy many Ups and Downs, may seem to threaten thee with a miserable
disappointment of thy comfort, yet know this that God who takes care of
temporal sparrows, will not forget hi^ spiritual doves: oh but it may be some
may be ready to say, if I were some eminent Christian such as Pete^ or Paul, or
Silas and John were, then I should think that God would concern himself with my
Condition, bu^ I am a poor inconsiderable Creatur^ slighted by the world and
slighted by Gods people, imputing my trouble to be nothing else but a pettis^
humor, and truly, I am fearful I may too truly say with (...) Church, Isa.
49.14. That God hat^ forgotten me and does overlook my trouble: poor soul take
heed tho^ do not dishonor God, by having such low and unbecoming thoughts
of him, as to think that there is any thing so great as not to be within his
power, or to be so small as not to be within his care. Thy Creation, and
Redemption, cost God as much power and love, as the Creation and Redemption of
Peter or Paul did, and God does as much concern himself with thy condition as
if he had nothing else to look after; and therefor comfort thy self with the
Con^ideration of that care and wisdom which God does manifest in all the
windings and circumstances of every Dispensation he orders forth unto ^hee.

I shall conclude this Discourse with a word to those who have had his
assurance of the love of God and still retain it. All that I shall ^ay to these
is this, be sure that your ^vidences of the love of God be ^uly grounded upon
the forementioned trials, and not upon the enjoyment of outward mercies, and
then be found constant and conscionable in the discharge of all thy relative
and religious duties, that thou may keep up in thy soul the fresh
apprehension of Gods love continually; for though thou that art a believer,
can never lose the love of God as to the habit or being of it, yet thou
may lose the love of God as to the evidence of it unto thee, and therefore
Christ bid those to whom he had discovered his love, to continue in his love,
and therefore says Jude keep your selves in the love of God.

Object. Hos. 9.15. does not God tell his people that he would love them no
more; in which words, there are two things.

First something implied, and supposed.

Secondly. Something pressed and proposed; that which is implied is that God
did love them, but that which is expressed is, that he would love them no more.
Therefore how can you make it appear that we can never lose the love of God.

Ans. We do grant that there is implied a love of God to those who were no more
to be the objects of his love, but what a love was it? we know God has a
general love to all his creatures, and this general love of pity extends it
self not only to rational creatures, but even to wicked men: God has a love of
pity even to wicked men as in Isa. 63.9. In his love and in his pity he
redeemed them, who were they that God has such a love of Pity to, we may see
in the 10 verse. It was such as were rebels against him and vexed his holy
Spirit, and in the Psalm. 78 38 verse. We may see that God was so full of
compassion that he is said to forgive their iniquitys, and would not stir up
all his wrath, yet though God did extend so much pity toward them, it did
manifest it self only in externals: let us take a view of this people, that
were such large sharers in this love of pity and compassion of God; if we look
into the 8. verse. we may see their Stubborness and Rebellion, in the 9. verse.
they turned back in the day of battle, in the 10. verse. they break Covenant
with God, and did not walk in his ways, in the 11. verse. they were forgetful
of his goodness, and for many verses together we may see their infidelity with
the highest aggravation imaginable and in the 29. verse. we may see their great
ingratitude in abuseing the mercys of God, first to eat and drink for the
gratifying their lusts, and then to rise up to play, in the 32. verse. we may
see their incorrigibleness and unbelief, and yet notwithstanding all this, God
had such a general compassion of them, and such love to them, as did engage him
so to manifest his love toward them, as to forgive their iniquitys so as not
to cut them off suddenly, and yet notwithstanding all this pitiful love of
God, extended to them in a general way, they still remain objects of his wrath
and abhorrency, so that he would neither let their bodies come into Canaan, nor
their souls into heaven, and this love mentioned in Hosea is only such a love
as is mentioned in the 63. Isai. and it is no more then if the Lord had said
unto Ephraim, I have exercised much patience toward thee, ever since Jereboam
did set up his abominable Idolatry, I have waited to be gracious a long time,
but now I will drive them out of my house I will un-church them, I will take
away mine ordinances from them, they shall no more enjoy the ordinary Symptoms
of my love, to wit, those spiritual privileges and advantages by which I do in
a general way manifest, my love to a Nation in general, and though I dare not
be positive in my assertion, I being but a man, and therefore not infallible,
yet I cannot but judge this to be the meaning, of the good spirit of our God,
because the Ordinances of Good, vouchsafed to a Nation, are in Scripture
declared to be manifestations of his love. Thus having endeavored to show the
meaning of the Holy Ghost in this Scripture, in answer to what might be
objected (from it) against the Immutability of the Love of God to believers, I
shall draw up all to this conclusion, that though (...) may seem to be mutable,
in the external manifestations of his love to a Nation in general, yet he is
immutable in his eternal love to every true believer in particular.

And this is that which may be a ground of much consolation to those that can
by what has been said, make it clear to their own souls, that they are such
that God has such an everlasting love unto, for if thou art an object of Gods
everlasting love, his Wisdom shall be engaged for thy Direction: and his Power
for thy Protection, and his Holiness for thy Sanctification, and his mercy for
thy Salvation, Oh my Friend, I want words to set forth and express the
thousand part of your happiness, that are in the love and favor of God, truly
my friends, I may say of the love of God as David did of the City of God,
glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou love of God, thou that artan object
of Gods love, thou have all the Attributes of God, and the offices of Christ,
and the influences of the Spirit all engaged for thy Sanctification and Comfort
and Consolation: the evidence of this love of God is, that which will be unto
thee bread in famine, drink in drought, peace in war, health in Sickness, like
in death: the love of God in Christ manifested to thy soul, is that tree which
will sweeten the waters of Marah, even the bitter waters of affliction: The
sense of this love of God is that which will lift thee up above the frowns and
flatteries of the world: the clear, discoveries of Gods love will make thee
willing to suffer from God or for God: and to conclude all in a world, the
sense of Gods love will make thee live holily, and live humbly, and live
thankfully, and live matchfully, and live believeingly, and live comfortably,
and live fruitfully, and dye joyfully, in full assurance of reigning gloriously
with him who loved thee before all time, and manifested his everlasting love to
thee in time, enjoying the fu^ fruition of his love when time shall be
swallowed up to eternity; and then there shall be no more sinfull^ Comets to
make an interposition, the Sun of Righteousness and thy poor soul, but
(eagle-like) thou shall be continually above the clouds of Sin or Sufferings,
and enjoy in a greater measure, then now thou art capable, of the love of God,
in as great brightness and serenity, as thou will then be in a capacity to
receive. Now to the God of love by all the objects of his love be ascribed all
Honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

