THE Rye-house Travestie: Or, a True Account and Declaration Of the Horrid and
Erecrable CONSPIRACY AGAINST His Majesty King WILLIAM and the Government.
Collected out of Original Papers and unquestionable Records, whereby the whole
Narration has undeniable Clearness and Strength. In a LETTER to the Right
Reverend Father in God, Dr. Thomas Sprat, Lord Bishop of Rochester, from his
Lordship's most Humble Servant THOMAS PERCIVAL.

-- Mutato nomine vestra
Narratur Fabula, --
LONDON, Printed for A. Bell at the Cross-Keys in the Poultry. 1696.

A True ACCOUNT of the Horrid and Execrable Conspiracy, against His Most Sacred
Majesty King WILLIAM III. and the Government. In a LETTER To the Reverend
Father in God, THOMAS Lord Bishop of ROCHESTER.
My Lord,
TO remind the Nation of the Rise, Progress and mischievous Designs of our
Blood-thirsty Iacobites, I think sit to lay open and declare to your Lordship,
and the World, an exact Account of the late accursed Conspiracy, Page 1.
which was actually formed and carried on in France against His Sacred
Majesty's Life, and against the Peaceable and Flourishing Government of His
Majesty's Kingdoms; as far forth as hitherto the Particulars of it have come to
my knowledge, by the Voluntary Confessions and undeniable Convictions of diverse
of the Principal Conspirators.

Page 2.
And I shall here faithfully present the Plain matter of Fact; whereby I doubt
not but wholly to put to silence the Malicious Insinuations of Factious Men,
who have hitherto had the Artifice to support and encourage their Party by
Impudent Slanders and Falsehoods, against the clearest Light and most evident
Proof: And I heartily wish that this may tend to confirm the Loyalty and good
Affections of His Majesty's Subjects at Home, and to establish Abroad the
Reputation and Honor of his Royal Justice.

And moreover (which I hope your Lordship and I shall ever regard) this public
and lasting Testimony will be given of our sincere thankfulness to Almighty
God, for that Miraculous Deliverence from a Danger which came so near His
Majesty's Sacred Person, and was so far spread in the Ruin it threatened to all
his People.

It is well known what Mischievous Arts of late Years have been used, and what
Treasonable Courses taken, to whithdraw these Nations from their bounden Duty
and Allegiance; and to expose His Majesty's most Just and Merciful Government to
Calumny and Contempt.

This Rebellious Design has been apparently carried on by Malcontents, whose
Crimes or Wants, whose furious Zeal or unbounded Ambition inclined them to wish
for a Disturbance of the Peace and Prosperity of these Nations.

To this wicked purpose, many the very same fatal Methods and specious
Pretenses which had heretofore involved these Kingdoms in Confusion and Blood,
were again revived: and by many of the very same Persons; Men of Crafty,
restless and implacable Spirits; Impenitent after the most Gracious Pardons;
whom long Experience had made skillful in seducing weak and unstable Minds by
Counterfeiting the Plausible Names of things in themselves most Excellent, but
most Dangerous when abused.

By these wretched Instruments was His Majesty's most Gentle and Benign
Government reproch'd; Sedition was every where promoted to destroy our present
Tranquillity; Desperate Speeches (such as Sir John Knight's, of Bristol and
others); Infamous Libels, Traitorous Books swarmed in all Places, and the worst
of all unchristian Principles were put in practice.

From these Preparations to a Rebellion, Page 4.
the Party began by degrees to proceed to Action; Distinctions of Sides were
made; Names and Tokens of Separation were given; Illegal Conventicles were
maintained, in Defiance of the Laws of God and Man; Tumultuous Feasts and
Factious Clubs were set up in City and Country. Close and Seditious Meetings
haunted. Frequent Cabals appointed, and by Men of High degree with the lowest;
Great Stores of Arms provided by private Persons. Page 5.
Insolent Progresses made through diverse Countries; thereby to glory in their
Numbers, and to carry far and near the the Terror of their Power, and even to
Muster their Party for some sudden Blow and General Insurrection.

All these and many more such Personal Indignities and Public Assaults, on the
Government, his Majesty long endured with the same Mildness and Clemency
wherewith he had already forgiven the highest Crimes against himself; His Royal
Goodness still patiently expecting and wishing, that in time the most obstinate
of his misguided Subjects would see their Error, and return at length to a
sense of the Duty they owe him, by all the strongest Bonds of Nature and Laws,
Religion and Gratitude that can possibly oblige Subjects toward a Sovereign.

But when His Majesty was abundantly convinced that all those dark
Consultations and open Tumults of unruly Men, were but so many Infallible Signs
and Forerunners of Rebellion, or some extraordinary Commotions, then, at last,
Page 6.
in a tender respect to his People's Safety, more than to his own, was his
Majesty constrained to awaken his Authority, to try what good Effect the Vigor
of his Laws would have on those Offenders, with whom his repeated Mercy and
Indulgence had so little prevailed.

And such was His Majesty's good Fortune, that the disaffected had been found
impotent in their repeated Attempts to set up Sheriffs of London and Middlesex,
to pack Juries to serve their purpose; so that whilst his Majesty carefully
endeavored to distribute Impartial Justice to all his Subjects, he very
happily obtained the same Right himself, and the Number of his Enemies was
found very inconsiderable, in those very places where their Desperate
Enterprises against the Government, were likely to be most sudden and
pernicious.

Amongst diverse other famous Examples of this Nature was that of Charnock, King
and Keys, for these Criminals were very considerable, for their audacious
Forwardness in carrying on the execrable Design against His Majesty's Life, for
which they were brought to a fair and Legal Trial, Page 7.
and His Majesty procured Justice to be done, without removing the Process into
another County, for here (the Jacobite Party being no way powerful) that old
Damnable Opinion and Practice of the Lawfulness of Equivocating, and even of
Perjury, for the Support of their Good Old Cause, had not prevailed over the
Old and Honest English Principles of Truth and Honor.

Thus His Majesty's Justice got the better at this time and is in little danger
of being defeated in a greater and more important Instance, Page 9.
should even any Peer of the Realm, not only be reasonably suspected, but in
the Issue manifestly discovered to have been an Author or Manager, of those
Traitorous Contrivances against His Majesty's Crown and Life, for even such a
Person will find he is not under the Protection of Juries of his own Appoinment
or Approbation; and therefore may not presume that he stands out of the reach
of His Majesty's just Indignation; for should he be Legally Indicted of Crimes
of the Highest Nature, on clear and positive Evidence; he will undoubtedly be
brought to a Lawful Trial by his Peers, and the Indictment not be Stifled by a
shamful Ignoramus, for at this Day His Majesty has gained this very
considerable Advantage, that he plainly perceives the strength of all his
Enemies Arrogance lies not now, as heretofore, in their extravagant Power to
pack the City Juries. Therefore now may not even a Lord Securely project, Page
10.
or a Ferguson write, or a Confederacy act against the Government; they not
having Sheriffs and a Settled Club at hand, with their Corrupt Pannels to
indempnify, and to second and applaud their most Villainous Practices; And His
Majesty seems resolved, at length, after a many intolerable Provocations, to
strike at that which he has now found to be the very Root of the Faction, and
not to suffer an ill Party of Men to destroy his Government, as they might have
done, Page 11.
had they been suffered to go on never so little farther uncontrouled; and it
is not to be doubted but the Righteousness of His Majesty's Cause will meet
with an answerable Success; and that so many guilty Persons will not escape
unpunished, Page 12.
who were just at the point of bringing their devilish Purposes to a quick
Issue, and once for all to strike boldly at the Heart of the King and Kingdom.

But to proceed to the History of the Times; this Conspiracy was resolved upon
by the French King, and the late King James, in January last: and for the
carrying of it on, the Duke of Berwick and others were sent into England, to
concert the grand Point of the Assassination. Their Party thenceforth gave over
all their quieter and more plausible Arts of Sedition, and betook themselves to
more precipitate Enterprises: inflaming some to Insurrections, others to
Assassinations. They proudly bragged throughout the Nation that, the late King
James would be here within a Month, Nay they offered to lay Wagers, that within
that time we should have a New Lord Keeper, and Mr. F. was to be the Man. They
bought up Horses and Arms in all Parts of the Kingdom, at the same time using
innumerable Deceits to alienate the minds of His Majesty's Subjects from His
Government. Their pretended Protestant Clergy, both Jurors and Non-Iurors,
talked, at this time, very impertinently of the horrid Murder of King Charles
the First, insinuating the Abdication of James the Second to be of the same
Complexion: They ridiculed the Popish Plot in 1678, that theirs of 1695 might
be less credited; They took occasion to exclaim against the Rebellion in 1641,
and of the Duke of Monmouth's, not sticking to represent the Prince of Orange's
glorious Expedition parallel thereto. At other times under Umbrage of great
Loyalty to King William, many of them declaimed of the Divine Right of Kings,
and of their unaccountableness on this side Heaven, from whence this wicked
Inference was made, that the late King James still remains their rightful King.

Such Practices as these were found by evident Proof, to have been the
Principal Rise and Occasion of ripening the horrid Conspiracy in this Nation.
Page 13.
As for his Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland, it is Notorious there has been long
Sheltered in it a desperate Faction of furious Zealots, that under the Notion
of Prelatists were growing up by degrees to a Violation, at last, not only of
all the Rules and Institutions of true Religion, but of Common Humanity. Have
they not proceeded to all the execrable Rage of Rapine and Violence? Page 14.
Their Principles are not yet entirely extinguished, tho their Force has been
Vanquished in open Field, by God's Provindence prospering His Majesty's Arms.
It is certain also, the Peace of that Kingdom has been much endangered by other
Factious and Seditious Spirits, who, tho at first they would not venture to
encourage publicly the Treason, yet stuck not secretly to favor and foment
their Cause, and would soon have owned and headed the furious Traitors, had the
Plot prospered.

By this brief Recollection of the Troubled State of Affairs, Page 20.
and the tumultuous temper of ill Men's Minds, in His Majesty's Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, about the time when this Treasonable Conspiracy was in
Agitation, the Impartial World may perceive from what destructive Seeds of
Sedition, private Passions and Animosities, under the disguise of Religion and
the Public Interest, so Monstrous a Birth was produced.

In the wonderful Discovery of which detestable Confederacy, and in the happy
prevention of its dire Effects; as all who have heard of it must acknowledge,
that a signal care of God's Providence has appeared for His Majesty and these
Nations preservation: so it must be acknowledged by all, that nothing has been
done on his Majesty's Part, but what was agreeable to that Royal Benignity and
Natural Candor of his whole Life whereof all the World, even his Enemies, have
had such undoubted Experience

Much of the Evidence was delivered in His Majesty's own presence. The
Examinations were taken by Men of unquestionable Reputation and Honor. The
whole proceedings has been managed with all imaginable Integrity. There has
been no straining or extorting of Accusations to blemish the Fame of the
Innocent: Page 21.
No Temptations of Rewards proposed: no Pardon assured beforehand, for
discovering or aggravating the Crimes of the Guilty.

Some Witnesses who offered themselves, of whom there might have been any
colorable Suspicion, were wholly rejected: Lest it should once again happen
that the blasted Credit or needy Condition, or Profligate Lives of the Persons
deposing, should derogate from the strength of their Depositions, and
administer any the least doubt of Subornation.

Those Witnesses His Majesty admitted had been generally Men strongly
prepossessed in Conscience, Zeal and Interest for that Party; Men whose former
avowed Hatred of the Government, was reason sufficient to gain them an absolute
Trust with any who studied to overthrow it. They were not of desperate
Fortunes, nor despicable Men; for the most part they seperatly and singly
brought in their Discoveries. Diverse of them had little or no Conversation or
Familiarity one with another. There was no shadow or possibility of a
Combination between them all to discover; Page 22.
yet such is the prevalence of self Conviction, and so great the Power of
Truth, that all their several Discoveries did perfectly agree with themselves
and with each other, in all Material Parts and Circumstances.

It was therefore in the Year 1695, a time when all His Majesty's Dominons
enjoyed a settled Peace and profound Security, whilst the greatest part of the
Neighboring World was involved in Wars and Combustions; that his Majesty and
his Council were suddenly awakened with the surprising Knowledge of this
dreadful Conspiracy, which had been laying very deep and broad for many Months
before.

The Man whom God chose to make the first Discoverer was Mr. Prendergast, a
Person of good Credit in his Conversation, but otherwise a most perverse
Papist, and fiercely addicted to their Cause, and one of the busiest Sticklers
against the Government. He by his approved Activity and Violence for the French
Interest, was Judged by the Chief Conspirators fitly qualified to be admitted
into their most private Consultations; Page 23.
and accordingly thereafter they trusted him as one of their surest Confidents.
Insomuch that he was invited to make one of those 40 Miscreants, whose proper
part it was to Assassinate his Majesty's Person.

Of which Number, after he had freely consented to be, and had met and acted
jointly with therest for some time, to prepare the cursed Work for a speedy
Execution; It pleased the Divine Goodness so to touch his Soul with the Horror
of so amazing a Crime, Page 24.
that he determined to discharge his Conscience of the Hellish Secret.

Wherefore he immediately resolved to prevent the Mischief of the following
Day, by giving his Majesty timely Notice: accordingly he went and acquainted
the Earl of Portland with the Design, who communicated the whole Matter to His
Majesty, who at his return told him the King would speak with him.

On Friday Night the 14 th of February, he went to Kensington, and was
introduced to His Majesty by the Earl of Portland, and laid before him his
whole Knowledge of this Diabolical Conspiracy.

But the intended Assassination, upon the first disclosing of it, appeared to
be so prodigious a Barbarity that His Majesty for some time gave but very
little Ear and slow Credit to this Information, as little suspecting as
deserving such Usage from the worst of His Subjects.

Which generous Caution, that His Majesty took not to be imposed upon by new
Rumors of Plots, and His Gracious Tenderness not to believe so ill of his very
Enemies, but upon certain Demonstration, was one of the Chief Occasions that
the Duke of Berwick and diverse others of the principal Agitators and Managers
of the whole Business took the Alarm, Page 25.
and got time to scatter and withdraw beyond the Seas.

However, by God's Providence continually watching over His Majesty's and these
Nations Safety, so many of the Traitors soon after fell into the Hands of
Justice, who did voluntarily acknowledge their being Partakers of the Treason,
or were convicted of it by evident Proof, that henceforth whoever shall pretend
not to believe the Truth of the whole, they must either be such as were Parties
in the Design, or so monstrously unreasonable as to believe there never can be
a real Plot against any Prince or State, but what does actually succeed and
take effect.

Thus much is certain of this Conspirary, and it is so remarkable and
extraordinary, that perhaps the like cannot be affirmed of any other mentioned
in all History, that there was scarce a man Attainted or Executed for it, who
did not more or less add some new light to the several parts of the Dark
Contrivance, either by a plain confession of it, or by the very manner of
dening it, and by the weakness of the Subterfuges, whereby they endeavored to
palliate their Crimes.

Upon the whole matter, tho it is not doubted but the Treasonable Infection was
in some degree or other spread into most parts of these Kingdoms, Page 26.
amongst the Ring leaders of the Jacobite Clubs, and lawless Conventicles in
Town and Country. Yet I declare an utter Abhorrence that bare Suspicions,
though never so probably grounded, should prevail to conclude any Man guilty,
and therefore resolve to make no reflection on the Fame of any, but only Such
whose Part in it was made out by positive Testimony.

And in the Kingdom of England the Persons who are already Judicially found to
have been deeply concerned as Actors, some in the Insurrection part, others in
the Assassination, diverse of them in both together, are these.

Page 27.
The Duke of Berwick, who, not only by Extraction but Education has been long
corrupted, and alienated from his Duty to his Native Country, and now it is
evident his Frenchified Mind is poisoned with unjust and forbidden Hopes.

The Earl of Aylesbury, who for some Years had been engaged in the most furious
Designs of the Faction, and of late especially.

Capt. George Porter, who had always been a busy Promoter of Popish and Slavish
Projects for overturning our Church and State; and was therefore for a time a
great Favorite of the Disaffected: Page 28.
Whilst he was imprisoned with Capt. Goodman, Maj. Matthews, Capt. Shevery,
Rhoads, a Trumpeter, and the rest of the Drury Lane Traiterous Riotors, in June
1695. Nor did they ever make any Objections against the Honesty of his private
Life till he came to the Honestest part of it.

The late Sir Thomas Roe of Islington, whose dark and turbulent Spirit and
insatiable Ambition had carried him on to be one of the Principle Persons
engaged in this Hellish Conspiracy. It being well known that this Unhappy
Gentleman not long before the Discovery, was heard to say that he should be at
the Head of a Reginment of Horse, and in the first place would cut the Throat
of Mr. Keck a Master in Chancery. But finding the Hellish Design to be
dispointed and Discovered, on Sunday the 23 d of February (the Day after the
Fatal Blow was to have been given,) God permited him to become his own
Executioner, and he shot himself into the Head, not venturing to give His
Majesty time to make use of the excellent Goodness of his Nature.

Sir William Parkyns, a Person carried away beyond his Duty and Allegiance into
this Traiterous Enterprise, by a vain Air of Popish Principles; whereby he was
the more easily seduced by the Wicked Teachers of that most Unchristian
Doctrine which has been the Cause of so many Rebellions, and was so conformable
to his Antichristian Education, That it is Lawful to cut the Throat of a
Protestant Prince.

Sir John Friend, who ever since this happy Revolution had professed himself an
Enemy to the Government of his Country, and had acted accordingly. As he Lived,
so he Dyed, a Stubborn Assertor of the Jacobite Cause.

Capt. Robert Charnock, a Popish Debauchee, who was a most active Instrument to
promote the Hellish Design against His Sacred Majesty, Page 29.
under color of an affected Zeal of Conscience and pure Religion.

Leiut. Edward King a furious Papistical Bravo; who had often laid Designs for
the King's Murder, which God as often prevented by his signal Providence.

Page 30.
Thomas Keys, a desperate and bloddy Raviliac, he was a Trumpeter in the late
King's Army in the West against Monmouth: He was actually engaged in this
Horrid Conspiracy, and has received the just Reward of his Treason.

Major Robert Lowick, a furious Roman Catholic and great Confident of the late
King James, by whom he was recommended to Sir George Barclay to make one in the
Assassination.

Page 31.
Peter Cook, Gent. a mighty Jacobite, one of those, who with an Hypocritical
Zeal would have passed for the most forward Reformers of Church and State:
whilst they themselves both in their Practice and Opinions, were the greatest
Corrupters of Virtue and all Good Manners.

Charles Cranburne, a Person whose resolute boldness recommended him to Capt.
Porter as a Person fit for his turn in any desperate Attempt, Page 32.
and at his Death Confessed enough to show his Crime tho not his Repentance.

Brigadier Rookwood, a notorious Enemy of the Established Government in Church
and State, and was actually to engage in putting the Hellish Conspiracy in
Exectuion.

-- Goodman, -- Harris, -- Knightly, -- Bertram, and Bois, Page 33.
notorious Papists, their Hatred to the Government transported them to be
Factious: These were all Men of crafty Heads, and nimble Tongues; restless
spreaders of False News, bold Talkers in seditious Clubs; where according to
the Corrupt Fashion of the Times, the most Profligate Persons of all Conditions
were wont openly to Arraign the Monarchy, and Vilify the Church, under the
fair Shows of amending both and a tender Concernment for the Public Good.
However these five last mentioned did in some measure expiate their Guilt, by
their Ingenious and Voluntary Confessions.

Sir George Barclay, Page 34.
a Scotch Man, and a Leiutenant in the late King's Guards, and egregiously
disaffected to the present Government, and therefore of considerable Interest
with the Court of St. Germain's and the French King, who are the most professed
Enemies of these Kingdoms, by whom he was sent into England with about 20
Troopers, under the disguise of being turned out of Commission to bring to pass
his Master's Devilish Contrivance. And he was known to be one of the Chief
Actors in the whole Conspiracy.

Brice Blair, Page 35.
a furious Roman Catholic, he was fitted for such a Design by his hot and
fiery Temper, and was a most desperate Enemy to the Government of these
Kingdoms.

But of all the Conspirators, Page 37.
the Man to whom belonged the Chief Place and Precedence in the whole
Diabolical Design, was Robert Ferguson, a Scotch Man; he had long brandished
his poisonous Tongue and virulent Pen against the Government. He is manifestly
convicted to have had a hand in the most Scandalous Libels of these Times, and
was particularly cherished and magnified by the Party, for his peculiar Talent
in aspersing the Government and reviling His Majesty's Person; so that upon all
Accounts of his restless Spirit, fluent Tongue, Page 38.
subtle Brain, and Hellish Malice, he was perfectly qualified to be the great
Incendiary and common Agitator of the whole Conspiracy; and it cannot be denied
but he was the Life and Soul of all, especially for the carrying on of the
whole Design.

These Persons appear hitherto, to have been the Principal Contrivers or
Instruments of the whole Treason in the Kingdom of England and Scotland.

Diverse others there are, concerning whom more than conjectural Proofs may be
given of their having been engaged in it, but I choose to spare particular
Names, as far as may stand with the necessary and just Vindication of the
Government.

It may suffice, that of these here mentioned the World is abundantly satisfied
that the several Shares they undertook in this Conspiracy, were very agreeable
to their former well-known perverse Principles and declared Disaffections to
the Government.

It is therefore certain, that in the Year 1695, a time when the French King's
Affairs were reduced to the height of Desparation, this Diabolical Design of
Assassinating His Majesty came afresh to be agitated, Page 39.
and the whole Factious Interest, in and about the Town, nay throughout the
three Kingdoms, prepared to employ the main of their Power and Craft for
overturning the Government.

All which time nothing was omitted by the Disloyal Citizens, who were no way
Numerous, and a Multitude of Strangers unduly mingled with them in their Clubs,
to terrify the Loyal, and gain over the timorous Members of the City; and a new
and Devilish Invention was much in Vogue, by which they made the Swearing to
the Government to be only an Instrument for the promoting their ungodly Designs.

All sorts of Arms, never before known to be procured in such quantities by
private Persons, such as Blunderbusses, etc. were carefully sought after and
bought up. The most improbable and villainous false Rumors, wherewith too many
of our Pulpits, with equal Industry and Malice designed to poison our
unthinking People, filled every Street.

My Lord (for tho I have insensibly slid into a tedious Letter, I may not
forget to whom I address this) I take the freedom to reflect on the Style of
Modern Sermons, which, my Lord, you know, are or ought to be serious Things,
and, to be confined to the Rules of strict and sober Truth. When the Clergy
find or make occasion to discourse of Princes, one would think the Subject
Matter should teach them Moderation and Temperance, Decorum and Decency; but I
shall evince that some have little regarded Truth or Manners: and for the
performing it, shall not ransack many Sermons, but give your Lordship a Taste
of the Fraternity's Goodly Method of disparaging and reproaching His Majesty,
and of their fine knack at Representation and Character, and that from your
Lordship's next Neighbor, and a Prebendary of your Church of Westminster, I
mean the Famous Dr. Birch, who with his effronted Forehead (tho then His
Majesty's Chaplain) began, and that very early, to sound the Trumpet to
Rebellion; and that before the August Assembly of the Nation's Representatives,
in his lewd Harangue on the 30 th of January 1693, for which, by surprise, Sir
T. D. obtained an Order of the House of Commons, that he and Mr. H. (who was
soon after expelled for Bribery) should return the Doctor Thanks, and desire
him to print his Sermon; which they accordingly did; and so the World became
Obliged by these high and extraordinary Flights.

We (quoth His Majesty's Chaplain) are still threatened in their Turn, either
with no Church at all, or the worst among Christians. Are not our very
Blessings turned into a Curse? Our Boasted Freedom is now only a Liberty to
bite and devour one another. Our long cried up Liberty of Conscience, proves
one of Impiety Licentiousness, and Error, and at best serves for a Step to
Dominion more than Devotion. Our Laws are indeed open, but to the continual
Conspiracies of false Witnesses against the Lives and Fortunes of the Innocent.
Ours (proceeds the Doctor) is the first State-Schism known in the World.

We have (says he) entailed upon us Disputed Titles; and for ought yet appears
endless Wars. We are fallen into those Dregs of Time, wherein Hypocrisy and
Profaneness seem to divide the World between them; and all true and unaffected
Piety is out of Countenance; wherein all the Sacred Ties to our King and
Country appear as loose as our Manners. If then we dare own discouraged Virtue,
and would stand in the Gap to save the whole from Destruction, the true way is
not to follow a Multitude to do Evil, or to join in those Fashionable
Flatteries that are ruin to the Embracers.

My good Lord, I appeal to You whether this vile Discourse is not stufft with
the most audacious Reproaches of a Crowned Head, that were ever heard among
Christians; Are such rare Men as this, I beseech your Lordship, fit to be
trusted with our Consciences? Now if I have not here set this bold Clergyman
in his true light, I hope I shall do it to purpose, when I tell yonr Lordship,
that this very Doctor was seen walking in St. James's Park, with that
remarkable Knight Sir John Fenwick, who Disappeared for some Months, but was
after taken at Rumney in Kent; and with a certain nameless Earl, on that very
Sunday before Noon ( February 23.) when their Party waited for the much longed
for News of His Majesty's Assassination. But to pass on,

Not only the Pulpit but the Press was employed for promoting this barbarous
Design, as I shall demonstrate to your Lordship, by a few Touches out of some
envenomed Libels.

The Clergy (says one of their Incendiaries) see on what Terms they stand with
their renowned Deliverer, and what great and glorious Designs he has to devour
them, so soon as he has Power and Opportunity. He has as good a Will to the
Church Lands as to his Father's Crown: But he durst never put it to the Issue,
lest it should discover the weakness of his Interest, for the Eyes of the
Nation are opened, They see themselves Cheated and Abused, and instead of
Liberties and Privileges, find themselves made Tools to insatiable Ambition,
and a Morsel for execrable Parricide. And it was the most unaccountable
Infatuation to have expected otherwise; that he who had Stomach enough to
devour his Father, would ever Stick at preying on the Wealth, the Rights and
Vitals of the Nation.

Read this envenomed Author a little farther, I entreat your Lordship. The
whole Nation (proceeds he) must be sacrificed to revenge that generous Pity and
Compassion which has been shown [by the King of France] to an oppressed Prince,
whom we have infinitely wronged. It Is not his Oppression but his Piety, is the
Ground of this Immortal Hatred: and it is manifest to all, that the Noble,
Princely and Christian Succor he has afforded our Injured King, is more
provoking than all the Oppressions in the World.

Another of their Emissaries says, he Challenges the whole World to produce
such an Instance of Injustice, and Violation of Promises, as this pretended
Saint, and Mirror of Justice has afforded us. Our Constitution both of Church
and State are reversed, and quite disjointed, our Liberties and Properties most
unjustly invaded, and more Instances of Arbitrary Power daily committed, than
in several of the former Reigns. I proceed says this venomous Libeller, to
address my self to those of my Countrymen who has had the misfortune to be
misled, that since they have had all their Expectations decceiv'd, themselves
gulled out of all those real Blessings of Government they formerly enjoyed,
Peace, Plenty, Liberty and Property, and all that could render a People happy,
by one whom a Man would be tempted to think could never have been procreated of
Human Race, void of all sense of Religion, Justice, Honor, and every
Qualification that is apt to conciliate Love or Veneration from Mankind; who
has really forfeited the Crown by his own Act, having violated the very
Instrument of Government he Subcribed: One who has been the Occasion of
shedding more Christian Blood, than has been spilt in the ten Persecutions,
merely upon a sham Pretense of Religion to us: That it is their Interest and
indispensible Duty, if they have any sense of Goodness remaining to free these
Nations of such a Plague and Curse, and if possible to redeem all those
Blessings which have been withheld from us by his Means, by atoning God
Almighty, by doing Justice to their highly injured King and Queen, to
themselves, and to all Europe, and averting those dismal Plagues which
otherwise e're long will fall upon their Heads: Otherwise let 'em do what they
can, be as obstniate, malicious and revengful as they please, if they be
resolved yet to act wickedly they shall be consumed both they and their King.

All this was evidently with design to shake the Crown and undermine the true
Protestant Religion; The Truth is, to such a Height of Arrogance were things
grown on their Side, that who ever shall Indifferently reflect on the Dangerous
Devices, Slanderous Reports, and Writings, and other Violent Emotions of the
whole Party that Winter, in the City and throughout the Kingdom, they will have
just cause to conclude that the Course of their Proceedings, was a daring
Struggle for Victory, and a Decisive Contention for Mastery over the Government.

Yet however cunningly the Train was laid, it took no effect but on themselves,
the Noise and Rage of all their Mutinous Routs, Page 41.
vanished into Air. Sir John Houblon, the Lord Mayor, together with the whole
Body of the Greater, Wiser and Richer Citizens understood rightly, and stuck
Unmovable to the Nation's and their own true Interest.

Which the Conspirators perceiving, many disaffected Lords and others withdrew
from their Houses, redoubling their Exclamations of Usurpation, Tyranny,
Oppression, and what not: and still applied themselves with all Diligence to
expedite the Rebellious Work before projected; fancying that yet the whole City
and Kingdom, would be at the French King's Beck, and upon the holding up his
Finger, would presently rise in Arms to extirpate the two Brothers, Liberty and
Property.

The French King had set on foot a Treaty with the Disaffected in England, and
sent the Duke of Berwick privily to London, Page 24.
who held diverse Meetings with the Confederates, who offered, that if that King
would furnish 10000 Men they would make a Sturdy Commotion here.

About that time also both ways of destroying these Kingdoms were brought under
their Consideration; the general way of an Insurrection, Page 43.
and the more compendious way, as they called it of Assassinating the King in
his return from Hunting. The Assassination was Instantly promoted on all Hands
in Town and Country, immediately after which the Insurrection was to follow.

At last it was thought advisable to send one to France to acquaint the late
King James with the result of their whole Proceedings, desiring him to prevail
with the French King to lend him 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, 1000 Dragoons, and they
would meet him at his Landing, at the Head of 2000 Horse; and knowing no one
fitter to employ in such a Concern, Page 45.
they desired Mr. Charnock would be the Man, because they knew him to be of a
fluent Tongue, and subtle Brain, and one of the Chief Contrivers and Managers
of the whole Design; he readily consented to their Desire, and immediately
provided for his Departure, after he had advised and encouraged each of them to
be hearty in the Cause.

Though Charnock was gone for a while, yet the Impressions of Mischief he had
left behind on the Minds of the Confederates, would not so easily vanish. They
soon reflected on his last advice, Page 51.
that so many having been made Conscious to the Design, they should certainly
find more Safety in pushing it on boldly, than in too late a Retreat. Upon this
immediately they recovered their Spirits and Resolutions, which his Departure
had somewhat damped; thenceforth they renewed their Consultations 'till his
Return, which was soon after, with the Answer, That the French King's Affairs
being in such a Posture he could not at that time comply with their Demand,
which for the present broke all their Measures.

But upon the Arrival of Sir George Barclay, who after having declared to the
Disaffected Party the Occasion of his coming, produced a Commission authorizing
them to perpetrate the Parricide, he withal told them that the late King was
retired from St. Germains to Calais, where lay a considerable Body of Troops
under his Command, that the French King had given Orders to Bouffleurs to draw
together immediately to Imbark, as soon as the Signal was given that their
Hellish Contrivance for Assassinating His Majesty's Person had taken effect:
Whereupon they renewed their Cousultations with more Vigor than before. The
Principal Managers having their frequent Meetings, as also the Inferior
Instruments theirs, whilst some of each number gave secret Intimations to the
other of what was passing in their separate Assemblies.

Of the great Council; Page 52.
the Consults that have been hitherto plainly testified and sworn to, were
those, at the old King's-head in Leadenhall street, and Mrs. Montjoy's in St.
James's- street. The Subordinate Cabals were kept in diverse other Places in and
about the City of London; as in January, in that Year, at Capt. Porter's, and
at Mr. Charnock's Lodgings in Norfolk-street: Or in common Taverns, as at the
Nag's-Head in Covent Garden, the Sun in the Strand, the Globe in Hatton-Garden,
etc. As also on February the 14 th, the very Day the Discovery was made, at the
Blew-Posts in Spring-Garden; and on the 15 th and 22 d, at Capt. Porter's
Lodging in Maiden-lane, being both the Times agreed upon to put the Design in
Execution.

Their Meetings being so generally in places of public Entertainment;
therefore to prevent the Observation of Drawers and Servants, they often
discoursed of their whole Bloody Business in a Canting Language of their own
making.

The King was sometimes called the Spark, the Prince of Orange, Page 53.
the Little Gentleman, etc. Provision of Arms, as Bluuderbusses, Muskets,
Pistols, etc. were talked of under disguised Names. The Insurrection was styled
the General Point, the Assassination taking off the Spark, and striking at the
Head. And because several or most of the Conspirators were notorious Papists,
it was sometimes agreed that their wicked Intentions against the King and
Government should be veiled under the terms of taking off the Insupportable
Yoke.

But for the most part when they were free and among themselves, Page 54.
they did discourse of the whole Contrivance in plain Language, and without
Reserve; their common Healths were such as these, To the Restoring the late
King James, the Health of the Prince of Wales, the late Queen, and the French
King.

But when Harris, Lowick, and others, who were less hardened in Cruelty,
expressed some kind of Consternation and Dread of the Consequences of so dire a
Stroke, Page 55.
readily declared themselves willing to join in the Insurrection, but shrunk a
little at first at the Horror of the Assassination; they said tho it was a
Barbarous Work, yet they would obey Sir George Barclay's Orders.

In these their private Cabals, the Matters they promiscuously treated of, were
either a general Insurrection or the Assassination of the King's Person. Page
56.
Of the Assassination diverse ways were consulted, 'till they fixed on that Lane
coming form Brentford to Turnham-Green. The Insurrection was proposed to be
made at the same time in England and Scotland. The adjusting that part of it
which related to Scotland was chiefly under the Care and managed by
Commissioners appointed for that purpose, by the French King and the late King
James, as well as this in England; all which Particulars are Circumstantially
set forth, so often repeated, and demonstrably confirmed in the ensuing
Evidences, that it will be sufficient here only to direct the Reader's
Observation by given a brief Summary of the whole.

Toward an in Insurrection throughout England, they laid the greatest Stress
on the City of London; not doubting but if that was once secured to them, the
rest of the Nation would of Course fall in.

Page 57.
For the increasing their Numbers, and drawing in New Converts this one General
Rule was carefully prescribed, that the bottom of the Design should in the
beginning be warily concealed from all Persons with whom they treated. First
their Inclinations were to be tried by gradual Insinuations, and plausible
Discourses at a Distance, till they had gained a full assurance of their
Fidelity. They were to be asked, If they would be concerned, in Easing them
from the Yoke that laid upon 'em? Meaning to murder King William; when it was
Answered, They would readily assist in any thing of that Nature: Then it was
next to be demanded, Whether they would contribute the Assistance of their
Persons or Purses, or both? That being also determined, It was to be farther
inquired, What Furniture of Arms, Horses, and Money they had in readiness? What
Friends they could engage? And if these Questions were resolved according to
their Minds, Page 58.
then the whole Mystery of the Villainy was to be frankly disclosed. They were
to be told in downright Terms, That their Design was to Assassinate the Person
of King William in order to fix King James again in the Throne, to which if
they would lend their Assistance it would answer their Expectation. He having
already sent over several Men and Money to buy Horses to help to do the Work.

The way being thus made to sound and prepare the Dispositions of ill Men for
any Violent Enterprise; the next thing came under deliberation was Money. Page
59.
For that several of the Conspirators declared, they had considerable sums of
their Own, or deposited with them, which were ready, and might be called for on
Occasion. That Sir George Barclay subscribed Money, enough to furnish 40
Horses, likewise Sir John Friend offered if the late K. James would give order
for it, to disburst 3000 l. that the Cause might not be lost. Neither was Sir
W. Parkyns, with many others slack in making provision for a sudden Push, for
they if the Business succeeded were in Hopes to satisfy their thirsty Appetites
and enrich themselves with the Blood and Estates of just and honest Men.

The next necessary Provision they debated on was Arms. And it is notoriously
known, the whole Party had been gathering great abundance of all sorts. Page 60.
All probably with the same prospect and in the same proportion for their parts
in the Conspiracy as Sir William Parkyns had done for his, though they happened
not all to be so manifestly detected; for not long after the Conspiracy was
discovered to His Majesty and His Ministers: the said Sir William Parkyns was
found to have by him, hid underground by his Garden-Wall, several Chests of
complete Arms, belonging as he pretended to his Country House, where no thought
of Robbery or Assault could be feared; and by consequence, there could not be
the least shadow or pretense that they were laid in there for his own lawful
use or defense.

Page 61.
But besides these Stores, which they had every one made for themselves, it was
resolved, at the very first News of the late King James's Landing with his
Cutthroat Army to be in readiness, some to attempt the public Magazines in
and about the City, whilst others in the remote Parts, were to use their utmost
Diligence to form themselves into a Body and join the Invasion.

Many Thoughts were also spent how to engage the Seamen to their Side: Tho it
must be said that their Practices with them met with the least Success of any.
Nor is it imaginable, the brave Race of English Mariners should ever prove
false to His Majesty, who has cherished, encouraged and promoted that
Profession more than all the Kings of England have done since the Conquest:
Page 62.
His Majesty well understanding that the Safety, Riches and Honor of this
Kingdom depend most on its Maratime Greatness.

However, the Conspirators not in the least doubting but they should have
sufficient Numbers, as soon as their Friends were arrived from France, to make
a Stand, and give time to others to come in, and declare; their Rendezvouses
were appointed in most of the convenient Posts of London and Westminster;
whence they might at once attack the Bridge, the Exchanges, the Guards, the
Savoy, Whitehall and the Tower: And they had ready in Town and Country a
considerable number of Officers to head and govern the mixed Multitude as soon
as they should appear in Arms.

At the same time, a Party was to be ready to scowr the Streets, and
immediately Barricadoes were to be made: The Horses of Hackney-Coaches, and
other Strangers, were to be seized on: The Horse-Guards not actually Mounted to
be surpised in their several Stables: For which end a Committee was chose, who
undertook to view the Posture of their Quarters, and reported back to the
Principals that the seizing 'em was a thing very feasible.

Ferguson had also often assured them he could promise for a considerable
Number of Men to be ready at a day, Page 63.
and that he would make one of the same Party himself.

Upon supposition of this Strength, their principal aim being to surprise the
Tower, as a Place most able to annoy them, and where there lay great Magazines
of Stores of Ammunition to furnish them; they had many Debates on that Subject.
Page 64.
And it is very well known they had brought an Officer in Trust therein to be
of their Party, who was to deliver the Tower into their Hands.

Page 65.
Besides securing to themselves by these means the Cities of London and
Westminster, which was their greatest Care; they had also under Consideration
the raising Commotions at the same time in diverse other Parts of England:
Especially those Counties of the West and North, in which they believed the
Iacobite Party to be most Numerous, and most inclined to their Factious
Interest.

In every County some one Great Man was to put himself at the head of the
Rebellion, and diverse of them had their proper Stations appointed.

In the North they depended on a numerous Assistance, having been informed, by
Sir William Parkyns, who had made a Journey into that part of the Kingdom, that
the North was as well inclined to their Party as the West.

Page 66.
Most Seaport Towns of any considerable Strength was to be attempted,
particularly Portsmouth, by some going into the Town on pretense of seeing the
Place, at the same time another Party coming in on the Marketday, disguised
like Countrymen, and both together were to fall on the Guards.

At the same time when they were making these Preparations for an Insurrection,
the other Design of Assassinating His Majesty kept equal Pace with it.

It is manifest that the French King and late King James, had often devised his
Majesty's Murder; it being indeed a Talent peculiar to them both to murder
Princes, and lay their Nations in Blood and Confusion. That of all Men living
they can most easily turn themselves into all Shapes, and comply with all
Dispositions, to get Agents to compass their Damnable Purposes; having by long
practice, got the skill to cover their Hooks with Baits fitting every Humor.
The Covetous, who are no small Number of their Iacobite Party, Page 67.
those they feed and deceive with hopes of Wealth and new Sequestrations: The
Ambitious, with Praise and Vainglory: The Church of England, with Promises of
Liberty and Religion: Sometimes not refusing to stoop lower, and even to serve
and assist the Pleasures and Debauches of Men that way inclined, if they find
them any way useful for their purposes.

And now also upon this Occasion, Page 68.
diverse Ways of performing the Assassination were debated; one was to make the
Attempt on His Majesty, as He came from Richmond by the Road.

Another when He was upon Horseback at Cue.

Another to Surprise Him by Ambuscade as He was diverting Himself with Shooting
or Hunting in the Park by Richmond.

But of these Propositions Sir George Barclay approved of none like the last
mentioned, in order to which he desired Capt. Porter to go with Mr. Knightly to
View the Ground; accordingly they went, and Mr. King with them: At their return
made their Report: That the Lane between Brentford and Turnham-Green to be much
more Feasible to dispatch the Business, or do the Trick, as they called it.

Page 69.
The Account they gave of the Commodiousness of the Lane for any such desperate
Enterprise soon encouraged them to fix it there. It being a Place lonely and
retired, with a River on one Side and Pales on the other, which would afford
all Advantages imaginable to the Assailants, and give as great Inconveniences
to the Persons Attacked.

The Place being agreed on, it was first questioned, Whether the Stroke should
be struck upon His Majesty's going to, or coming from Hunting: But it was
thought more expedient to defer it 'till His Majesty's return.

That Point being over, they had several Meetings, to consult of all the
Circumstances of the Parricide.

Page 70.
The number of the Men to be Personally engaged, were Forty at least, of which
Number Sir George Barclay was to make up about Twenty. Mr. Charnock was to
furnish Eight, Capt. Porter Seven, Sir William Parkyns Three Men and 5 Horses.
To that end 2 or 3 Lists of Names were drawn up, out of which choice was made
of Two which were called Ordely Men, and Quartered at Kensington, to give
Notice to the Rest when His Majesty went a Hunting.

The Arms to be used were Blunderbusses, Muskets, Pistols, etc. The several
Parties were to be dispersed at the Inns at Brentford and Turnham-Green, that
they might be in a readiness against the approach of the Fatal Hour.

On the day the Design was to be executed, the Attempt was agreed to be made in
this Manner: Some one or two, were to be at the Ferry, to give Notice when His
Majesty Landed, first to Sir George Barclay, then to the rest.

Upon Warning given of the King's being near at hand, all were to be in a
readiness, to Issue forth in a Moment, some on Horseback, some on Foot.

Immediately, Page 71
upon the Coach's coming within the Lane, they were to shut the Gate, and the
Conspirators were to divide into three Parties: Some before in the Habit of
County-men were to throw down the Pales, before sawn a-sunder for the same
purpose, in the narrowest Passage, so to prevent all possibility of Escape:
Then Mr. Charnock with his Party were to attack the Guards in the Rear, and
Rookwood and Porter with another Party in two Wings were to attack both sides
of the Guards. The other Party to Aim only at His Majesty's Coach, which Party
consisted of 8 Persons, and was to be under the Particular direction of Sir
George Barclay; the Villian declaring beforehand, Mr. Prendergast was to have
a very good Blunderbuss, which carried 7 or 8 Bullets, to be of his Party, and
to Shoot into it. King at the same time telling him, He hoped he would not be
afraid of breaking the Glass-Windows.

Page 72.
It is indeed a thing prodigious to tell, and were it not for the undeniable
Proofs of it, very difficult to be believed, that not only One or Two such
Furies should rise up in a whole Age, but that so great a Number of Men should,
be found so void of all Humanity, as not only to imagine and contrive so Horrid
a Fact, but to discourse of it in so many Meetings, so sportfully and merrily
as they did, as if the Cruelest Tragedy, which Wicked Men or the Devil ever
invented, had been only a Matter of Common Past-time and loose Raillery.

Page 73.
The execrable Deed being thus supposed by them to be feasible, without much
Opposition, they then farther considered the several Ways of their escaping
afterward. Sometimes they thought if it were possible to take the King alive
and carry him to France, whether they intended to bear him Company. But if not,
another way was proposed by Sir George Barclay, after the Fatal Blow was given,
to get privately into the City before the News of what was done could possibly
get thither. It was concluded at the same time, That those Lords and Principal
Men of their Party should be ready to Head the Faction upon the first arrival
of the News that the late King James was Landed.

Thus Saturday the 15 th of February being come, the first day pitched upon for
executing their Hellish Design; Page 74.
whilst they were thus wholly intent on this Barbarous Work, and proceeded
securely in its Contrivance without any the least doubt of a prosperous
Success, having prepared every thing in order to have perpetrated this
Villainous Work; Behold! on a sudden God miraculously disappointed all their
Hopes, by Chamber's bringing word, about Noon, the King went not Abroad that
day.

Yet notwithstanding they being disappointed at this time, which made them look
one on another in much disorder, yet they could not part 'till they had drank
their accustomed Healths: And to add to their Villainny, Capt. Porter took an
Orange in his Hand, and began a Health to the Squeezing the rotten Orange,
which having gone round, they took leave of each other for that Time.

Presently after, Page 75.
at their next meeting, their Discourse first tended to doubting whether the
Design had not been discovered; but then 'twas immediately answered, If it had,
they should not have been there, but taken up. Whereupon they resolved,
notwithstanding the former Disappointment, to Excecute the Divilish Design the
next Saturday following.

The Result of this their Consultation they imparted to their inferior Agents
who were to act under them and ordered all things to be ready against that time.

The late King for preparing a Declaration to facilitate his Re-accession to
the Crown ordered diverse of his Agents in England to send him their
Conceptions, out of which Collection a Complete Remonstrance was gathered. The
main Drift of the whole was to amuse the People's Fancies for a Time with new
Chymera's of Freedom from Taxes, and Advantages for Trade: Then to calumniate
and asperse King William as a Tyrant and Oppressor, Page 79.
and accuse all his Faithful Subjects, as Servile Instruments of Arbitrary
Power, and Betrayers of their Country: Whilst he and his Party were to be
magnified as the only Asertors, and Restorers of Liberties, and Properties; who
it is notoriously known have ever acted the contrary. His and their Design in
all this being the same that has been put in Practice by all Promoters of
Popish and Slavish Principles, Sedition and Treason in all Ages; who have
always thought they have done more than half their Business, if they can but
once appropiate to themselves all the good and pleasing Words of things
plausible and popular, and fasten on His present Majesty's Government the Names
and Titles of things vulgarly odious, or contemptible.

But in their particular Heads of Discourse in which the Con^pirat^rs chiefly
delighted, Page 81.
and were wont in their Meetings most amply to enlarge their Inventions, was
concerning their resolutions of several kinds of Vengeance to be executed on
those Eminent Persons of all Professions, whom they thought most capable and
willing to oppose their Bloody Enterprise.

Their Passions in that part indeed transported them beyond all bounds of
common Prudence even to the highest degree of ridiculous Vanity, and
extravagant Ostentation of their full assurance to succeed in the dire Attempt.

Having first gloried in the Imagination of imbruing their Hands in Royal
Blood, they scrupled not to profess they would continue the Assassination on
all the Principal Officers of the Crown, and Ministers of Justice; and
spightfully projected all Circumstances imaginable which they thought might
aggravate the Terror or Ignominy of their Punishment.

The Lord Mayor, and the Sheriffs of that Year, were concluded fit to be
Murdered. All others were doomed to the like Destiny, who might think they
deserved well of the Faction by their Moderation: But they resolved that
Neuters should be treated as ill as their most avowed Enemies.

They made no Distinction of Opinions, the Soberest and Richest of the Church
of England, together with the Presbyterians and orher Dissenters they hated and
dispis'd in general, Page 82.
as Men whose Interest could not be divided from King William, as knowing they
must fall with him, and undergo the same Fate.

In this furious manner they proceeded to lay about 'em in their common
Discourses, with all the Infernal Malice that is so agreeable to their
Principles and inseparable from them: There never having yet been found, in all
Records of Time, any Popish Plot but it was always most certainly attended with
a fierce Spirit of Implacable Cruelty.

As it cannot be imagined that either of the Cabals was altogether unacquainted
with what the other were doing, during all this time; so it is manifest, some
of their great Men understood the dark Hints that were sometimes given them, of
taking off the Spark, removing the Yoke that lay so heavy upon them; and
knocking him on the Head: And also that the inferior Instruments proceeded on
assurance, That when they came to Action they should be Headed by Men of much
higher Quality and Condition than as yet openly appeared amongst them.

Wherefore of the Debate and Resolutions of the French King and the late King
James; in France it was thought expedient for the farthering of their Design,
that a small select Number of the most eminent Heads of the Party, in and about
London, should be united into a close Cabal, or secret Council; who might have
their frequent Assemblies, and be ready on all Occasions, to guide and direct
the motions of the lower Agents.

The Persons who undertook this Universal Care and Inspection, were the Duke of
Berwick, sent from France for that purpose, Sir William Parkyns, Sir John
Friend, Sir George Barclay, Sir John Fenwick, Mr. Charnock, Mr. Porter; and
some others, were admitted, as occasion served, on some particular Debates.

After their Arrival from France, they had several Meetings in January,
particularly at the Globe-Tavern in Hatton-Garden, and at the Sun-Tavern in the
Strand, where some General Heads were propounded of things to be resolved on,
Page 58.
in their more mature Thoughts, as where the Insurrection should first be made,
in City, or Country, or both at once: what Countries were most disposed for
Action: What Places would be most proper for their Rendezvouses: What Arms were
necessary, how to be provided, where to be laid in, so as to administer no
Ground of Jealousy: And how and by what means a Disturbance might be made in
Scotland, at the same time.

The last was looked upon as a Principal Point, and therefore the managment of
that Affair was left to the French King, who had appointed a Considerable Body
of Men to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of that Kingdom: Page 86.
And who delivered this as his Opinion, That the Plot was so close and deeply
laid, it was past the Power of Men and Devils to hinder the Fatal Blow.

The late King James, that nothing should be wanting on his part, deputed some
of his Confidents hither, to attend the Issue of their Debates, to represent
their Proposals; and to assist in the Assassination.

The first Day appointed for the accomplishing this wicked Design was the 15 th
of February, Page 87.
which being over, and they by the Singular Mercy of God disappointed; yet so
great was their Thirst after Royal Blood, that they did resolve to go on and
execute it. And the next Saturday, which was the 22 d of February, was pitched
upon for the time of Execution; and accordingly, on Friday the 21 st of
February, the day before, they met at the Nags-Head in Covent Garden, where
they had some discourse among them that they were in doubt, because of the
first Disappointment, whether there had not been some Discovery, but that Doubt
was soon over; for it was said it could not be so, for then they should not
have been there together. That seemed probable, and the Disppointment was
imputed to some Accident which gave them new Assurance to go on, and they
resolved to go on and do the Business they had formerly resolved on, the next
day, which was Saturday.

Thus, on the 14 th of February, Page 88.
was the whole Conspiracy going on in a full Carreer, when Mr. Prendergast made
his Discovery: But finding that His Majesty and His Ministers, were exceeding
diffident of his single Intelligence, in a business of so vast a Moment;
therefore, whilst he was considering which way he might best strengthen his
Evidence, Mr. De la Rue, on Friday Night, the 21 st of February, was introduced
to His Majesty by the Earl of Portland, who discovered to him the Hellish
Designs of his Implacable Enemies.

Upon Saturday the 22 d of February in the Morning, which was the 2 d time
appointed for the Execution of this Bloody Design, Page 89.
they Met together at Porter's Lodging, and resolved to go on with it and put
it in Execution, where they had Notice from Chambers that the King did go a
Hunting that Day, and there was great Joy among them all, thinking themselves
sure; and so they ordered all things to be got ready. From thence they went to
the Blew-posts in Spring-Garden, where. News was brought about one a Clock,
That the King did not go Abroad, for the Guards were all come back in great
haste, their Horses being all in a Foam, and the King's Coaehes to the
Mews-Gate.

They at first received the News with various Apprehensions and Motions of
Mind, Page 91.
looking on one another with much Astonishment and Confusion; and immediately
parted in great Disorder, being fully assured the thing had taken Air, and was
discovered.

Page 92.
His Majesty, with inexpressible Surprise, found by undoubted Evidence that many
of his mis-guided Subjects had deeply engaged themselves to imbrue their Hands
in His Royal Blood, went on Monday the 24 th of February to the House of Lords,
and in His Speech accquainted both Houses, That he was come on an extraordinary
Occasion, which might have proved fatal if it had not been disappointed by the
singular Mercy and Goodness of God.

That he had received several concurring Informations of a Design to
assassinate him, and that our Enemies were very forward in their Preparations
for a sudden Invasion of the Kingdom.

That His Majesty had not been wanting to give the necessary Orders for the
Fleet, and that he hoped there was a Strength of Ships, and in such a
Readiness, as would be sufficient to disappoint the Intentions of our Enemies.

That he had dispatched Orders for bringing Home such a Number of our Troops, a
might secure us from any Attempt; and exhorted them to do every thing which
they should judge proper for our Common Safety, etc.



Upon this astonishing News the House of Commons ( Nemine Contradicente)
resolved to address His Majesty to congratulate his happy Deliverance, and to
give him their Thanks for imparting the Horrid Design to the House, and to
desire His Majesty to take more than ordinary Care of his Royal Person,
assuring him that they will stand by, assist, and defend His Majesty with their
Lives and Fortunes, against the late King James and all other His Enemies both
at Home and Abroad; and that in case His Majesty should come to any violent
Death (which God forbid) they would revenge the same upon all his Enemies an
their Adherents, etc.

The House of Lords also unanimously agreed upon an Address to His Majesty, to
which they desired the Concurrence of the Commons; who made some Amendments
thereunto, to which the Lords agreeing: The same Evening both Houses attended
His Majesty therewith. You have here a Copy thereof.

WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled; having taken into
our serious Consideration, what your Majesty has been pleased to Communicate
to us this day, think it our Duty in the first place, to give Your Majesty most
Humble Thanks, for having acquainted Your Parliament, with the great Danger
Your Sacred Person has been so nearly exposed to, and the Design of an
Invasion from our Enemies Abroad; We heartily Congratulate Your Majesty's Happy
Preservation, and thankfully acknowledge the signal Providence of God in it; and
at the same time Declare our Detestation and Abhorrence of so Villainous and
Barbarons a Design: And since the Safety and Welfare of Your Majesty's
Dominions do so entirely depend upon Your Life, We most Humbly Beseech Your
Majesty to take more than Ordinary Care of Your Royal Person: And we take this
Occasion to Assure Your Majesty of our utmost Assistance, to Defend Your
Person, and Support Your Government against the late King James, and all other
Your Enemies, both at Home and Abroad; hereby Declaring to all all the World,
That in case Your Majesty shall come to any Violent Death, (which God forbid)
we will Revenge the same upon all your Enemies, and their Adherents. And as an
In^nce of our Zeal for Your Majesty's Service, we will give all possible
Dispatch to the Public Business: And we make it our Desire to Your Majesty, to
Seize and Secure all Persons, Horses, and Arms, that Your Majesty may think fit
to Apprehend upon this Occasion.

To which His Majesty gave a gracious Answer to the effect following, viz. My
Lords and Gentlemen, I Thank you heartily for this kind Address: On my Part you
may be assured, that I will do all that is within my Power for the Conservation
of this Kingdom, to which I have so many Obligations. I will readily adventure
my Life for the Preservation of it, and recommend my self to the Continuance of
your Loyalty and good Affections.



The House of Commons also the same Day resolved upon the following Association
to be signed by their Members.

Whereas there has been a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, Formed and Carried
on by Papists, and other Wicked and Traitorous Persons, for Assassinating His
Majesty's Royal Person in Order to Encourage an Invasion from France, to
Subvert our Religion, Laws, and Liberty: We whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed, do Heartily, Sincerely, and Solemnly Profess, Testify and Declare,
That His Present Majesty King William is Rightful and Lawful King of these
Realms. And we do Mutually Promise and Engage to stand by and assist each
other, to the utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of His Majesty's
most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James and all his
Adherents. And in case His Majesty come to any Violent or Untimely Death (which
God forbid) We do hereby further Freely and Unanimously Oblige our Selves, to
Unite, Associate, and Stand by each other, in Revenging the same upon his
Enemies, and their Adherents; and in Supporting and Defending the Succession of
the Crown, according to an Act made in the First Year of the Reign of King
William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of
the Subject, and Settling the Succession of the Crown.

There was also an Association agreed upon by the House of Lords, which was
carried by a Majority, which appears to be of a Comfortable Importance.

Their Lordships Association differs so little from that of the Commons, that I
do not transcribe it; but show you how they vary: Instead of the Words [ King
William is RIGHTFVL and Lawful King] their Lordships insert.

That His Present Majesty King William has A RIGHT BY LAW to the Crown of this
Realm, and that neither the late King James, nor the pretended Prince of Wales,
nor any other Person has any Right whatsoever to the same, etc.

Ninety six of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that was then present,
subscribed their Association, and others who were at first absent, come in
daily; it has been refused only by 15.

The House of Commons having, as I told you, agreed upon the above-written
Association, ordered it to be engrossed, to be Signed by their Members; and
near 400 of that August Assembly, which consists of 513, have already (with
great Alacrity) subscribed it.

On Tuesday the House ordered that their absent Members, as they come to the
House, do come up to the Table, and sign the Association; or, in their Places,
declare their Refusal so to do: and

On Thursday it was ordered that the Association, and the Subscriptions
thereunto, be entered upon the Journal of the House; and Resolved that it should
be presented to His Majesty, by the Speaker, and the whole House, before the
end of that Session.

It was also, the same day, ordered that such Members who had not already,
should by Monday Fortnight Sign the Association, or declare their Refusal.

Now a day or two before the Conspirators final Separation, the King and his
Council began to be convinced of the truth of Prendergast and Dela Rue's
Evidence, by a full knowledge of the Witnesses Characters, and by the firmness
and constancy of their Testimony, besides many other concurring Circumstances.
Wherefore His Majesty ordered Warrants should be Issued out against the Persons
accused, whereof some absconded, others were taken; of these last diverse
confirmed what Prendergast and De la Rue had sworn, and Named others as
Partakers in the Treason. Whereupon more and more appearing every day to have
been engaged, Proclamations were Published in England and Scotland for their
Speedy Apprehension. By this means through the Providence of God, so many of
them were either Seized or Delivered themselves up, as have irrefragably
confirmed every part of the foregoing Account. What became of the several
Conspirators will appear by the Following List.

The Duke of Berwick presently fled beyond the Seas from the Coast of Sussex.
Page 94.


Capt. Porter, Mr. Prendergast and Mr. Keys, was taken at Letherhead in
Surrey, and were brought up to Town; the last mentioned received the deserved
Reward of his horrid Ingratitude and Treasons: the two former largly confessed.

Capt. Harris surrendered himself to Mr. Secretary Trumbull, and largly
confessed.

Capt. Bois was taken, and freely Confessed.

Mr. ^ela Rue came in, and Confessed what was done and said at the Traiterous
Meetings at Capt. Poter's Lodging, etc.

Sir John Friend fled fro^m his own House to hide himself at* Quaker's in
Stratton Ground, Page 9^
where he was Taken, Arraigned, Condemned and Executed.

Sir William Parkyns was Taken at Mr. Castlemain's Chamber in the Temple; he
was likewise Arraigned, Condemned and Executed; he confessed enough to show his
Crime, but not his Repentance.

Mr. Bryerly taken, and Confessed.

Peter Cook, Gent. taken March 17 th; and committed to Newgate Arraigned and
Condemned, but not as yet Executed.

Christopher Knightly, was taken disguised in Women's Clothes, Arraigned and
Condemned, but as yet not Executed.

Sir Roger L'Estrange, was taken up, and dismissed upon Bail.

Edward King was taken, Page 96.
Arraigned, Condemned and Executed.

Capt. Stow, taken the 6 th of March, in a Spunging-House, near Smithfield; he
having caused himself to be Arrested upon a Sham-Action of 300 l. under the
Name of Smith.

Mr. Blair, was taken, examined, and confessed.

Mr. Robert Ferguson was seized in Gray's- Inn-lane, hid under a Bed.

Page 97.
-- Lowick was seized in Alley in Golden-lane, very much disguised, Arraigned,
Condemned and Executed.

Sir John Fenwick withdrew, upon notice there was a Proclamation out against
him; was taken with one VVebber, at Rumney in Kent, ready to go over-Sea, and
was Committed, and is still a Prisoner.

Ambrose Rookwood was Taken, Tried, Condemned and Executed.

The Earl of Aylesbury was taken and committed to the Tower, where he is still
a Prisoner.

-- Goodman, was taken, and made an Ingenious Confession.

-- Bertram was taken, and confessed.

Robert Charnock was taken, Arraigned, Condemned and Executed; the deserved
Reward of his horrid Treasons.

William Berkenhead, who has gone by the several Names of East, West, South,
Fish and Baker, was taken, but since made his Escape out of Goal.

Charles Cranburne was Taken, Arraigned, Condemned and Executed.

Sir George Barclay fled, and withdrew from Justice upon the first Discovery,
and is Out-lawed.

Sir Thomas Row, upon the first Discovery, shot himself into the Head, of which
Wound he the same Day died.

Besides these there are several others secured which must not expect to be
dismissed but by due Couse of Law. Page 9^.


Wherefore to return to what happened shortly after the Discovery. His Majesty
having now received irresistible Proof of the Certainty of the Wicked and
Unnatural Design; that the World might have the like Conviction, resolved
speedily to bring some of the most Notorious Malefactors to a fair and open
Trial.

The Persons who were first put upon justifiying themselves, were Robert
Charnock, Edward King and Thomas Keys, on the 11 th of March 169^, against whom
diverse Witnesses were produced, who in their Depositions, first gave some
distinct Account of the Plot in General, and then of the particular Share each
Person at the Bar had in it.

As to what Concerned Charnock.
Capt. Porter first deposed, That the said Charnock, himself, and others did
meet at the Globe-Tavern in Hatton-Garden, the Nags-Head in St. James's-
Street, and often in other places, where they did consult and contrive the
Design for Assassinating His Majesty's Person, agreed upon it, and the Ways and
Methods for Carrying it on; That he with the rest did agree it should be done
on the 15 th of February, in the Lane coming from Brentfort to Turnham-Green,
and Horses and Arms were provided, and that he did Personally engage and bring
6 or 7 Men more to act in the Design, that he went into France to invite the
late King James to England with a Foreign Force.

The next was Mr. De la Rue, who Swore, That he the said Charnock was at
several Places with diverse of the Conspirators and where the Matter was
discoursed concerning the Assassination: and that some time after the first
Disappoinment, he asked him, How the thing went? and he answered, he was afraid
it would come to nothing.

Then Mr. Prendergast swore, That Charnock sent a Note to Capt. Porter, to
Countermand the Order for the 15 th of February, subscribed by the Name of
Robinson.

Next Mr. Bertram swore, That he the said Charnock asked him, if he would be
one in the Design in taking off the Spark? meaning King William, but he
answered, He was otherwise engaged. And after the second Disappointm^nt, he
this Deponent met him again, who told him, he heard Warrants were out against
them: Therefore would have had him come to his Lodging, where, with others, to
have gone to Kensington to put their Design in immediate Execution, and assured
him there would be Safety in so doing.

Against King.
First, Capt. Porter deposed, That the said Edward King went with him and
Knightly, to view the Ground: And was with the other Conspirators at most of
their Meetings, particularly at his Lodging in Maiden-lane, the same day they
were to execute their Design; where were Discourses of that Nature: And also at
the Blew-Posts in Spring-Garden, That he was present when Word was brought of
the Disappointment.

The next was Mr. De la Rue, who Swore, That the said Edward King told him, on
the 7 th of February, that he was going out Town about something in order to
the Design, with Knightly, Durance, and others, to see whether the King went to
Richmond or Hounslow, and That sometime after he told this Deponent, he did
ride out with his Friends, and that there was the Rarest Place for the
Execution of the Design against King William that was possible, or had they
studied never so long for a Convenient Place they could not have had such
another. And that he was with him on the 15 th and 22 d of February, at
Porter's Lodging, and the Blew-Posts in Spring-Garden, where they had
Discourses concerning putting their Purpose in Execution. And that he had seen
him at diverse other Times and Places.

Mr. Bois swore, That King was the first that ever told him of the
Assassination, it was at his own Chamber in this manner; That there was a great
undertaking in hand, that he had put his Name into the List, and That, if he
would make one, he should have a Horse; and gave him 20 s. to buy Boots. He
told him several were come over from France; That the late King James would
Land very Speedily.

Against Keys.
Capt. Porter first deposed, That he the said Keys was present at most of the
Consultations, he hired Horses for the Captain to be employed in the Business.
That he was at the Blew-Posts in Spring-Garden, with him and the other
Conspirators, where word was brought of the Disappointment, both the 15 th and
22 d of February, and That he agreed to be one that should be Personally
concerned in the Assassination.

Mr. Prendergast swore, That he the said Keys was at Capt. Porter's Lodging in
Maiden-lane, the 25 th of February where were diverse others, whose discourse
chiefly tended to the Execution of the Assassination: and afterward, on the
same day, they met again at the Blew-Posts in the Spring-Garden, where, with
others, he did agree to act in the Design.

Mr. De la Rue deposed, That he the said Keys was one of those that met at the
Blew-Posts in Spring-Garden, on Saturday the 22 d of February, and he was the
only Man told him of the Meetings. That when Word was brought of the
Disappointment, he went to the Mews-Gate, to learn the reason if he could of
the King's not going abroad for two Saturdays together; and that he brought in
word. The Guards were come back in a Foam, and the King's Coach to the
Mews-gate, and by People's Muttering he feared a Discovery.

But the whole Evidence against Charnock, King and Keys being clear and
positive Testimony; and what they pleaded for themselves being only their own
single Affirmation and Negation, without any support of Witnesses, the Jury
brought them in Guilty of High Treason.

Accordingly to which Sentence they were Executed the 18 th of the said Month.

At the time of their Execution each of them delivered a Paper, to the
Sheriffs, wherein they owned themselves guilty of the Crime for which they
stood Condemned, and that they were for Killing the King and the Guards.

The next Criminal Arraigned was Sir John Friend, who was brought to his Trial,
March the 23 d of that Year.

Against him Capt. Porter deposed, That about the latter end of May or
beginning of June 1695, on a Monday, the Lord Aylesbury, the Lord Mongomery,
Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkyns, Sir John Fenwick, Mr. Charnock, one Cook,
and this Deponent, met at the old King's-Head in Leadenhall-Street, and at one
Mrs. Monjoy's- Tavern in St. James's- street, sometime after. At both these
Meetings it was consulted and agreed, to send Charnock over to France to invite
the late King James to England and to prevail with the French King to furnish
him with 10000 Men; 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons, and each did
promise to meet him at his Landing with 2000 Horse, and Sir John Friend did
say, he would be as forward in his Assistance as any. And not long after the
second they had a third Meeting, where were Sir William Parkyns, Sir George
Barclay, Sir John Friend, one Holmes, Mr. Ferguson, and this Deponent.

Capt. Blair swore, that 2 or 3 Years ago Sir John Friend produced a Commission
he had from K. James, to be a Colonel of a Regiment of Horse, which he was to
raise, and to appoint what Officers he thought fit; That he read the
Commission, it was sealed at the Top James Rex, and counter-sign'd Melford,
That he promised this Deponent he should be his Lieutenant Colonel, and told
him he should get as many Men as he could, that Mr. Fisher was to be his first
Captain, and Vernatti was to be another, and Mr. Sclater should be Captain of a
Troop of Non-Swearing Parsons, and that for engaging and contracting with Men
to come in to be of his Regiment, and to caress and keep them together and to
carry on the Design, he had expended a great deal of Money. And that he laid
down 100 l. to facilitate Col. Parker's escape out of the Tower; That he had
wrote a Letter to King James, and gave it this Deponent to read, who told him
'twas well penned, and that he believed Mr. Ferguson did pen it.

To this Sir John Friend makes an Objection against the Credit of the Witnesses
that they were not to be believed, upon this Account, because they are known to
be Roman Catholics, and he a Protestant, their Consciences as to Oaths, are
somewhat large, especially when they swear against Protestants, and therefore,
says he, they are not to be allowed, against Protestants, as Witnesses; and
that their Credit was not sufficient to induce a Jury to believe them. At first
he alleged there was a Statute that disabled them from being Witnesses, but
that was proved to him to the Contrary.

Then he insisted upon it, that Blair was not to be looked upon as a Witness,
and that because he denied he knew any thing of the Plot: The Occasion of that
was this; when he was in the Gate House, there was News in the Flying-Post or
Post-Boy, where it was alleged that Blair had confessed all; and that
thereupon Blair said, he was Innocent; but Blair being called into Court again
swears, he did not say he knew nothing of a Plot, but denied being privy to, or
concerned in the Assassination: so that he did not deny wholly to be in the
Plot, but in the Assassination.

Another thing he insisted upon to be a Matter of Law, in the Statute of the
25. Edw. 3. which was overruled by the Court.

So that what he had to say for himself, proving no way material; then the Jury
withdrew, and returned after a short time, and brought him in Guilty of
High Treason.

As touching the Paper he delivered to the Sheriffs, at the time of his
Execution, he said, he died in Charity with all Men, and a Member of the Church
of England; he no way denied the Fact for which he stood Condemned, but rather
Justified it, and made some groundless Reflections on the legal and regular
Proceedings against him; concluding with a Prayer which could be dictated by
none but a fierce Jacobite. It was in truth a Prayer more proper for their
Treasonable Meetings at the Old King's-Head in Leadenhall-streei, etc. than to
be used as the last Words of a Gentleman dying in the Profession of the Church
of England.

The next Offender that came under the stroke of Justice, was Sir William
Parkyns; who came to his Trial the 24 th of March the same Year: Amongst the
several Witnesses that was produced Capt. Porter was the first, who has been a
Witness hitherto against several upon the like Occasion, he swore, That about
the latter end of May or beginning of June, 1695, Sir John Fenwick, Sir John
Friend, Sir William Parkyns, and this Deponent, with diverse others, Met at the
Old King's Head in Leadenhall-street, and some time after, at Mrs. Monjoy's; at
both which Places they did consult, how they might again Restore King James: in
order to it they thought it very necessary to send, Mr. Charnock, who was at
that Meeting, to King James, and invite him to England with a French Force,
viz. 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons, if he could solicit the French
King to lend him so many, and that each of them did send their promise to meet
him, where he should appoint to Land, at the Head of 2000 Horse.

And further, as to the Assassination, he swore, That about the latter end of
January, or beginning of February, Sir George Barclay was sent over with a
Commission from the late King James; whereupon Sir George Barclay, Sir William
Parkyns, this Deponent, with diverse others, had several Meetings, particularly
at the Globe-Tavern in Hatton-Garden, the Nags-Head Tavern in Covent Garden,
the Sun-Tavern in the Strand, and other places. Where it was resolved to
undertake to Assassinate King William, that Sir William did consent to it, and
said, he thought it necessary to be done, to facilitate the Restoration of
King James: and offered to Lend 5 Horses to engage in it, three to be mounted
by Men as he would get, the other two by Capt. Porter; That he told Charnock,
in this Deponents hearing, He had a Commission from King James for the raising
a Troop of Horse, and that he had seen and read the Commission Sir George
Barclay brought over, which was to Levy War against the Person of the Prince of
Orange, and that he would not Personally engage in the Assassination, because
he had a Regiment to look after.

Sweet swore, That he the said Sir William Parkyns told him about Christmas
last, That King James would come; he asked him, How he knew it? He told him, He
had his Word for it; and that he had a Troop which consisted of Old Soldiers;
he had Thirty Sadles, and besides there would be some Volunteers which were old
Officers: That he was to go into Leichestershire, and did, it was about the
latter end of January, and Scudamore went with him; and one Yarborough, and a
Parson that came out of York shire, met him there: And that he found the West
was as well inclined to King James 's Interest as the North; and a Lord's
Brother was concerned. That Sir William sent for him out of the Country the
second time the King was to be Assassinated, and that he had designed to have
used him in the business, but that he had Compassion on his Family.

Eubank swore, That he, in January last, waited on Sir William into
Leichestershire where several resorted to him, particularly one Yarborongh, and
a York shire Parson; that afterward he ordered him to bring three Horses to
London, and he brought them up the 14 th of February, and Sir William told
him, he thought to go out of Town on the Morrow, being Saturday; but his mind
altered 'till Monday following, when he went to his House in VVarwick-shire,
and returned the Friday after, which was the 21 st of January, and brought up
four Horses more. The next Day, being Saturday, this Deponent was sent on a
Message to Kensington; the Answer he brought back was writ in his Almanac,
which he showed to Sir William, who thereupon bid him go to his Inn, and get
his Horses ready to go out of Town in the Afternoon, which he did; on the
Monday following he received a Letter from Sir William, to go to his
Fellow Servants Evans; that after reading the Letter, they went with a Cart and
Horses to one Haywood's House to fetch some Chests; there were three large
Ones, out of which were taken seven or eight smaller, which they carried to Sir
William's House, and buried them in the Garden.

Then Thomas Watts was sworn, who deposed, That after the breaking out of the
Plot, he did search Sir William Parkyns's House, where, in the Garden, he found
buried several Boxes, or Chests; there was in them four Dozen of Swords, Thirty
two Carbines, Twenty five Brace of Pistols.

There are more Substantial Concurring Evidence, which I think two tedious to
mention; but shall refer any inquisitive Person to the Trials.

Sir William Parkyns says for himself, that he does admit and agree, what
Porter says is very positive and full, but that is but the Evidence of one
Witness: And that by the Law no Person ought to be convicted of High Treason
upon the Testimony of one Witness. But then it was answered, as to the Matter
of Law, he is to the right, no Man ought to be convicted of Treason, upon the
Testimony of one single VVitness: But it was proved he, with others, did send
Charnock into France. To which if you add the Testimony of Sweet, who swore Sir
William told him King James would come, that he had a Troop, had bought
Saddles, his having such a quantity of Arms, of his going into Liecester-shire.
If all which be understood in pursuance of the Design against His present
Majesty, then there are at least Two Witnesses, to several Overt-Acts of the
same Treason.

But then it was objected by Sir William, That Sweet does not prove any
Overt Act, that what he said being only words, and words are not Treason. But
then it was answered, they are words that relate to Acts and Things. That he
had a great quantity of Arms, beyond what he, as a private Man, could have
occasion for, or use: Sir William pretended he found them at his House, when
he first went thither, all rusty; but account was given, these were bright and
fit for use.

By this plain evidence of the several Stages of his Journey, his Treasonable
Intercourse with the Men of the North, his agreeing, with others, to send
Charnock to France, his providing such a considerable quantity of Arms, his
engaging to lend 5 Horses, and 3 Men, to act in the Assassination, etc. was
made out beyond all possibility of Confutation. After a full hearing on both
sides the Jury withdrew, and after a very short time returned, and brought him
guilty of High Treason: According to which Sentence he was Executed the 3 d of
April following. At the time of his Death delivered a written Paper to the
Sheriffs, wherein he acknowledged his being concerned in the Design against the
King's Life.

On the 21 st of April 1696, was Ambrose Rookwood brought to Trial. Against him
Capt. Porter first deposed, that at several Meetings for the carring on this
Design against His Majesty, Mr. Rookwood was present, more particularly at the
Globe-Tavern in Hatton-Garden, where Sir George Barclay, Mr. Charnock, Sir
William Parkyns, this Deponent, and others, discoursed which was the best way
and method; That, and first, Mr. Rookwood said, 'twas a very desperate thing,
and seemed not very willing to engage in it, whereupon Sir George Barclay told
him, he should command his Party; he replied in French, There Is an end of it,
and consented.

And farther that on Saturday Morning the 15 th of February, there met at his,
this Deponent's Lodging, in Little Rider-street, Sir George Barclay, Rookwood,
and several others, where word was brought by Durance, the King did go abroad;
and it was resolved by all, the same Day to put their Design in Execution.

The next Witness produced was Captain Harris, who swore, That on Saturday
Morning the 15 th of February, the first Day when this Assassination was
designed to be committed, he went to the Lodging of one Burk, where Mr.
Rookwood was, with others, and he found them all in great Disorder, and
thereupon asked them, what was the matter, and what they were going to do? And
Rookwood bid him go to one Counter, and he should know of him what was the
matter. Accordingly he went; and Counter told him, and those who were with him,
That they must get ready to go to Turnham-Green; and at the same Time and
Place, he this Deponent met Sir G. Barclay, and after some Discourse of
attacking the Coach, Sir G. Barclay at the first said, They were his
Ianizaries; and afterward going out, he came in again, and said, They were Men
of Honor, and that they were to go abroad to attack the Prince of Orange:

He further deposed, That upon Saturday the 22 d of February, the second time
it was to have been put in Execution, Mr. Rookwood gave this Deponent a List of
Men that he was to Command; that Mr. Rookwood's Name was at the Top, and this
Deponent's counterfeit Name, which was Ienkins, and Hare's counterfeit Name,
which was Guinea; and that he told this Deponent, He was to be of his Party,
and that he should be his Aid-du-Camp, and they were to make ready to go to
Turnham Green to attack the Prince of Orange.

Then the Council for the Prisoner endeavored to take off the Credit of Mr.
Porter, and opened very great Crimes, that he should be guilty of, which must
render him a Person not to be believed; but did not prove any thing: No Witness
that they called against Mr. Porter said any thing against him, to invalidate
his Testimony, or to introduce any one to disbelieve what he has said.

Then they said in Point of Law, there is no Overt Act proved of any Design
against the King's Life, that affects Mr. Rookwood; there were other Objections
started, which were overruled by the Court. The Jury went forth to consider of
their Verdict, and after a quarter of an Hours stay returned, and brought him
in Guilty of High Treason.

The next Person that was called to the Bar to justify himself, was Charles
Cranburne, the 22 d of April, 1696. Against him Capt. Porter deposed, That he
made the said Cranburne acquainted with the Design of Assassinating His Majesty
King William, the Day before they were to execute it; and he engaged to be
ready and make one. On Saturday, the 22 d of February, he came to my Lodging in
Maiden-lane, and I sent him to Sir William Parkyns. for a Note for two Horses
that I was to mount of his: He came back and told me he knew where to have
them, and that Capt. Charnock was afraid we should not have our Complement of
Men, and desired me to send him an account what Men I could bring, which I did,
by Mr. Cranburne; and being to go to the Blew-Posts, ordered him to bring it to
me thither; and he did bring it back to me, to the Blew-Posts, with Capt.
Charnock's List underneath: And notwithstanding word being brought of the
Disappoiotment, we parted not till we had drank the Healths, to the Restoring
the late King James, the Prince of Wales, etc.

Then Mr. De la Rue swore, That he the said Cranburne, the 22 d of February,
the day on which they the second time thought to put the Design in Execution,
was sent with a List, by Capt. Porter, of his Men, and whilst I and Capt.
Porter was at the Blew-Posts in Spring-Garden, he brought, to Capt. Porter, the
List from Charnock, with an addition of Names. And after, word was brought of
the Disappointment, the Company began to drink very Disloyal Healths, as to the
Restoring the late King James, the Queen, the Prince of Wales, and the French
King. Then Capt. Porter, having an Orange in his Hand, squeezed it, and drank a
Health, to the squeezing the rotten Orange; which was Pledged by all, and
particularly by Mr. Cranburne.

Mr. Prendergast deposed, That he was with Mr. Cranburne the 14 th of February,
and there was a Discourse of going in pursuance of this Design the next day,
and Mr. Cranburne agreed to it: and when they were disappointed the 15 th being
at the Blue-Posts in Spring-Garden, they then agreed to pursue it the next
Saturday, and that Cranburne was one of them that agreed to it.

To all this Mr. Cranburne and his Council offered very little, finding the
Evidence so positive; so the Jury withdrew to consider of their Verdict a
quarter of an Hour, and returned into Court, having found him guilty of
High Treason.

On Wednesday the 22 d of April 1696, Robert Lowick was brought to the
King's Bench Bar, for Conspiring to Assassinate his Majesty King William.
Against him Mr. Harris swore, That between the 15 th and 22 th of February he
met Mr. Lowick in Red-Lion-fields, and discoursed with him there, about the
Assassination; and told him what a barbarous and inhumane thing it was that we
should be the Murderers of the Prince of Orange, and that it would render us
odious to all the World, and that we should be a continual Reproach to our
selves; he did agree it was so, but would obey Orders; that he said Sir George
Barclay, he was sure, would not do it without Orders; which he repeated twice.

On Saturday the 22 th he this Deponent and Mr. Lowick dined at a Cooks at the
End of Red-Lion-street; and being there together, he this Deponent was in a
Sweat, and Lowick asked him the Reason; he told him he had been about to get
ready Rookwood's Party that were to seize the King: says he, you need not grudg
to do it, you have six Shillings a day, and I have nothing, and yet I brought a
couple of Men at my own Charge.

Then Mr. Bertram swore, That he the said Robert Lowick came to him about the
Beginning of February last, and asked him if he would espouse a thing with him
that might be for his Advantage? He told him, he thought he might espouse any
thing that he thought fit to engage in; he answered it was well, and desired
him to ask him no more Questions. On the 14 th of February he desired him to be
at his Lodging at 12 a Clock; he went: when he came there, he took him up into
his Chamber, and told him, he believed they would ride out in some little time,
and that the King was to be seized in his Coach; and he gave him a Guinea to
buy him Necessaries.

To this he and his Council had little to offer in their Defense, the Evidence
being so full and positive against them; which being summed up to the Jury,
they withdrew for a short time, and returned into Court, having found him
guilty of High Treason: according to which Sentence he was Executed, and
Rookwood and Cranburne with him.

On Wednesday the 13 th of May, in the said Year 1696, Peter Cook Gent. was
Indicted for endeavoring to procure Forces from France to invade this Kingdom,
and Conspiring to levy War in this Realm for assisting and abetting the said
Invasion, in order to the Deposing his Sacred Majesty King William, and
Restoring the late King James.

The first Witness produced was Mr. Porter, who swore, That the Lord Ailesbury,
my Lord Montgomery, Sir John Fenwick, Sir William Parkins, Sir John Friend,
Mr. Charnock, Mr. Cook, and himself, (Mr. Goodman came in after Dinner) had two
Meetings; the first was in May, at the old King's Head Tavern in
Leadenhall-Street, in order to consult about an Invasion. In this Meeting it
was consulted which was the best Way, and the quickest, to restore King James,
and hasten his Return into England; several Discourses and Proposals there
were: At last in was agreed to send Mr. Charnock to the late King, to borrow of
the French King 10000 Men, 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons, to be sent
over into England, to assist the late King's Restoration. Says Mr. Charnock
thereupon, This the King can do without your sending, and I would not go upon a
Foolish Errand. What will you do in this Matter? The Company desired him to
promise King James, That if he would send word where he landed, they would be
sure to meet him at his Landing with a Body of 2000 Horse. And all of them that
were there present, was asked by Charnock, Whether he might assure the King of
what they had told him? Every one said, Yes, you may: And when Mr. Cook was
asked, he kneeled upon a Chair, and said, Yes, you may.

The 2d Meeting was about the latter end of May, or beginning of June, at Mrs.
Montjoy's Tavern, at St. James's; where were present, at that time, my Lord
Aylesbury, Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkyns, and Mr. Charnock, and Mr.
Cook, and himself; they did assure Mr. Charnock that they kept to their former
Resolution, and would abide to what was agreed upon at their first Meeting: And
that accordingly Mr. Charnock did go to France, and he did return, and bring
back King James's Thanks to them: and he had share of the Complement.

Then Mr. Goodman swore, That about the middle of the Month of May, Mr. Porter
acquainted him there would be a Meeting of some of King James's Friends, at the
Old King's-head in Leadenhall-street; that tho he could not dine with them he
would come to them after Dinner, which he did; when he came there, Mr. Porter
brought him into a Room where was my Lord Montgomery, my Lord Aylesbury, Sir
John Fenwick, Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkins, Mr. Charnock and Mr. Cook:
after we were set down, there was a Consultation, that considering the French
King's Wars retarded the Affair of sending back King James, and the means of
restoring him to the Crown; it was thought fit after some Debate to send Mr.
Charnock into France, to King James, to prevail with the French King to furnish
Ten Thousand Men, whereof 8000 to be Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons: That
we would meet him at the Head of 2000 Horse. When our Resolution of the Thing
and the Number was thus fixed, Mr. Charnock asked, whether it were with all our
Consents? And that he might assure the King, that this was our Resolution?
Whereupon we all rose up, and said to him, Yes, you may; Yes, you may; every
one particularly: that at the same time Mr. Cook kneeled upon the Chair, when
he said, Yes, you may, and his Elbows were upon the Table.

There was another Meeting as Capt. Porter told me, but I had Business in the
City; but whatever he promised on my behalf as to the Quota of Men, I would be
sure to make it good, but was not at the second Meeting.

So that after a Long Trial and hearing Council both for the King and Prisoner,
the Jury withdrew to consider of their Verdict about three quarters of an
Hour; they returned into Court, and brought him in Guilty of High Treason.

As for the Persons Out-lawed, my Lord, they having by Law the space of a whole
Year allowed to surrender themselves, Page 1^0
before they are to be looked on as Men absolutely to be condemned, it is hoped
before that Time's expired, that some of them will voluntarily come in, and
stand a legal Trial, and, if possible, prove themselves innocent: but if not,
they must not think the Evidence against them will be any longer suppressed,
there being to be found in the Informations given in upon Oath, abundantly
sufficient to convict every Man of them, either of the intended Insurrection or
Assassination; both which are made out with as much Clearness of Testimony and
Strength as any Humane Affair is capable of.

And his Majesty is deeply sensible, and has publicly acknowledged, Page 171
how he has once more been preserved, by the immediate Hand of Heaven, from the
Rage and Violence of blood-thirsty and cruel Men; cannot but look on himself as
a-fresh obliged to manifest his Gratitude to Heaven, by promoting the Glory of
his Preserver, in continuing to consult, above all things, the Welfare of his
Church, and the Peace and Happiness of this great People committed to his
Charge.

And since, my Lord, the Divine Favor has so marvellously put into his Hands
this new Advantage, he will improve it, not in Acts of Severity and Revenge,
which your Lordship knows his Nature utterly abhors, but by imitating the
Divine Goodness, in a regular Course of strict Justice to all obdurate
Impenitents; so, which he much rather desires, in his usual Method of Mercy and
Kindness, to as many as shall give sincere Proofs of Penitence, and Reformation
of their pail Crimes: Virtues, which we have too much Reason to believe, his
Enemies have been hitherto little acq^ainted with.

Before I conclude, my good Lord, let me entreat your Lordship's Patience
whilst I address my self to those misguided Englishmen, who, after all this,
persevere to be disaffected to his Majesty and the Government; whom I would
willingly persuade to cease doting on their old Bondage, and hankering after a
Perjured Prince, who when amongst us, broke his Coronation Oath, and studied
nothing more than subjecting us to Popery, Slavery, a Despotick and Arbitrary
Government. Did he not assume to himself a Power to suspend and dispense with
the Execution of the Laws, enacted for the Security and Happiness of the
Subjects, and thereby rendered them of none effect? And did he not, in order to
the obtaining a Judgment in the Court of King's Bench, for declaring the
Dispensing Power a Right belonging to the Crown, turn out such Judges as could
not in Conscience concur in so pernicious a Sentence? And after having packed
Judges for his Purpose, he obtained the Judgment he required. What, Can no King
please them but him who set up a Commission of Ecclesiastical Matters, against
express Laws to the contrary, which were executed contrary to all Law? Can no
one content them but a Prince who values nothing in the World so much as the
overturning our Religion? and in order thereto, Did he not send the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and six other Bishops, to the Tower, for setting forth, in a
Petition, their Reasons why they could not obey the Order requiring them to
appoint their Clergy to read the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience?
Finally, Can nothing please them but a King who Arbit^ally, and against Law,
turned the Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford out of their Freeholds, and
put the College into the hands of Papists? Did he not bring his Army of Irish
Cutthroats by whom we went in danger of being Murdered every Moment?

Or if the Experience of Time past, Page 173
so dearly bought, can prevail nothing with them, let them but seriously
reflect on their present Condition, Who may, if they will, Securely enjoy
Peace, Plenty, Liberty, and the best Religion under the best of Princes, whilst
many Misguided Gentlemen, both English and Scotch, who have abandoned their
Families and Estates to follow that Unhappy Prince to St. Germain's where a
considerable Party being Protestants, Vide A View of the Court of St. Germains.
they only desired a Chapel from the late King James, for the Exercise of
their Worship according to the Church of England; and proposed Dr. Granvile,
Brother to the Earl of Bath, formerly Dean of Durham, as a fit Person to be
their Chaplain: They urged the great Incouragment such a Toleration would give
to his Adherents in England, and what Satisfaction it would be, to such
Protestants as followed him; but though common Policy, and his Circumstances made
every body believe that this request would be easily granted, yet it was
positively denied, and Dr. Granvile obliged not only to retire from Court, but
also from the Town of St. Germains to avoid the daily Insults of the Priests,
and the dreaded Consequences of the Jealousies with which they possessed King
James's Court against him. Dr. Gordon a Bishop of Scotland, the only Protestant
Divine that then was there, met with a worse Treatment still than Dr. Granvile,
and was reduced to the necessity of abjuring his Religion for want of Bread,
with which he could not be supplied but upon those hard Terms.

Let them examine a little farther, and they will find the Lord Chief Justice
Herbert, a Person both well qualified to give Advice in English Affairs, and of
an unspotted Reputation in his Country, interceding in behalf of the Protestant
Party's Demand: Upon which an Information was trump'd up against the Chief
Justice by Mr. Comptroller Skeleton and Sir William Sharp, of having said that
K. James's Violent Temper would ruin himself and all that Followed him. My Lord
owned the Words; but made so ingenious an Explanation of his meaning, that King
James was satisfied. Shortly after they charged him with another Plot of
corresponding with the English, whereupon he, and a Worthy Lady with whom he
Boarded, were confined; and Broomfield, the Quaker, committed to the Bastile.
Thus was my Lord Chief Justice, for no other reason but his adhering to a
Protestent Interest, excluded from all share of Management of Affairs in King
James's Court; though his Capacity and Sufferings were sufficient, in the Eyes of
all reasonable Men, to have entitled him to a share in that Prince's Favor
and Secrets. If my Lord Chief Justice Herbert was so used, I would fain know,
upon what Ground any of our Iacobites should flatter themselves of a better
Treatment.

Sir Andrew Forrester, Sir Theophilus Oglethorp, and Mr. Fergus Graham, these
Gentlemen by their Capacities as well as Services, were encouraged to go over
and offer their Assistance to King James; at whose hands they were unkindly
used, and the Reward of their Service, only a Pass to return for England again;
where it is expected they will Plot no more.

If there can still remain any well-meaning Men in their Party, led away by the
specious Delusions of good Words abused to the worst of things, let them
instead of hearkening to what Wicked and designing Men under the most deceitful
Colors Suggest to them for Sinister Ends, guide their Opinions by their own
plain and sensible Observations. Let them but fairly and indifferently, compare
the present State of all Nations round about them with their own: And then let
them, if they can, refuse to Bless God and King William for their inexpressible
Advantages above all others.

Henceforth therefore let no vain pretense of Liberty and Property push them on
to the same desperate Designs by fomenting Jeasousies between the King and his
People, or throwing in Sparks of Discontent, and endeavoring to blow them up
into Flames of Mutinies and Rebellions. Be advised to consider what you are
doing, and run not headlong to Destruction by helping forward your Countries
Ruin, by laboring to Subject it to its most avowed Enemies; the securing
whose Interest here in England, was the Devilish Design so long on Foot.

Wherefore let me conjure them to look back on their past Actions which gave us
the dismal Prospect of Slavery in our Persons, Consciences and Estates, if the
Divine Goodness had not miraculously appeared for our Deliverance.

Let us seriously consider, if the Direful Stroke which was Levelled against
His Majesty had taken effect, what the Consequence would have been; assuredly
we must have bid adieu to our Religion, Law and (...) at once, for Popery,
Tyranny, and Oppression poured in upon us like a Mighty (...) Wives and
Daughters Ravished, (...)our Faces, our selves ransacked and plundered, if not
knocked on the Head, and if spared, (...) to live in the most extreme Misery,
and at last (...) with the utmost Cruelty.

Therefore since it has pleased God to bless us with the Surprise of a
Deliverance from so great Evils, Let us be persuaded to become a Loyal and
Quiet People, (...) to Obedience; which is the hearty Wish of a (...) of his
Country, and,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Humble Servant.

FINIS
ERRATA.
Page 7. lin. 17. dele (...) after that. p. 13. l. 12. re^d (...). p. 14. l. 23
r. principal. p. 15. l. 3. r. disapp^inted. p. 20. l. 9. r. Repre^e^tation. p.
23. l. 2. r. have had. p. 30. l. 2. r. giving. ibid. l. 3. dele in. p. 37. l.
1. r. (...). p. 38. l. 12. dele Comma after (...). ibid. l. 23. r. (...). p.
43. l. 11. dele Comma after others


