Christianity Restored To Its Primitive PURITY, Or the Mercenary Church
Reformed; Being an Abstract of a SERMON, PREACHED At Oak-wood Chapel in Surry,
and at the Abbey Church in Bath June the 27th. 1699.

Showing that all true Pastors must Preach Freely.

By Jos. Perkins.

The Priests Preach for Hire, and the Prophets divine for reward, and yet they
say, is not the Lord among us? Mica. 3.11. LONDON. Printed for the Author,
MDCXCIX.

The PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Church of England for about Twenty Years has Compelled me to Preach
Freely, or for little or nothing, and now some of them blame me for what they
themselves have taught me. Must I still be a constant Practitioner of this
faculty of Preaching Freely, and never become Proffessor of the same? I have
been compelled to Preach for nothing many Years, and now by long Practice I
have gotten an habit of it: And what I then did by constraint, I now do
voluntarily: and therefore I hope, it is an acceptable service unto God, as
being a freewill offering. Here my Adversaries urge, that I was not compelled
to Preach for nothing: for no man compelled me to Preach at all: And many have
advised me to throw off my Gown, and take up some other employment.

I answer, that though no Man, yet Gods commands, and my own duty and Conscience
compel me to Preach, (for woe be to me if I Preach not the Gospel) But ye by
denying me any reward, though you have not simply compelled me to Preach, yet
have you compelled me to Preach for Nothing. For being in this Calling, I must
therein abide with Christ, though you deny me a disciples reward, and thereby
compel me to get my liveing by making Verses, as St. Paul did by making
Tents. You upbraid me, that 'its not fit to make Poetry a Trade to get ones
liveing by.

I answer it is not fit to make Preaching a Trade to get ones living by neither:
But of the two I had rather be a mercenary Poet, than a mercenary Preacher. But
what reason is this, to muzle up the mouth of the Ox, that is, not suffer me
to live by the Altar, and yet endeavor to hinder me from provideing for me and
my Children some other way? Ye have cast me out into the Sea of this World
without Cork or Bladder on purpose to Drown me; But thanks be to God, I can now
Swim without either, that is, Preach without any reward to support me: And now
being thus Skilled in the Art of Preaching Freely, I must teach my Brethren to
do so too.

When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

Jos. Perkins.

Acts, 20. v. 33. I have coveted no man's Silver or Gold or Apparel.
That all true Pastors ought to Preach Freely, not for Hire or reward.
WE have Christ's express command for it Mat. 10. v. 8. [Freely ye have
received, Freely give] which command the Apostles observed by Preaching the
Gospel Freely; without respect to any Reward. By which means Christ and his
Apostles were very Poor, and lived by Alms. Yet these poor men planted
Christianity in the World, which Rich Churchmen by their Covetousness have
almost rooted out again.

Christ the Eternal wisdom of the Father knew well enough that his Religion
could not be planted or propagated, if there lay any Suspicion of Covetousness
on the Preachers thereof. It was the sincerity of the Apostles that added
authority to their Words; and therefore St. Paul does so often clear himself
from the Suspicion of Covetousness, [ I have coveted no man's silver, or gold or
apparel. Act. 20.33. Neither at any time used we a Cloak of Covetousness, God
is witness. 1 These. 2.5. He calls God to witness, which surely he would not do
(says Bp. Sanderson) nisi dignus vindice nodus, if it did not highly concern
him to stand clear in the eye of the World in that behalf. He wrought with his
own hands for his living that he might not be burdensome to those, to whom he
Freely Preached the Gospel. (2. These. 3.8.) but that they might know he aimed
only (as every other true Pastor does) at the benefit of their Souls, and
nothing at all at his own worldly ends: for thus he says, I seek not yours but
you: not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved.
And again whether those that grasp together Pluralities of livings and seek to
get into the richest Parsonages, are of St. Paul's mind or no, I leave the World
to Judge. But if they are not of St. Paul's mind, they are not worthy to be
Christ's Messengers. The Servant is not greater than his Lord, nor the Disciple
greater than his Master. Christ had not where to lay his Head, lived by Alms,
went about on Foot, and had not a piece of Money to pay Caesar his due, but
what he got by working a Miracle. Many of our Pluralists, etc. Live in stately
Palaces, ride in glorious Chariots, and have of the Churches Revenues some 500
l. some 1000 l. some many Thousands a year. And all this they have as a Reward
for the good service they do in the Church. This is their Hire: And Christ
himself says the Labourer is worthy of his Hire. Very right.

But what is meant by Hire there? You may see, Mat. 10, v. 10. where it is
explained thus [the Workman is worthy of his Meat.] and this is the Hire
Christ allowed his Apostles: and this was reward enough to satisfy an Apostle,
because they had the grace of God, which was sufficient for them: But without
that, 1000 l. a year is not enough to satiate the desires of some of our
Preachers, Food and Raiment is an Apostles Hire: If our Preachers (by what
names or Titles soever dignified or distinguished, etc.) can do the work better
then Christ and his Apostles did, then let them in Gods name expect a better
reward than they had. I presume, St. Peter deserved as good Preferment as any
Bp. in Christendom, yet says he, Silver and Gold have I none: And I believe,
none he desired, but was content with what his Master allowed him, viz. his
Food a slender reward: And yet as slender as this reward was, the Apostles did
not do the work for the sake of this reward neither. For no man can be so
foolish as to think that the holy Apostles went up and down to Preach for
Victuals, and to get their Living (as many amongst us do get into the Priests
Office that they may eat a piece of Bread) this Mercenary Trade of Preaching
for Victuals had been beneath an Apostolic Spirit. No: they did it Freely
without regard to so much as the Bread they Eat. If they had been such mean
Hirelings as this, they had been altogether unworthy to be called Apostles.
This Hire came by the by, and was not at all in their intentions; according to
that saying of our Lord, First seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness,
and all these things (Food and Raiment) shall be added unto you. Nay so far
were they from seeking to get their Livings by the exercise of their Office,
that they lost their very Lives for the same. And Christ proposes to his
followers not preferment, but Persecutions: Behold I send you forth as sheep in
the midst of Wolves.

I do not here condemn all that take Money of their Congregations. It is one
thing to take their rewards, and another thing to Preach and Pray for the sake
of the reward. St. Paul himself sometimes took their Charity, when he knew he
might safely do it without danger of being thought covetous: Yet was he always
very careful, as to keep his Conscience clear from the Evil, so to keep his
credit from all appearance of it. When we have so far wrought our selves into
the good opinion of our People that they do not suspect us guilty of
Covetousness. Then may we safely take their Charitable relief for the supply of
our necessitys. But when the honor of God and the safety of Souls ly at stake,
and the taking of money breeds a strong suspicion in men that we are Covetous,
and that Preaching and Praying is but Priest Craft, and a means only to enrich
our selves by, we are then bound in Conscience to be very spareing in taking
their Alms, that so we may refrain from all appearance of evil. If we will do
the work of God sincerely, we must overlook all Rewards, and suffer no mixture
of self Love to mingle with and corrupt our pure intentions. That so all men
may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

I have not written these things to hinder the true Pastor from his Reward; For
the Labourer is worthy of his Hire. But then it must be the Labourer, and not
the Loyterer. He that does not Work, neither should he Eat. The greedy
Pluralist then that does not the Work, but keeps Journey-men Curates to Work
for him, does not deserve so much as the Bread he Eats. And yet commonly, he
that works least, devours the most. This is the common Practice in the present
Church, to make Preaching and Praying a mercenary Trade for Gain, and to keep
Journey-men Curates. That which was Ordained of Christ as a means to draw men's
Minds off from the World, Is it self become (through the cunning of Satan) a
mercenary Trade to gain the World? Preaching and Praying are perverted from
their right End, not to gain Souls, but to gain the World. The Disciples did
forsake the World to follow Christ: These follow Christ for the sake of the
World, or rather forsake him like Demas, to embrace the present World. Christ
made his Apostles Fishers of Men: Satan has made these greedy Pluralists
Fishers of Money. If these Men were as good Christians as the Apostles they
would be content with as small an Allowance as they were: But as far short as
they come of them in Goodness, so far would they surpass them in Greatness. Nay
were they as good Men as the Heathen Poet, they would be content with Food and
Raiment, (as the Apostle also exhorts) -- Mensura tamen quae
Sufficiat census siquis me consulat, edam:
In quantum sit is atque fames and frigora poscunt.
Juvenal.

He that aims at the wrong End, must needs err all the Way, and he that aims
at Honor or Profit by the Ministry, aims at the wrong End. He that desires
the Office of a Bishop desires a good work, says the Apostle, he speaks only
of the Office and the Work, not the Reward. Some indeed do desire the Office
and the Work, but as a Means only to attain a further End, namely to get
Riches. But this is a base Desire and far unworthy an Apostolic Spirit. And
that this is the aim of many in the present Church of England, may appear by
this, that when they have attained the End they aimed at, viz. Preferment, they
then make but little use of the means, Preaching Praying etc. according to the
old Maxim: Acquisito fine cessant media. Just like that Cardinal, who to make
show of Humility and Poverty of spirit, was wont to spread his Table with a
Fishing nett; but when he came to be Pope he presently left off the Fishing
nett, and being asked why he left off St. Peter's nett, he readily answered, he
had already caught the Fish, meaning the Popedom. And many of our Church men
do the like at present, when they have gotten the thing they aimed at,
Preferment, they usually neglect the Office and the Work: Perhaps employ some
underling Curate to do the work for them, allowing him some petty Wages for the
same, reserving the greatest Share to themselves for doing little or nothing:
Whereas the Labourer and not the Loyterer is worthy of his Hire. But what
reason is this, that one man should do the Work, and another reap the Profit?
To argue the Case a little with you, whosoever you are that employ Journey men
Curates. If the Curate does the Work, for which the Parsonage is given as a
Reward, why should not he have all the Reward that does all the Work? But we
suppose that the Curate is not so good a Preacher as the Rector. I answer, you
Pluralists are the more to blame for employing such Persons in a Business of so
high a concern, as the saving of Souls, that is not so well qualified for the
Work as your selves are. If he be worthy of the Office, I think he is worthier
of the Reward, than he that does nothing at all, or but seldom Preaches. If
those idle Pluralists that employ Curates, would advance the best men they
could to their Cures, it were the more tolerable. But alas! it concerns the
Pluralist for his own Credit to provide a Journey man Curate that does the Work
worse than himself. They always aim to employ greater Dunces than themselves,
or like themselves, according to the Proverb,

Similis simili, and similes habent labra lactucas. They consider that it would
be a Shame for them to be out done by the Curate; and therefore some of them
have taken occasion, to dismiss their Curates for Preaching without Book,
whatever other Pretense they might have. They are jealouse of a witty Curate,
least he should carry the Glory and the Praise, of which they are no less
Ambitious, than Covetous of the Gain. Thus Juvenal could not endure a learned
Wife, [ut solaecismum liceat fecisse Marito] and the Indian Queen would admit
no beautiful Women into her Court and Service, least Joan should be preferred
before my Lady. Now then supposing we are to Preach and Pray for Hire or
Reward, (which I do deny) What encouragement is here for Virtue and Learning in
the present Church of England, when better Scholars are rejected, and worse
admitted into Curacies? Yet thus it is: Learned and Eloquent men do usually
place dull sorry Curates to supply their Places, that so the Parishioners may
the more admire their Doctor, who Preaches though but seldom, yet abundantly
better than the Curate. They know the Maxim very well Contraria inter se posita
magis elucescunt.

Therefore that the People may have a better Opinion of their Doctor than of
the Curate, it concerns the Doctor to provide a Curate that Preaches worse than
himself. All Artificers, as Shoemakers, Tailors etc. readily employ such
Journey men as are most ingenious in their Craft: But alas! it is quite
otherwise in Priestcraft: There the Pluralist in the matter of Men's Souls,
employ such Journey men Curates as are always worse than themselves. Here I
could instance in several Particulars, but I spare their Names, one of whom has
thrust in a Thorn into his Cure, to stop the Gap, a sorry Fence, God knows, to
keep the Devil out of his Parish. And if Learned Men employ such sorry Curates,
What can we expect from such as have but little Learning? And yet that there
are many Dunces advanced to Dignities and Pluralities, is an undeniable and
palpable Truth. It is obvious to every understanding Man's Knowledge and
Observation, That by Bribery, Symony, Affinity, Consanguinity, by Favor,
Friendship and base Partiality, very indifferent Scholars, and worse Preachers,
are hoysted up into eminent. Places in the present Church, whilst others that
have more Honesty and better Learning, are in a low and mean Condition.

And thus it comes to pass sometimes. A Gentleman has a Presentation of a
Living: He breeds up one of his Sons at School; his Son proves a Dunce, yet for
his Fees gets a Degree and Orders, and then is Presented, Instituted and
Inducted into the Living, which another deserves ten times better. Another
Marries the Patrons Daughter or Kinswoman, or cracked Chambermaid, and so climbs
up into the Fold by S -- k Simony: Very few or none come into Preferment for
their Deservings; and then they employ Curates like themselves; and then the
Church of God is like to be well served.

To prevent these and many other Abuses, I wish that nothing were settled upon
the Church by Law, but that every Parishioner might give the Minister what he
pleased; and that the Ministers would think that Christ's Command to the
Apostle, concerned them too, Freely ye have received, Freely give: Were it
thus, none but Religious and Devout Persons would put themselves forward into
the Ministry: But now, Preferment being settled upon the Church, he that can
get it has it, whether he deserves it or no. The Riches of the Church are a
Bait for Covetousness to Bite at; and the more Covetous and Ambitious any Man
is, the more forward is he to thrust himself into the Ministry, on purpose to
serve his own base Ends. For when there is striving for greater Livings, and
fat Parsonages, and but little seeking for Poor ones, any Man may easily judge,
whether they seek the Flock or the Fleece, the Salvation of Souls or their own
Gain.

It is reported in Baker's Chronicles, That the Prior of a certain Convent in
England being dead, many of the Monks made great Interest to the King, to get
to be Prior: But the King took notice of one Poor Monk who never sought at all
for this Dignity; and asked him, Brother what will thou give me to be Prior?
not one Farthing said the Monk, for I can serve God as well, (and with more
ease) with what allowance I have already, as if I were a Prior, Well then,
replied the King, I think thou art the fittest man to be Prior, and thou shall
be Prior.

And certainly that man best deserves to be a Priest, or Bishop, that least
desires the Profit; and he that desires it at all, deserves it not at all. He
that makes Divinity a Step to raise his Fortune by, is altogether unworthy of
that high and honorable Office. And yet alas! the World is overspread with
these Locusts, who make Preaching and Praying the servile Instruments and
Trades to get Riches by. The present Church of England, is quite different from
the Christian Church in the Apostles times, when they Preached Freely, (as
Christ commanded them) and their Flocks as Freely supported their Pastors, Here
was no pulling and halling of Duties, from the Congregation by quarrelsom Suits
of Law, but all of them resembled God their Father in giving Freely to each
other, the Pastor his Spiritual to his Flock, and they again as Freely their
Temporal to their Pastor, without the least strife or constraint. God grant to
us the same Spirit, that we may be not only Professors of Christianity, but
Christians indeed, and make it appear by our Works, that we have not only the
show, but the power of Godlyness.

Now let us consider the ill consequences and effects of this mercenary Trade
of Preaching for gain. All that do this, are Hirelings, and therefore no true
Sheepherds: And Christ tells us, that the Hireling flees when he sees the
Wolf coming, because he is but a Hireling: and so the Wolf scatters and
devours the Sheep, Just so do all mercenary Preachers, seeing the Wolf of
Popery or Persecution coming, presently fly from their own principals, giving
way to the Wolf. For what cares the Hireling so long as he has his Hire? He
matters not which Master he serves, God, or Satan. Whereas he that is content
to Preach Freely, and has no Preferment to lose, has no temptation on him, to
make him tack about every time the wind Turns, like the Vicar of Bray, but
stands immovable like a Rock in the midst of the Waves of this troublesome
World.

This mercenary Preaching for gain, has caused a very great decay of Piety and
Religion amongst all men. For men observing the minds of their Teachers set
upon this World, are apt to believe that there is no other World, and that the
Resurrection, a future State, Heaven and Hell, are but Chymera's and Fables
invented by Priests, as I have heard an Athiest affirm, who told me, One bird
in hand (meaning the present Life) is better than two in the bush, (meaning the
Life to come) I am afraid that the Covetousness of Churchmen Embracing this
present World, has most powerfully taught Atheism and Irreligion, Their
Examples overthrow their Doctrine.

Quid verba audio, facta cum video? It Is in vain to Preach against Covetousness,
(which no man that has his mouth stopped with 2 or 3 Steeples (can well do) if
it appear that our very Preaching is but a means to gain Riches, and an effect
of Covetousness it self. This Preaching for filthy Lucre has in a great measure
evacuated, enervated, and made void the Gospel of Christ, so that it cannot
have that influence upon the Hearts of men as it had in the primitive times,
when it was sincerely Preached, without any other design save the honor of
God, and the Salvation of Souls. And it will never recover its strength and
efficacy again, till it be Preached by such Persons as have indeed renounced
the World, and show the same heroic and Apostolic Spirit, that was in St.
Paul and the other Apostles, who had not an Eye to the World, but only to God
and his truth. He that pretends he aims at both, the saving of Souls, and his
own gain, seems to me as strange a Prodigy as Janus, having two Faces that
look East and West at the same time. For who can look at two objects so
directly opposite as God, and the World? It Is the intention that has the
greatest force to render an action good or evil. If in our Sermons we aim at
Profit or applause, or any thing save the glory of God, and the benefit of
Soul's, then are our affections insincere, and will prove as unacceptable to
God, as unprofitable to men. If thine Eye be evil, thy whole body is full of
darkness. If the intention be naught, all is naught. They that follow Christ,
and Preach for the sake of gain, and to grow Rich by the Church revenews, are
like Judas, who followed Christ, that he might get something by him. The other
Apostles forsook all to follow Christ: but Judas followed him for the sake of
gain. First he got to be Purser, and to carry the Poors bagg, (the Treasure of
the Church) from whence he was wont sacrilegiously to filch and steal, and at
last sold his master outright for ready money. Just so do all covetous Church
men creep into the Church, on purpose to enrich themselves by the Churches
revenews, and when they can get nothing any longer by defending the truth, you
may observe them to fly from the truth, and deny their own Principles. When
they are like to come to any loss for Christ's sake, they will readily betray
his truth either by silence or contradiction. But he that Preaches Freely, is
safe from being tempted to be a Turn-coat, or a time-server, or man-pleaser. He
that Preaches Freely in this sense, may also Preach Freely in another sense,
that is to say, with greater freedom and Liberty of Speech, than the hireling,
who is afraid to speak the whole truth for fear of displeasing men, and so
losing his Hire.

Brave and noble was the intention of Hannah, in dedicating her young Son
Samuel to the Lord, not to get his living by his service at the Altar: Base and
ignoble are the intentions of all those parents, who breed up their Sons at
Schools and Universities, on purpose to provide for them in the World, and to
raise their Fortunes by the treasure of the Church, by bestowing on them such
livings as they have in their own gift: by which means those that are far
fitter for the Office, are shut out.

As for Simony (falsely so called) who knows, not that it is a common practice
in the present Church? Can it be imagined by any thinking man that a Patron,
who gives a great sum of money for the advowson of a Living, will be so
simple as to give a Presentation for nothing. No: He that buys the Devil (as
we say in the proverb) must sell the Devil too. And then the worst man must
have it: For no good man will be guilty of Simony and Perjury withal, for the
sake of the best Living in the world. We all justly condemn that Cardinal who
gave himself to the Devil to be Pope: But he is a worse fool that gives his
money to the Patron, and his Soul to the Devil by Perjury, for the sake of a
Parsonage or Vicaridge. And when we observe that mere Ignoramus's are in great
Livings, and wiser men shut out, every one of sense may well imagine, that not
their virtue, but their money, advanced them to the same: and then the Church
is like to be served well, when he that should Preach against covetousness,
Perjury and simony, is himself a covetous Perjured simonist, and deserves
rather to stand in a Pillory than a Pulpit. Alas! It Is not the holy spirit of
God calls these men to the Ministry, but Covetousness the root of all evil.

Wherefore to avoid all these grievous Sins, we must shun Covetousness (for
they that will be rich, fall into Temptation) and Preach Freely, and when we
have so done, we must still say, we are unprofitable Servants, we have done
what was our Duty to do. They that Preach for reward, Christ will say unto
them as he did to the Pharisees, they have their reward, and all the reward they
are like to have in this Life. But he that is content with his allowance of
meat and livery, in the mean time, shall in the end, when he has done his Days
work, receive an unmeasurable reward; even Eternal Life. And as he did the work
Freely, not for the sake of reward, so shall God Freely give him a reward, not
of Merit, but of Grace.

I shall now answer some few objections, that may be made, and then conclude.

1st. They will object, That this Preaching for nothing will make us Poor, and
thereby Contemptible.

I answer, the Apostles were Poor, yet very honorable. But by your own
objection, you tacitly confess, that it is not your Virtue or Worth, but your
Riches that renders you honorable; and then the respect and honor you have,
is not given to you, but to your money. When an Ass went through the City with
a golden Image on his back, the superstitious People fell on their knees and
worshipped: The silly Ass thought they had worshipped him, whereas they worshipped
only the golden Image on his back. Just so the common People do honor, and
worship Rich Church men for the sake of their God, their Mammon, their Silver
and golden Images.

Conscisum Argentum in titulos faciesa minutas. Juvenal.

2ly. they object, That the Apostles where Rich-men; Had they not more then any
of our Churchmen? For did not many men sell their whose Estates, and bring the
price thereof, and laid it at the Apostles feet. Acts. 4. v. 37. Very true.

But the Apostles were not much the Richer for it: For they were not so good
Husbands as to Pocket it up, (as our Priests, etc. do) but distribution was
made for the relief and necessity of the Poor Christians, according as they had
need. v. 35. Let them look to it, that appropriate to themselves the Revenews
of the Church, which were given by Religious Papists, and put into the hands of
Churchmen, not that they should, like Judas, convert it to their own Private
use, but employ it to the relief of the Poor.

3ly. They object, that they have not received their talent Freely, (as the
Apostles did) but that they gave money for their Learning, for their Degrees,
for their Orders, Licenses, Institution, Induction, and (I believe they may
truly say) for their Presentation too. And how do we receive Freely then.

I answer, They are very ungrateful to God, who deny him to be the Author and
giver of every good thing we lawfully enjoy. He gave us all things Freely, and
we are ungrateful if we do not Freely give to him, what he has so Freely given
us.

If they get into the Church by Bribery, Simony, Perjury, or any other unlawful
way, they may not thank God, but the Devil for it; and he will upbraid them
with it afterward to their shame, that he made them Rich.

4ly. They object, that they that serve at the Altar, should live by the Altar:
And Bp. Sanderson says, that since God himself has ordained Wages to him that
labors in his work, he may not only expect it, but even exact it too, from
those that would unconscionably defraud him thereof.

I answer, They that serve at the Altar should live by the Altar; But can they
not live without 5 or 6 hundred, or a 1000 l. or 4 or 5 Thousand pounds a Year?
If they expect, or exact more, than what is enough to keep them and their
Families alive, they expect and exact more than God hasallowed the very
Apostles themselves. But to return your objection on your own heads, if they
that serve at the Altar, should live by the Altar, why are you so unresonable,
as to deny your Journey-men, that serve for you at the Altar, to live by it,
but are many of them forced to get their livings by teaching School, or some
other way.

I allow then, that if unconscionable men will deny you your Meat and
Clothing, you may exact it of them, (provided you Labor in the Work) But I
think it were better (by Bp. Sandersons leave) not to go to Law with
ungrateful People for a little Victuals and Drink, but rather (as Christ
commanded the Apostles) to shake of the dust from your Feet, as a witness
against them, and so leave them.

By all that has been said, I hope it appears plainly, that it is the Duty of
Christ's Ministers, (notwithstanding God has allowed them Food, etc.) to
execute their Office Freely, without respect to that, or any other reward; when
we have done thus, we must yet confess we are unprofitable Servants, we have
done but what was our duty to do, and woe be to us (as St. Paul said of
himself) if we Preach not the Gospel, and that Freely too. Were this lesson
well learned of us, there would be no striving after Pluralities and dignities,
no Bribery nor Simony nor Perjury in the Church, but that a righteous, and
gracious, and learned Person that is Poor, might as soon be advanced to a
Bishopric, as an ignorant, covetous, ungratious Person that is Rich. They that
seek for Rectories, Vicaridges, Bishoprics for the sake of gain, are no better
than those that followed Christ for the sake of the Loaves: And are no better
ahen the Heathens: (for after all these things do the Heathens seek.)

When Christianity began to Flourish, and Kings and Emperors to embrace the
Christian Faith; and out of their zeal for Religion, made Laws for the support
of Churchmen, and admitted none into Offices but Christians; many wicked
Persons professed themselves Christians, merely to get Offices and Preferment;
just as our Sea and Land Captains and Officers, who living in a constant and
habitual Practice of Cursing, Swearing, Blaspheming, etc. do yet take the
Communion to qualify them for the King's Service. So ungodly Men screw
themselves into the Ministry for the sake of Gain: Ungodly men I say, for no
godly man desires the Office of a Bishop or Priest, for the sake of filthy
Lucre. I am sorry that the Liberal Arts should become servile, and Divinity it
self made a Slave to Mammon. I am sorry that the pretended Disciples of Christ,
should strive to be so very much Richer than their Master; and they that are
not so good Teachers as the Apostles, should yet desire to be so very much
above them. I am sorry that Covetousness has crept into the Hearts of
Churchmen: 'Twas the Covetousness of the Clergy brought in those abominable
Errors into the Church of Rome; as Purgatory, Praying for the dead,
Indulgences, Pardons, and Intercession to Saints, by which means they gulled
and fooled the ignorant deluded vulgar, and got much of their Lands from them
to the Church: Yet these Popish Bishops and Kings, did great works of Charity,
with what they by their cunning Devices got from the People: They Built and
endowed abundance of Colleges and Schools, Hospitals and Churches. But the
Protestants, that have these things at present in their Possession, do make a
worse use than those Papists did; for these employ the same to the support of
their own Pride and Luxury.

It Is Covetousness makes the Roman party strive to bring in Popery again, that
so they may recover their ill gotten Lands. It Is Covetousness in the adverse
Party that makes them prick up their Ears, with hopes one time or another to
get uppermost; that they may enjoy the Riches of the Church: All quarreling
betwixt these Parties about Religion, is but like that of Rivals, contending
for a Rich Lady, take away her Dowry and her Covetous Rivals will soon quit
their persuit. Veniunt a dote sagittae. None will follow her for her Beauty or
Virtue. Just so let the Church be made Poor, and disrobed of her gorgeous
Ornaments, and then you shall see, these false Lovers will soon forsake her. He
is the true Lover only that Preaches freely, and loves Religion, not for her
Riches, but for her Beauty of Holiness. Great is Diana of the Ephesians! Thus
they cried out, not for love of the Goddess, but for fear if her Worship
ceased their Gain and Proffit would cease together; 'Twas for the sake of Gain
that they served a false Goddess: It Is for the sake of gain that Covetous men
serve the true God, as the Devil falsely upbraided Job. A true Churchman, (and
every true Christian) must look higher than the things below, and be content to
suffer for Christ's sake, proposing to himself Afflictions, Reproaches, Poverty,
yea and Death it self, if the honor of God and the defense of his Truth
require it. For the true Pastor, as he ought not, so neither can he reasonably
expect to grow rich in this World; because his business is to rebuke Sin, and
not to please men by flattery or connivance. Now it is not reasonable to think
that such a Reformer should have much favor from the World. No, they that tell
Truth, shall be fed with the bread of Affliction and the water of Affliction,
whilst the false Prophets shall be fed at Jezebels Table. The World loves the
Hireling best, because the Hireling always Preaches pleasing things, otherwise
they know they shall forfeit their Hire. Thus they have their great Livings,
not for declaring the whole Truth, but for holding their Tongues, just as a
false Witness is suborned or hired to be silent when he should speak the Truth.
The Devil sometimes gives Churchmen great Livings to stop their Mouths, that
they may not Preach against Popery or Rebellion, or any work of Darkness, that
Satan the Prince of Darkness is about. Just as the Thief in the Fable, offered
the Dog a piece of bread to bribe him to forbear Barking. A true Witness will
speak the Truth without being Hired to do it, but a false Witness must be
subborn'd and Hired, and these Hirelings are the only Favorites of the World:
The people love the Hirelings, because they flatter them, but hate the true
Pastors because they boldly tell the unpleasing Truth: According as the Prophet
Jeremiah has said, cap. 5.30.31. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in
the land. The prophets prophecy falsely, etc. and my people love to have it
so: etc. The Hireling sells his Sermons at as dear a rate as he can; and we say
in the Proverb, Magis illa juvant, quae pluris emuntur. Things dear bought, are
good for Ladies; those delicate people that cannot endure the severity of Gods
Truth, are best pleased with those temporizing fawning Chaplains, that sow
Pillows, and daub with untempered Mortar. A Hireling by corrupting the Word of
God gets Preferment, but a true Pastor like John the Baptist, sometimes loses
his Life for telling the Truth.

If Christ whipped out of the Temple, such as Bought and Sold there, What shall
become of them that Buy and sell the very Temples themselves? What shall become
of them that Sell their very Sermons and Prayers, etc. What shall become of
them that turn the holy Calling into a mercenary Trade for Gain?

I for my part am no Hireling, but a Member of that pure and unspotted Church,
all whose Sons resemble their heavenly Father, in giving Freely what he has
freely given them. For as God has freely given to us life and being, and all
things, yea and his own Son Freely, so does every one of his Children, freely
impart and communicate to each other. It Is not the Prayers, nor Ceremonies, nor
Articles, nor Homilies I Object against, but the Pride and Covetousness of the
present Church.

And therefore that Church, wherein Preaching is made a Trade for gain, that
Church wherein Dignities are bestowed by Partiality, that Church wherein there
is no respect to Learning: That Church which forbids Marriage, that Church which
Beats and Banishes her Pastors for Preaching the same sound Doctrine she
pretends to maintain, that Church wherein Buying and Selling of Parsonages,
etc. are constantly practiced, that Church that takes no Care of her own,
namely those of her own Household. I do renounce, with all the covetous Desires
thereof, as being fully persuaded, that the nearer to this Church, the farther
from God.

Ad Concionatores Mercenarios.
Presbyter Argento conductus Rostra fatigat:
Praemia si tollas, Presbyter ille silet.
Illum facundum fulvi spes reddidit Auri:
Hac dempia taciti Piscis ad instar erit.
Histrio, Tibicen, Cantores Causidicique
Hi vocem vendunt, Presbyteriq, pij.
Unicus est Vates contemptus ridiculusque
Officium tantum, Praemia nulla petit.
Sol non conductus praebet sua lumina Mundo:
Et non conductus munere fungor Ego.
To the Mercenary Preachers. In English thus,
By bribes of Silver Priest is Hired to Preach:
Take away those, and ho'll no longer Teach.
Alas! it is Money makes him Eloquent:
His Voice is gone when golden Hopes are spent.
Actors and Fiddlers, Songsters Pleaders do
Their Voices sell, and so do Preachers too
One Prophet vile, and scorned, yet has regard
To the Office only, not to the Reward.
The Suns bright Flames to Mortals Freely Shine:
And whilst I Preach for nothing, so do mine.
-- Loripedem Rectus derideat, Aethiopem albus.

Juvenal. The names of some of those Places where Jos. Perkins, has Preached
Freely.
Westminster Abbey 1 Lincolns Inn 2 Trinity Chapel 1 Oxenden Chapel 2 Knights
bridge about 20 St. Fosters 1 St. Catherine Colemans 2 Wappin Chapel 1 Marabon
4 Hogidon Hospital 1 White Chapel 1
In Middlesex.
Teddington 1 Brentford 2 Fulham 1 Chelsea 6
In Surrey.
Kingston upon Thames 2 Peterson 1 Battersea 8 Tootin 6 Epsom 20 Ewill 20
Astead 3 Clannon 1 Oakwood-Chappel 9
In Kent.
Deptford 1 Woolwich where I was Banished. 20 Eltham 1
Hampshire.
Winchester 1 Portsmouth 1 Kingston 1 Southhampton 5 Pear Tree 4 Abbots Ann 9
Amport 2
Wiltshire.
West-grimstead
Essex.
Mersea Island.
Oxfordshire.
Coggs and other adjacent Places 3 Binsey 1 Hincksea 1 St. Bartholomews
Hospital 7
Gloucestershire.
Wickwarr, where I was Beaten for my Pains 14 Addersley 2 Newington 2 A
Chapel near Newington 1 Bath Abbey 1 Bath Abbey 1 June 27
About 7 or 8 hundred times in all, and yet I am not weary of well doing.

-- Ingratium dieas, omnia dixeris.
FINIS.
The Author of this Book, wears a white Scarf and Girdle; as the Badge of his
Profession, and to distinguish him from all Hirelings.


