A SEA OF THE SEED'S Sufferings, Through which Runs A RIVER OF Rich Rejoicing.

Thick Darkness girds the hours of Death's black day,
A Mourning Seed weeps over her wry Way.
Damsels yet shall their Dowries large possess,
And dance at Marr'age, in the Lamb's Wifes Dress.
But whilst the Earth Blood, as a Garment, wears;
Upon her Face I Will drop my trickling Tears.
In this my Sea, that Soul which wadeth deep,
Shall know my Flood-sluce, and apart shall weep,
Filling his measure under Pharaoh's frown;
His End shall be to wear a weighty Crown.
Written in the Year, 1659, in Rome-Prison of Madmen, By the extreme Suffering
Servant of the Lord, JOHN.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

To the Congregation in the Valley of Megiddon, which are come to the Mourning,
as it was in the Days of Hadadrimmon.
I Am a Worm poor and low, which in the Earth does creep,
Hid as the tender Plant with Snow, in time of winter deep.
So says the Seed, grievous Oppressions long have bin
My weighty burdens: ages spreading clouds of sin
Have wrapped me up, and roul'd me under trouble;
I stand the same, they perished as a bubble.
Hills, Mountains, Rocks have covered me, procelsive swelling Seas
Weights, raging waves I feel and see, my burden's without ease
In Egypt's Land, wherein, like as a slave I Am bound,
And made the subject of her Rulers arrows wound;
And in my bleeding state am made the stock,
Which every heart therein does hate and mock.
I as the innocent Turtle-dove, that is left without a mate,
Do mourn in secret, full of love, whilst all flesh does me hate:
And in the Wilderness, like as a helpless Lamb
Does lie, bleating out grief at side of a dead dam;
And like a Babe at a dead Mothers breast,
Struggling for Milk; so am I without rest.
Does Vi'lence in the Land flow, and am not I oppressed?
I would that all Nations did know, how they have dispossessed
Me of the Inheritance, to which I was Heir born,
And shut me out of doors, and left me as forlorn,
Subject to Sufferings, in a Sea of danger;
In all the Earth a Pilgrim and a Stranger.
Hunger, Thirst, Nakedness, and Cold, yea, pangs of pain I eat,
To which Oppression does me hold, Tears are my drink and meat;
Sighs in the deeps do gird me, as a swadling-band;
The Night's black womb of wrath's my bondage in the Land.
Oh! where is the Eye that does my Sufferings read?
Who am of Jacob's loins, that Worm and Seed.
Nations, Hosts, mighty Powers as one, in Battle array are set:
Kings, Princes, Multitudes (unknown) their Spears and Swords have whet;
The alienated Jew and Gentil's fallen Will,
United are, designed mine innocent blood to spill:
Gog and Magog's great Host have thus decreed,
To cut down every branch of Abraham's seed.
I lodge in Deserts under boughs, which thorny trees have spread,
When I would rise, then Hell in Vows moves on this worm to tread
Who am that Grain, against which all the World stands
In wilful Enmity and Wrath, in Troops and Bands:
As thus, as desolate, involved in grief,
Left languishing in Earth, without relief.
I speak of flesh, the flesh of Son of Man,
Which past not flaming Sword, nor fiery Fan.
Though I do pant, all flesh is as an Adamant,
My trickling drops man's spirit does not move
Of sweating blood, increasing on me as a flood:
Ah! how each day does he gainsay my love.
My Virtue pure, his Lust abhors, which does allure
God's host of Angels, in the Heavens to wed;
Though I descend, yet mark, man's desperate cursed end,
In Oath he is bound, deadly to wound my head.
What shall I say? Blood is the travel of my day;
Earth's thundering rage, blown forth by Lightning's breath,
Does post and fly, pursuing Life; Ah! hear my Cry:
What! shall I weep in Oceans deep to Death?
I could not hope but that each sigh and groan,
With every tear is dropped before God's Throne.
A Song for that Assembly.
HEaring the Seed's fore cries, my heart did think,
How bitter is the Cup given thee to drink?
And pond'ring well, mine Eye did plainly see,
That, like spread-nets, sorrows have compast thee.
Whilst in the shallow waters I did wait,
Like as the least, I saw thee made the bait,
The little Dolphin's spaun, in every hour
Pursued by Fishes, which would thee devour.
And whilst I waited, the Deeps did me cover,
Wherein I saw, where thou swim'st swift to hover,
The Whale, the Shark, the Porpos, and the Hake
In scools do chase thee fierce, a prey to make:
Holes then in Rocks thou make thy hiding place,
To save thy Life from their most cruel chase.
Thou swim'st in Deeps the longest course of fears,
There Is not another which such Suffering bears.
When unto shore I came with lift-up head,
Thy many Woes on Earth I plainly read;
And then in secret said, Sure few do wey
Thy Sufferings great; hunted as for the prey
Of Wolf, Fox, Lion, Tigar, and of Bear,
Which houl and roar thy Lamb-like flesh to tear.
Wild-Asses snuff up Wind, fed-horses rush
All against thee; Bashan's black Bulls do push
With all their force and might, with strong-set horns,
Pointed like Spears, as sharp as pricking thorns.
The Cockatrice hid in a secret place,
His Jaws hold venom, to spit in thy face.
The Crockadile, with Man's voice feigns his cry
To slay thy life, he weeps in subtilty;
If that in pity thou should haste to see,
What should the cause of such sore mourning be.
Thus, as a snare, in secret he does watch,
Thy tender Life, his deadly mind to catch.
Whilst standing still, and lifting up mine eye,
Flocks of devouring Birds I did espy,
In the Air, with watching eyes, soaring aloft.
At which I suddenly conceived the thought,
And in the secret closet of my mind,
I said, They seek the little Wren to find,
Which in much fear in Thickets hid does lie,
Whilst Hawks and Vultures over thee do fly;
Their Bills and Tallants all prepared are,
Watching thy rising, at thy Life to sparre:
The Eagle flies with a fixed will,
To tear thy tender flesh with her strong Bill:
The Ostrich great, which Iron can digest,
Prepares her appetite on thee to feast:
The cruel Dragon of the Wilderness,
Pursues thee fierce in time of thy distress,
With clashing wings and scales, flying most swift,
As if to find thee, Heaven and Earth would sift;
He spues out deadly venom, as a fluction;
Restless in life, whilst seeking thy destruction.
The fiery-flying Serpent's flaming breath
Spreads burning in the Earth, seeking thy Death,
Many a subtle twist with tail, and wrench
With head and body, he works to entrench
Upon the borders of thy Liberties,
Thereby to catch thee as a prey and prize:
He stretches Wings in Elements most high,
Burning in flames, as he his course does fly
Aloft, ascending, shining in the Air,
As if he were a blazing-star most fair;
And as the Polisher of Hell's wombs snares
In sort most subtle sets his blocks and bars,
Thy pure path to pervert, and cause to stumble
Thee unto loss of Life, thou sweet and humble.
Mine Eye reverted to the Earth again,
I saw the ground, in which thou long have lain:
The sight was sad, a pure Lilly-seed
Compast with every noisome hurtful Weed;
Thistles and Brambles over thee aspires,
With choking Thorns, and destructive Briars.
Through cloven Mountains things I clearly did
Behold, which in Earth's womb in Deeps lay hid,
A Treasure vast of Silver and of Gold
Of price uncounted, never by man told.
Though sad to cite the shape in which it lay,
Like ragged Rocks in Oar, in hue like Clay;
Absconding Virtue, whilst not separate
From the corrupted dross and Reprobate,
Wanting its splendour illustrious and bright,
Which purged, is seen by every open sight.
Beneath the Oceans, which the Earth does measure,
Mud, Sands, and Craggy Rocks conceal a Treasure;
The Carbuncle, and every precious Gem;
The Saphir, Pearl, and the Diadem,
The Rubie, Emerauld, and Onix-stone,
With what is unnam'd, and unto man unknown:
Besides, in her dark womb I saw revealed
A smothered substance, in whose bowels sealed,
Is all fullness of Virtue and Perfection;
But what avails? Death's chains hold in subjection.
Have I not therefore all day long to cry,
Oh! Sorrows, Woes, Oh! immense Misery?
Verily, since these things I Have seen and felt,
My heart within me like as Wax does melt:
Oh! Pressures, Pressures, Bleedings, Sorrows, Cries!
Remembering Jacob, tears run down mine Eyes;
My Bed's sore pangs, my Cup holds Woes, deep measure;
I wrap my soul in care, despising pleasure.
Thou Drop, Thy Channel's more than many Brooks,
On Thy Grief's Streams my mourning spirit looks;
Yea, for thy sake my Bowels are a River,
Poured on the ground's, my Reins, my Heart and Liver.
Whilst carnal, did I then a thought retain,
That Man so brutish was in his disdain?
Was it conceived by me in the least,
His Nature more Oppressive than the Beast?
Nay: 'twas not clear in substance comprehended,
That he from Nature's bonds was thus descended;
Instead of Perseverance, vile Regression,
Disjoined from Mercy, united to Oppression.
Oh Seed! how much more might mine heart encite?
Too tedious for my Hand and Pen to write;
Thy more abundant Sufferings than what man,
Yea, all below the Sun, discover can.
How like an hungry wandering Orphant poor,
With bleeding Bowels, thrust from every Door,
By Cruelty of what is thine own bereaved;
Though coming to thine Own, yet not received!
There Is not a Covenant in Earth so true,
Nor Law so just, to give to Thee thy due,
Of Pity, Mercy, Justice, all denied;
Of Men abhorred, despised, of all defied.
When I saw these, and many secrets more
Of Sorrows, which I have sealed up in store,
And plainly knowing that beyond Conception,
Grief is thy Portion, through Man's ill Rejection.
The matter deeply sank into my heart,
And there stuck fast, like as a wounding dart.
The more I mused, the more my thoughts increast:
What shall I say? I Will signify the least.
What all? yea, all, and more than I do mention,
Feeds thy sad soul with sighs, Ah! doleful pension.
What all? yea all Kings, Peoples, and their Powers,
Their fenced Cities, Fortresses and Towers.
What all? yea all, built wilfully as Babel,
With the same mind, which Cain slew just Abel.
What all? yea, all, against thee are decreed,
To leave thee Root, nor Branch, nor as a Seed.
What all? yea, all is thy destiny and fate,
The World's Oath to hold the Captivate.
Pond'ring, Interrogation moved in me;
Saying, How shall this Seed delivered be?
Who can the troubled Hosts on Earth suppress,
Without which, Can he Life and Peace possess?
How can it be conceived, and much less spoken,
Hell's strength and stratagems all to be broken?
Who can rip up Foundations of Mountains,
And fix Bars on the Doors of unclean Fountains?
Who knows the Night's course of the Wolf and Fox?
And who can trace the Serpent's path on Rocks?
Who can show measure just of every flight
Of all the Screech-Owls, and the Bats by night?
Who can trace twists, and search depths of all Holes,
Which are the secret paths of the blind Moles?
I ask of all the worldlings wise as Fools,
Can you still Cockling-Races, or Whirl-Pools?
Who can convert Flames into flakes of Snow?
And, who can stop the Ebb, and make to flow?
Can Procreation be without a Dame?
And, who can ever make a Panther Tame?
Who can make Seas like unto the least Fountain?
And make a little Stone, a mighty Mountain?
How shall this be e're in succeeding days;
Jacob's most small and low, who shall him raise?
Let all Generations henceforth and for ever know, That the most High GOD has
his secret habitation with the QUAKER and TREMBLER at His Word, as may appear
by the Glory of the Voice of his Majesty.

I girt my Loins with strong Steel-bands of fear,
Dread filled my house, whilst Jah's face did appear,
My Vitals all became a Silver Stream,
In substance, melted not, as in a Dream,
Nor under bonds of Magick's gloomy hour;
But in true feeling of Celestial Power.
Jehovah's Love, in Life did move,
and Wonders did enquire,
Of this Worm low, that I might know
the strength of Flames of Fire.
Standing a little still, I heard, as read,
A Voice ascending out of Deeps in dread.
My Int'rogations quickly had an end,
The Word responsive did me comprehend;
Things sealed up in Eternal Decree
From Ages past, in great fear compast me;
So dreadful was the Word, which often did make
Me in my motion stagger, reel and quake.
Thus said the Lord, Hear Man, and I Will demand,
Who round the swelling Seas has fixed dry Land?
Who's he that makes every Fish's way?
And, who does bar the Night, and open Day?
Who has created Wonders in the Deep?
And who feeds Worms which in her bottoms creep?
Where Is he who by his Wisdoms words or wishes,
That Is able t'answer me among the Fishes?
The Lempits spaun, what Man has seen to tell?
And how gained she her Covering of a Shell?
Who gave her strength fast to the Rock to cleave,
That no Fish else of life can her bereave?
Can Man this secret unseal and unlock,
Whether another substance than the Rock
Does she feed on? let him in Wisdom speak,
What Instrument has she the Rock to break?
Who knows the Spaun which Cockles and Musles shed,
And what is the substance wherewith it is fed?
Who knows the time of their Natures conception,
And when is the moment brought unto perfection?
Who leads the Wrinckles over Mountains high
Of craggy Rocks, which in the Oceans lie?
Who built the House which she bears on her back,
Wherein she is hid, as in a sealed Sack?
Her one Scale opens and shuts; it is her Door,
Wherewith she seals salt moisture up in store,
That when the Ebb her Lodge to Air does give,
Till Flood returns she has enough to live.
Was it by Art of wise Princes or Kings,
Or, who gave to the flying Fish her wings?
Which when pursued by other Fishes great,
That would her Life destroy, and Body eat,
Therewith in every Chase, Life to defend,
Does out of Natures Element ascend.
Who gave the Dolphin her dear tender Love,
And made her swiftest which in Seas do move?
Who made two Fishes Weapons for to wear,
Whereby they swim, dreadful with Sword and Spear;
Though being little, and in substance small,
Yet are a Terror to the mighty Whale?
Who makes the Oyster gape with ardent heat
In Summertime, as if she wanted meat?
And whilst yet thus her shells stand open wide,
Who taught the Crab-fish to draw near her side,
And with his claw a Stone therein to put,
Whereby to save her life, she cannot shut?
And thus is made the other Fishes Bait,
Which for the same takes time to watch and wait.
Who gave some Fishes fins, others walking legs,
And makes some spaun, and others to lay Eggs?
Who hatches Tortles Eggs hid in the Sand,
And who sustains their Life by Sea and Land?
Who of a Seed has made thee flesh and bone,
And whereof made I every precious Stone?
Of what is composed Earth, Trees and every Plant?
And which was first, LIGHT, or the ADAMANT?
Who answers? What, can Man reveal to me
The substance whereof I composed the Be?
Who knows his Art which makes the Honeycomb?
And, who made Man before a Woman's Womb?
What Is the Infusion, who can it resemble,
Which at the Cock's-Crow makes the Lion tremble?
The same which fills the Elephant with fear,
When that a Mouse before him does appear.
Who taught Jack-halls to hunt the Lyon's prey,
And Pilot-fish, to lead the Shark her way?
One knows the thing, which to all flesh seems strange,
How that Camelion her self does change
Into all Colors, perfect White excepted,
Which by the Law for Man's meat is rejected.
I bend th'exalted flames of Phoebus low,
Autumn to usher Winter's birth of Snow,
Her Travel, as a Vest, on Earth does spread,
Wherein the Night-steps of Wild-beasts are read;
Which though the girdings of the Night conceals
Day dawned, printed Lines to Man reveals.
Though Lions roar, and Wolves do howl and bark,
Panther, with them I sent to Noah's Ark;
A golden third I Have given with clear sight,
To measure the blind Bats and Screech-Owls flight,
The Moles dark paths, a Laborynth obscure,
Yet scrutal Worm does comprehend it sure.
He which has Mose's Rod in Shiloh's Day,
Over a Rock can trace a Serpent's way.
I built the Seas on each hand as a Wall,
Which saved a Seed, and on an Host did fall.
Remains there yet another doubtful thing,
Which He that made all, cannot to light bring?
WORM, where were thou ere Adam saw a Day?
Or, who has counseled me in mine own way?
Did I choose Compounds, what man can me tell,
To make a simple, Poison to expel?
Or, chose I Drugs, beneath Life's proper seal,
To make a Salve all Sores and Wounds to heal?
Sought I mixed Medicines the Plague to cure,
Or Lethargy, which loathes Purgation pure?
Logicians, Lawyers, Chemists and Star-gazers,
Make Smoke in Tophet, they of Men amazers.
Arts painted Image with Apology,
Is but the Wash-pot of Theology,
Which tracks out Hirelings in their subtle traces,
And spreads with Dung Baals Diviners faces;
Whilst Light reveals, a shovel is their tongue,
Which in the Bride-groom's room heaps noisome dung
So dung for dung, repaid's their equal way,
Till their work's up, and wrath cuts down their stay.
In number of the Just they shall not rise;
As the tree falls, it so consuming lies.
For Mammon's sake they have the Just oppressed,
The Simple to deceive, my Law they wrest.
They rob the Poor, and raven Widows bread,
With Joy of Orphants spoils they crown their head.
Wherefore's I live, I Will fill their Cup with Woe,
The effects of Vengeance shall their banks overflow.
And he which slips the Day given to repent,
In Judgment's hour from hope of Life, I Will rent.
Where Is the Philosopher? what has he found,
Raking up Rubbish of black Egypt's ground?
The cause of courses natural, which move
With all effects, spring from a root of Love,
Which Wisdom swaddles with a golden band,
He builds not Babel, nor trusts Art of hand.
Wheels out of frame do make the whole work jar,
Fractions pursue whilst Man's bound in a snare,
Through what his Love unnatural compounds
Of Roots, Stones, Oar, and Dirt of diverse grounds.
It Is but one simple Virtue does unfold,
Which touching Metals makes all pure Gold.
Who studies Wisdom? there is at each man's stall
Teaching a Seed, he which has one has all;
But Man whose Wisdom does exalt his thought,
Without the Key of Rocks, his All is naught;
His Rule, Progression is; his own Reduction,
His Joy and Pleasure prints his own Destruction.
Who answers me among the Fowls of Heaven,
Which in the Ark were saved by numbers seven?
Since Noah's day, who all their increase took,
And registered their numbers in a Book?
Who couples them in season, as yoak't even?
I Will yet demand of Man concerning seven.
Who gave the Wren her treble Voice to sing,
Consorting Music with the Timbrel string;
And in much Joy, saved from an evil chance,
Makes her in Summer in Vine branches dance?
The Red-breast's shril Notes singing on a Rock,
Sounds as a Shepherd piping to his Flock;
Who gave the love which she bears in her breast,
And Innocence for a seat of rest?
Who makes the Thrush in Springtime to rejoice,
And gifted her with a loud chanting Voice?
Who gave the Hand her quavering Keys to feel,
And guides the same, which turns her Cymbal-wheel?
Who Black-birds whistle, which makes Woods to ring?
Sweet Valleys echo whilst yet she does sing,
In Deserts; who from under shadows mute
Raises her Voice to sing unto the Lute?
Who fills the Nightingale with Harmony,
Her Tune transcending all in Air that fly?
Who strained her seven strings unto perfect trial?
Which makes the Music on her well set Vyal;
Who makes the Lark ascend with out-stretcht wing,
A Song of Melody on high to sing?
Who has her Organ unto sweet Notes bound,
And blows the Bellows for her Pipe to sound?
And who has given unto the Turtle-Dove
Her mind of Chastity and pure Love,
And made her of her Mate so dear a Lover,
That choosing ONE, she will never choose Another?
The United Harmony let it be penned;
Musical Consort never shall have end,
Who hastes these seven in flight with wide- spread wings
In Orion's house to feast on flesh of Kings?
Sit silent Sodom, for it is Sion's Seed,
Which in the seven-seal'd Roll do run and read.
I gave my servant Moses a pure measure,
But now to Shiloh a more glorious Treasure;
Whose Day shall give an Holy Seed to see,
Unto him gathered multitudes to be.
Can Man yet answer Me in open fields,
Amongst the tender Plants which the Earth yields?
Who makes the Grass to grow, and Plant to spring,
The Lilly seed, and every fragrant thing?
Can he by all his Wisdom, Will, or Power,
With all his Compounds, new, create one Flower,
Which of Earth's substance shall partake and feed,
And flourish, yielding perfect seeding Seed?
Can he the nature of the Lilly's Seed,
Change into an offensive hurtful Weed?
Or else the Virtue of the Primrose-plant,
And Violet by all his Wisdom, scant?
How knows he when the virtu's more or less?
Has he to Curse, and have not I to BLESS?
Knows he that Plant which grows in Woods obscure,
Whose root of Pestilence is perfect cure?
I Have seen Physicians, Herbals large, which want
Description of that fragrant Root and Plant:
Does he know which of every Seed shall grow,
Whilst yet in hope he spreads his hand to sow?
Or when in blade sprang up new-shot in ear,
Is he assured which Reed shall increase bear?
Who dwells in Deeps, where Virtues life reposes,
Hid in the Root, which odours gives to Roses?
Who knows where Pleiades has built his Bower
Of Spices, decked with every fragrant Flower?
Who in the Earth has dug so deep to see
Him clothed with Sap of every fruitful Tree?
Who spreads the Vine-leaf as a Summer-shade,
And as with Jewels, does her branches lade?
She prospers pleasant in the Valleys low,
In Vintage making Fats to overflow.
Can Man, whose Study's but as mudled mire,
Make Plants in Eden spring of sparks of fire?
Whilst virtuous Shiloh, which in flames reposes,
Of burning Coals makes sprout forth Damask Roses,
Which Mortals know not with which hand to handle,
Whose Light's thick Darkness, spread by Shiloh's Candle:
To whom all souls must come by Transformation,
To know the Work mysterious of Salvation,
He Is full possessed, which in his right hand reads
His Line of Life unto Perfection leads;
Which seals the doom of his most woeful state,
Whom death cuts off, in sin's chains captivate.
Who answers me in word of Visitation,
Which perfect trial brings on every Nation?
Who can set bars by strength of his right hand
To bolt out famine, sent to smite a Land?
Where is that King which on the Earth does reign,
Which fire, sword, and plague can bind and chain?
And who can say, but those, and many more
My Judgments, yet a little held in store
Shall quickly sweep the earth, and in this wise
Cut off all lovers of their lusts and lies?
Who numbered has the arrows of my quiver,
Prepared for battle, Jacob to deliver?
Have I not said, there is for him a day
At hand, and am I yet to seek the way
In which mine own unsearchable Decree
In all earth's compass perfected shall be?
Can man's frail life and strength on his back bear
The weight of my shield, buckler, sword, and spear?
Let vain man answer in his pride and lust,
Who made all Nations in ONE of the dust?
Or, who gave Counsel, or materials brought,
To assist me in all that I have wrought?
Will he not understand amid'st his joy,
That he which made, can ALL at once destroy?
Kings, Princes, Nations, all degenerated,
Have they more strength than what is of dust created?
To David's sling, what is Goliah's spear?
If I strike Dread, who is he that shall not fear?
I could yet question man, time without end,
Whilst, in a word, all things I comprehend;
But that in folly he himself may know,
I Will sum up all in ONE of what is below.
Can man whose contract in death's-day stands dated,
Create a work of what is not yet created?
Worm, where were thou before the sun ascended?
Or e're that I my first days work had ended?
Or, where when the first fixed Stars did sing
A joyful Song of Praise to their high King?
Moreover, I demand vain man to prove,
Can he yet answer me in Heavens above?
Can man the Storms rebuke? or, can he check
The moving Winds? are Whirlewinds at his beck?
Can He the Heavens Influences sweet
Turn back, and cause that in the season meet,
Nor Heat, nor Cold, times tepid, Dews nor Rain
Shall be in all succeeding days again?
Can Man Heavens bright Clouds in his weak hand hold?
Or, all the moving Constellations fold,
And roll up in a secret place to hide
Them, where they never more shall be espied?
Or, is He such a Powerful Commander,
That at his beck all fixed Stars shall wander?
Can mortal Man in his corrupted will
Stop the Moon's course, or, make the Sun stand still?
Can he the Morning spot, or the Sun stain?
Or, can he Thunders bind, or Lightnings chain?
Can Man his hand to the third Heavens streatch,
And therewith violently make a breach
Through bars of Brass, which bolt fast doors of Steel,
Much more in substance than Earth's Orb or Wheel,
And so lay waste in his fond will and pleasure,
What Is there contained of Jacob's certain treasure?
Could he do all these, still I Am far above
The Heaven of Heavens, where naught besides does move,
Can Man cut off Strong-fire-all's renting Claws?
Or draw his Teeth out of his burning Jaws?
Does Man's Eye make him tremble with a look?
Or, can he tear his heart out with a hook?
Each of his Joints are as an Iron hill,
His Teeth grinds Carcasses, as in a Mill;
His Nostrils flames sees in his Cauldron Whales,
And fryes the flesh of Kings in his cast Scales:
He gapes like Gulphs, as if he hungry were,
Thirsting for Blood, he roars the Prey to tear;
His Furnace fire in Brain-pan of his head,
Boyls Cauls and Blood of every heart, fat fed.
Can Man his brazen skin rent as a rag?
Or joint his tail, which Ocean's deeps do drag?
He waves his Wings over his Steel-barr'd Cage,
And Storms impetuous move in roaring rage;
The foaming Seas, like Mountains full of breaches,
His Motion turbulent, her Womb's deeps reaches;
His glazed sparkling Eyes appear most fierce;
Nor Shot, nor Weapon can his Body pierce;
Steel, Brass and Iron unto him are straws,
Their strength sev'n times compos'd's not like his Claws,
He shakes his Back, which makes his Scales to rattle,
Like shouts and clashings of a dreadful Battle:
Has Man yet seen the measure of his Bow,
And Arrows length? Or, how came he to know
His Golden Shrouds, Six over every shade,
The Seventh shuts in the Mould that he has made?
He walks in secret in the deepest dark,
And leaves his Relic, it is a fiery spark;
He marks his Path out by a Line obscure,
If two would walk therein, one's snared most sure.
Can he whose Fame spreads as Ahithophel,
Reach round that Sphere which is his lowest Cell?
All Is mean to me, which in thine Ear I sound;
Heights reach not me, nor Deeps the most profound.
Worm, where were thou before Time did commence,
And, what stood then against me as defense?
Who then was with me counselling in decree?
Or, what, does Man think Time has altered Me?
Man's mighty Mountain's now to me no more
Than 'twas ere Light past through Heavens open door.
I see the Counsels, Leagues, and Powers of Hell,
Satan and his Angels in that black Cell:
The Divil had time with him that first did sin,
And before that his reign did not begin.
Who yet, as Prince in Earth and Air does reign,
But is appointed unto Seal and Chain.
Death and Hell's Leagues, I Will disanul and save
Jacob, from her wide Jaws and loathsome Cave;
It Is One which all performs, who will not scant
The just fulfilling of his Covenant.
I Am He in Judgment and Truth, changing never,
Yesterday the same, this day, and for ever.
God's glorious Sound did me confound,
yea, and my Bowels break;
Yet then as I, most low did lie,
his Mercy heard me speak.
Oh! Thou which rent'st the Heavens, and make the Earth to reel,
And overturnest all, like as a running Wheel,
Hear me, O GOD, I pray, a little to declare,
Who am in all things before Thee naked and bare.
Thou measur'st Deeps beneath as the breadth of a hair,
And as a span, the Heavens high, most bright and fair;
Thy present Word and Power mine inward parts does break,
Oh! hear me yet a little, let me further speak;
Mine eyes, mine eyes run down, this Flame my heart does melt,
I sow my tears as seed, since this Thy Power I Have felt;
I Am very poor and low, like the least worm that creeps
In the Ocean's belly, swallowed with the immense Deeps:
O GOD before Thee what am I? hear me, I pray,
And till I have declared, turn not thy Face away.
My breadth is as a Razor's edge, that is newly set,
My height, as the breadth of a Needle's point sharp whet;
Yea, comprehended is my stature with a thought,
Unto thy Greatness, I Am, but as a thing of naught.
I couch, I bend, I bow before thee in thy Throne,
Thy Reign is Power and Life, to corrupt man unknown.
And the Lord answered me through the Clouds of the Morning Dewes, in a clear
serene Day of the early Spring.
THou Son of Man, lift up thine head and hear,
Thou naked art, therefore I say, draw near.
Like as a broken Bow thou shall not start
From my Testimony, written in thy heart;
But with thy strength, inclined in pure fear
And dread, thou shall witness of my NAME bear.
Moreover, Son of Man, give ear to me,
And I will make thee Counsels deep to see:
Behold the Drop of Blood which in the Earth does lie,
Has from her drowning Deeps raised a Cry,
Which like as Lightning's arrows most swift are,
It has ascended above every Star;
And pierced Heavens bars, and moved me in my Throne,
In Righteousness to weigh the Cry and Groan:
But I the LORD which Counsel do reveal,
Do charge thee that the Secrets thou do seal,
From every unclean, corrupt, vult'rous eye,
For whom's the WOE and Dregs of misery;
How it shall be say not; dwell thou in Me,
Who has a Sword and Scale given thee to see,
With many other Instruments of praise,
Held in one hand that Drop of Blood to raise;
But thus thou may prophecy and dispense,
A Drop of Blood shall be a Sea immense;
A little Stone shall be an open Fountain,
And a dry bone shall be a mighty Mountain.
Moreover, in a day it comes to pass,
A Diamond spark shall cut an Earth of Brass,
And all the Waters under Heavens divide
That open passage be from side to side
Of every Island, and all firm Lands,
A mighty Host to march in Troops and Bands,
Raised of a Root, Earth's Globe to compass round,
To seek the Lost until that it be found;
And in that Day shall be a dreadful Wonder,
A panting Worm shall be a Voice of Thunder;
The lower cloudy Heaven's composed of Steel,
Which bands Earth's brazen Circle like a Wheel,
That Orb also, with what increase it yields
In fenced Gardens, or in open Fields,
In a moment shall melt away like Wax,
As with the sudden flames of burning Flax,
Kindled by motion and glance of a spark,
Which Dust and Ashes cover in the dark;
Yet in the fiery flames there shall remain.
As unconsum'd, a little simple grain,
But all in Earth besides shall burn as Tow,
And perish, as the Sun dissolves the Snow.
Preach this to proud flesh which does vainly boast,
A Mustard seed shall be a mighty Host,
Which shall a Standard pitch, and Ensign spread,
Wherein Conquest in Battles shall be read;
And then the Worm which has crept maimed and halt
In Ages past, I highly will exalt;
Which I Have anointed as King of Salom,
To reign for ever in Jerusalom;
To him that ent'reth then within her Gate
I Will give to see the thing that I create,
A Lion fierce, a Lamb, a Lamb, a Lion
Which shall roar out of the Mountain Sion;
Whose sound shall be as Trumps unto the Battle,
Which in the four winds shall ring and rattle;
So dreadful shall the Echoes then rebound,
That all the Dead shall hear, buried in ground;
The Sea shall give up what lies in her Womb,
With Death, and every Sepulcher and Tomb;
Then He shall judge all which do Judgment wrest,
Perverting Truth, which have the Poor oppressed:
And as I live, I Will spread his face and brow
Sevenfold more wide than are the Heavens now;
And every Eye shall see what they have hated,
A Worm, Innocent, mine own created:
His frown shall be the World's WOE and DREAD,
Yea, every soul to Him shall bow the head;
His Eye shall pierce the secrets of all hearts,
And in the Guilty shall fix wounding darts;
Which no flesh living shall at all remove,
The Recompense of their despite of love.
His breath as Lightnings, piercing as a Lance,
In dreadful flames on every soul shall glance,
Fulfilling Vengeance in the Wicked's heart,
Ev'rlasting burnings, never to depart.
Yea, with his breath all pure Gold shall melt,
Which in Heavens Treasure shall be seen and felt;
And pure Silver shall run down as streams,
With the ardour of his Rays and burning beams:
Lift up thine head, the DAY draws very nigh
In which this WORM I will exalt on high;
And I the JEALOUS moved for his relief,
Do charge thee wait in content and belief;
In the Ark of the New Testament abide,
And in its secret desk see that thou hide
The written Rolls of Fire and pure Gold,
Until the Word shall be, Thou may unfold:
The Sum of all thus sealed up in thy breast,
Lie down in Peace in the Lamb's Endless Rest.
To the Children of the Day.
NO Damage, hurt nor loss, but Gain's won in the Cross.
Let Patience all things bear, in Trembling and in Fear.
Content thy Mate, in every state, leads to the entrance through the Gate,
Where all within, in Joy do sing, and Crowns of Life do wear.
At large I may not say, what I this Holy Day
In pleasure do possess, whilst foes do me oppress,
But will proceed, to show the need, of Jacob small that bruised reed,
That it may rouse, LIFE as a Spouse, to woo Him in distress.
This thing may many prove,
behold, stretched wings of Sion's Turtle Dove,
in swiftest course of flight do move,
with weight of wooings unto love;
A little simple Wren,
waits with the Pen,
in clear sight
to write,
Amen.
A Son of Sion which in ardour pants
Unto Jerusalom's Inhabitants,
Provoked in spirit, greeting to transmit,
Does of the same hereby himself acquit:
Upon the Sabbath day which God has blessed,
I waited in the Temple of his Rest,
Until I saw a little moving Stone,
To open as a Roll before the Throne,
Wherein was written Mysteries profound,
With many Prophecies, which compast round
My soul in deeps of Contemplations,
Oh! Immense, Immense Revelations.
Though I Am a Worm to speak unto an Host
Of Heaven, yet moved in the Holy Ghost,
I stand up armed with Courage, in Life bold,
In Fear and Trembling, lest I should withhold
To pay the Obligation, as my due,
Discharged thus, by spreading in your view.
There is an Orphant in the Wilderness,
Which wanting Bread, languisheth in distress;
I cannot in a secret place repose,
To hide my self from the afflicted's Woes,
Most grievous Cries, the Echoes as a Dart
And piercing Lance, wounds me unto the heart.
Oh! you on whom the glorious Sun does shine,
Unto my Voice your open ear incline.
Jerusalem a substance does possess,
Which can remove that bleeding Worm's distress.
The Liberal Hand is this day meet to measure
A Portion of the Consecrated Treasure,
For the Redemption of the Captivate,
From the Chains of his sore oppressed state.
Give ear ye Sons and Daughters to this WORD,
Unto Jerusalom Thus says the LORD:
This WORD shall be his burden which conceals,
and shuts himself up under Clouds, and seals
His Life and Portion in obscurity,
Starting from Zeal, the flame of Purity,
Relinquishing Life's motion, keeping back
The thing which the oppressed Seed does lack.
Remember ye the Ancient Prophets race,
Whose life stood not at all in time or place,
But wand'red as Pilgrims and as Strangers
In all the Earth, without respect of Dangers,
Some dragged to Sufferings, and to Tortures hurled,
Some slain, of whom worthy was not the World;
I Am directed to him, moved to partake
Of Tryal's pledge; whilst yet for the Seed's sake
Like as a Lamb I bleat, I bleed, I roar,
Like as a Lion in the Gate and Door,
The entrance of the Palace of the King,
Blowing my breath on every living thing.
Stand up thou simple, stagger not at all,
The Voice is GOD'S, which secretly does call:
Yield unto Him, with whole affection bent,
The RACE is sure, thou run'st as him that is sent.
Ye called to the labor of the Day,
Take Instrument in hand, and come away
All Plowers, Planters, Pioneers and Miners,
With Reapers, Threshers, Fanners and Refiners,
Proceed in strength each one in his Vocation,
To see Redemption of the whole Creation.
You valiant Soldiers, which the Weapons wear
Of War, the Javelin, Dart, the Sword and Spear,
Appear as Champions in Earth's open field,
With Ensign, Standard, Buckler, Bow and Shield.
Unto the Battle let the Trumpet sound,
Avenge in Earth until the LOST be found,
Aim right and shoot the arrows of your Quiver,
To pierce Gog's Host unto the heart and liver;
And GOD Eternal with most high renown
Of Victory, all the Courageous crown.
Dear Brethren and Sisters in the Power,
Remembering You, I Am as a dropping shower,
Mine yearning bowels like to Wax do melt,
Ah! let me by you all be seen and felt.
My Life salutes you with an Holy Kiss,
Transmitted by the Lips of Heaven's bliss.
Love clasps Life, with dear embraces
Of Virtue's arms in Joy and Pleasure,
Reading the sweetness of the Graces
Wrapped up in Life, Ah! heavenly Treasure.
To Life, as the Mate of a Dove
I Am bound in unknown endless Love:
Let every Lamb
Of the true Dam
Read how your Life my soul does move.
Thoughts are fixed fast in my breast,
Deeply anchored in my heart.
May it be said LOVE has oppressed?
Then you are my wound: ah! piercing Dart.
Sure had not He which does reveal
Your brightness, given a Leaf to heal
My Maladies,
In counsel wise,
Death had on me set her seal.
Dear Salutation as Embassage
I send to Heaven's blessed Host,
Though not as if I had made passage,
Relinquishing sweet Sion's Coast,
But with you for ever bound
In God's Covenant profound,
And Glorious Day
Which leads the way,
And saves out of the cursed ground.
Your smell is as a fragrant Flower,
Your taste more pleasant than sweet Wine,
I feel you in the Eternal Power,
I see most clear your faces shine;
Your sound as Melody mine ear
(Of Cymbals, Lutes and Trumps) does hear,
The piercing Voice
Makes heart rejoice,
And Love's clear eye to drop a Tear.
You Are built upon an Holy Mountain,
A Glorious Palace for the King;
Your Foundation is Life's Fountain,
Angels beholding, Praises sing
To GOD uncessant all day long,
On David's tuned Harp, the Lamb's Song.
Let Nations prove,
Hell cannot you move,
The Wonderful has built you strong.
Roses, Spices, Gems and Gold,
To see all no flesh can pry,
Sion's Treasure vast untold,
Unutterable in mine eye,
You Are the sum which do possess
The Sum in everlasting bless,
Most High Renown,
Your weighty Crown
Shall Kings and Nations to death press.
I bless Him who gives to know
Counsels deep in his own way.
Sion's streams shall overflow
Earth's Wide compass in a day:
All shall yield increase and store,
Creatures trav'ling in pain sore
Shall then be blessed,
And not oppressed,
Curse removed for evermore.
Feel my yearning bowels moved,
Which Mortal cannot comprehend,
Toward You, my Dear Beloved,
In that which never shall have end.
All which GOD'S own Image bears,
And the Lamb's white Garments Wears
With Virtue's grace
Behold my face
As a ground of trickling tears.
Let me pierce the inward parts,
And provoke the souls of all
In the flames of burning hearts,
Which on GOD the LORD do call,
Whilst sweet odours do ascend,
To the Father recommend
Him of Man hated,
The LORD'S created,
Whose Love alone does Life defend.
That no tender Lamb may bleat
After Me with other Voice,
GOD the Father I entreat
Than which makes my heart rejoice.
Rest you all in the pure Life,
As the Bride, the Lamb's own Wife,
To live, or dye,
Given up as I,
For Truth a Sacrifice most rife.
JOHN.

To the Seed of the Kingdom, Plants of the Paradise of God; most purely and
everlastingly beloved Brethren and Sisters, in the Immortal Life,
Congratulation.
CAn I forget that Womb whose Travels were
For me more grievous, than which flesh could bear?
Or bury in Oblivion's Grave, that Breast
Which suckled me? or Cradle of my rest?
Can I requite my Friends as deadly foes?
Or scorn the Bed of Heavenly Joys repose?
Or loath the Waters sweet, of Jacob's Well,
Like Sulphury streams of the infernal Cell?
Can I forget that Hand and living Bread,
Which in sore Famine freely has me fed?
Or drown in Deeps the thoughts of God's own breath
To burst like Judas, strangled unto death?
Nay, for in GOD most merciful and just,
Abides my Confidence, Faith, Hope and Trust.
Ah! Sion, Sion, thy most glorious Life,
Is all to me, my Joy, I am thy Wife:
And therefore if I should make slight of thee,
Then all thy Good would be a sting to me;
Then would my Bow against me surely bend,
And all my Darts into my Body send,
And all the pointed Arrows of my Quiver,
Would sorely stick fast in my Heart and Liver.
Then would my Sword which on my loins is bound,
Fall sharp on me, and leave a mortal wound:
Yea, then the Teeth of this my Instrument,
Would flesh from bones, and all my Intrals rent.
My Honey would become as Rue and Gall,
And heavenly showers like snares of Fire would fall
Upon my head; yea, then my pleasant Wine
Would be as molten Lead; and this straight Line
Would mark out all, even as an equal due,
Which gives clear sight that God's most just and true.
The Oil which burns within this Lamp of Gold,
Would also me in flames of fire fold:
For then would Shiloh all his currents make
To me, like as the fiery burning Lake;
Should I become like as a turning Vane,
Then this my Bread would be my deadly bane.
My Marrow would become like Pitch and Tar,
In dreadful flames; yea, then the Morning Star,
Which has revealed his glorious shining Light,
Would gird me in the hideous howling night:
But surely I to God's own Mercy have
Committed all, whose Grace does freely save;
Weakness is mine, but strength's in God's own hand,
By which alone in fear, I live and stand,
In Baptism's fire, exceeding John's, who lead
To Jordan's Deeps, whom Herod did behead.
Ah! Babes most dear, with you in that I am,
Which gives to see me as a patient Lamb,
In pure Content, bearing the Yoke and Cross,
Esteeming mortal, but as dung and dross;
In taste of Virtue, of the heavenly Seed,
At God's own Table with you all I feed;
With each low worm in his proper measure,
I drink a dram of the sweet Wine of pleasure,
My soul in Ardency of Life does say,
I am as near you as the Light the Day.
As firmly fixed, like flesh unto your bones,
As in the Mountains solid Rocks and Stones:
As real in you, though no flesh can see,
As is the Sap in the green Olive Tree:
I Have chosen you like as the Turtle-Dove,
To be dissolved in this most constant Love.
I want the words of Wisdom's Deep profound,
To show how deep you are planted in this ground:
What shall I say unto my heart within?
Where can thou end, but where thou did begin?
And there the Rivers run, exceeding measure,
What shall I say of this my Love's vast treasure?
You have much more than this weak hand can write,
For all is yours which Spirit does endite;
My Spirit's also with and in you all,
Who by the same are saved from the fall.
Can I within me less Affection find,
Than Worms or Beasts, who love their proper kind?
Nay, Lambs, ye know in living substance well,
That my Brooks current, mortal does excel.
For this my Stream toward the Deep does run,
As does my Flame ascend toward the Sun.
No wise Philosopher did ever know
The moving Cause why Seas do ebb and flow;
Nor of them all which in their Tombs do lie,
E're saw the Love, which moves the Sun to fly,
In course most swift round Heavens widest wheel,
But God's Host now the Cause and Life do feel.
The lesser to the greater is well known,
And each true Nature moves toward its own.
Here Is Fire below, the greater Flame's above,
Till twain are joined, they do yearn both in Love.
Th'ore-whelming Floods, which on the Earth were sent
In Noah's day, dropped from the Firmament;
Besides, you see how rainy Clouds do bring,
Refreshing Showers in pleasant time of Spring;
And fills the Fountains which are here below,
And still the Streams unto the Seas do flow,
And all their Tides, wherein they always move,
Show they have affection to the Floods above.
Now read me and my Love, which tongue cannot speak,
To you my Life, which Death nor Hell can break;
Yet still I pray in fear, that God defend
Me from the ill, and save me to the end.
And O ye Branches of the Olive Tree,
Your leaves are shades, and Fruit is life to me;
God's Wisdom which surpasses man's devices,
Has built you as a Bower of fragrant Spices.
Your Walks are Joyfulness, and Peace your Seat,
Your Life is Bread and Wine, and Love is meat;
My soul is planted in your holy ground,
And here your flames of Love do me surround;
And on your substance, which distills as drops
Of heavenly Dew, I feed like Honey-sops;
Partaker with you in Community,
Of good in God's House in the Unity;
And in the Stem my Branch with you reposes,
Which bears the Buds, and all the Damask-Roses*
You are the Bed composed of heavenly pleasure
Unto my soul, yea, God's peculiar Treasure.
How purely run these most refreshing streams,
In daily Visions, and Nocturnal Dreams;
The Fullness verily is in the Father,
Who does our Minds into his Bosom gather,
Like tender Chickens by the Clucking Hen,
Whose Name be praised by Life, by Voice and Pen.
Let me descend from Sion's glorious Mountain,
To show a Seed the Vale wherein's the Fountain;
For surely I could freely lay down Life,
With Blood, to buy a stranger for my Wife;
For what is so purchased by joynt-consent,
Is as the Seed of Judah's saved Tent;
What? Forreigner, would thou walk in in the Way
Of Life and Peace in this God's saving Day?
Thy whole Affection must in substance bend,
To that which brings to flesh a final end;
And that from Darkness thou the Day may know,
The Proud must bow down to the poor and low:
For lo the Sun, which gives the Day her light,
Remains below the Horizon all night.
Such is the Principle and Spark in thee,
Veiled by Sin's Clouds, whereby thou can not see
To know the Poor, the Oppressed, and his Cries,
Within thy Self, which in a Dungeon lies.
Wherefore draw near unto the Earth's short end,
To see the Day Star and the Sun ascend;
For know thou whilst that thou do there remain,
Assuredly art bound in Death's black Chain;
And whilst thou do from Mountain run to Hill,
Seeking a Stream to drink thy lustful-fill,
Arrive thou can not unto Jacob's Well,
For so thou run'st to ring a broken Bell:
Stand still, I Will touch a Stone and thou shall know,
That Waters in thee out of it shall flow;
In Conscience there is a secret LIGHT within,
Which does distinguish Truth from every sin;
That is of GOD which judges works of Evil,
And thoughts in Man moved of the tempting Devil;
The Soul which faithfully its Judgment keeps,
Shall know Salvation from the Darkness deeps:
Then follows Faith and Hope, which gives alone,
The Internal Knowledge of the virtuous Stone,
Out of which Waters pure of Life do gush,
And in the same's concealed the Burning-bush.
Then will his River run, and Flames ascend
Of heavenly Virtue, which shall never end.
Remember Man the LIGHT within's the Way,
From Darkness dwelling to the Door of Day;
Which leads to Fullness, free from every doubt,
Obeyed within, possessed, but lost without:
And therefore Wanderer at home retire,
Lest that thou sink and perish in the mire.
For that which leads Man from the LIGHT within,
Spurs on the Race to end the Life in sin.
And then of sin in which he lives and dies,
Shall have his Wage; for as he falls, he lies.
Yet still my Heart does in my Body burn,
Toward the Doves, to whose Door I return
With Corn in hand, to spread before their eye,
Upon the Stage whereto they daily fly:
Which is the place whereon they always feed,
Amidst the house wherein their young they breed.
To all the Hungry and the Thirsty Lambs,
I Am broken-Bread, and Wine drawn out in drams.
And of a truth it is my soul's sweet care,
That every Babe may eat and drink a share.
My life in Sion would be always found
Among the Seed, a Salve to every wound;
And perfect Medicine to every grief,
And to the Oppressed an Arm of good relief.
Let not my Love's heart languish under sorrow,
For lo thy JOY approaches with the Morrow.
The YOKE to Self, and CROSS to Flesh fly never,
That DEATH may Dye, and LIFE may live for ever;
For, suffering Sword contentedly to slay
The Mortal, thou in Battle win'st the Day;
Then Thine's the Standard, and the Ensign spread,
And thou in Sion know the Ruling head,
Then Peace, then Joy, then Pleasures pure abound,
And Solace sweet, as Walls, do thee surround:
Then Sobs and Grief GOD from thy Land does banish,
And Sighs and Sorrows as a shade do vanish;
Yea, of thy Trouble whilst thou were forlorn,
Remains not thought, for joy a SON is born.
Wherefore, O Plants, wait in the Spirit meek,
And in the drouth from God the Showers seek;
In which sweet state you shall me witness bear,
God's fullness feeds each low heart full of fear:
Who does exalt the Spirit of the Humble,
But the Exalted from his Seat does tumble.
When as the Woods in Summer time are green,
The Thrustle's tune is heard though she not seen
By any Mortal, yet there is an Eye,
Which sees how she from Tree to Tree does fly,
And does perceive whence her sweet Notes aspire,
And what is the thing her life does most desire,
Which is the Book wherein I read your Race,
Beyond wide-Lands, Seas, Time and utmost Space.
And here with you I rest, I live and dwell,
Like Silkworms hid in one wrought case and shell;
Yea, lodged in a secret suckling Breast,
Like as the young ones in the Turtles Nest.
Dear Lambs, true number of the Shepherd's tale,
As one by one I hug and kiss you all:
Remembering you, I drop like molten Marrow,
Yea, rent, like Fallow torn with the Harrow.
Ah! feel my Bowels, which like Rain distills,
And runs like Rivers down the steepest Hills:
Yea, touch my panting heart and thereby learn,
My soul most frequent after you does yearn.
I Am Ravished beholding Virtue's graces,
Of Heaven's Glory to o're-spread your faces;
And cannot utter how my deeps abound,
Of love to you, which in the Life are found.
You Are at the Fountain pure, I plainly see,
And so am I, yet still remember me:
There in the Spirit of Life, Joy, and Peace,
Pray for your Brother, pray and never cease;
For I am God's and Yours in every Trial,
The which you know full well without denial:
So read me, You, We, One, through Life's infusion,
In the first Principle, and last Conclusion.
Of JERUSALEM.
THy Beauty has enamoured me in Virtue's Lodge of Rest,
A flaming Torch thine eye may see of Love burns in my breast;
Thou art the Stone which does my Spirit whet,
Like as the Razor which is newly set:
Ah! feed my Edge that is ground exceeding sharp,
To sing thy Virtue's praise to David's Harp.
For as an Host in Sion's Coast,
of much more strength than Nations;
Thou do arise before mine eyes,
in all my Contemplations.
Here ends what was written in Rome-Prison of Madmen.
To the Black Power.
OH Earth hear this, Oh Earth, thy doleful End and Doom,
God comes to sweep the Nations in dread as with a Broom;
His mighty Day's at hand, the World to fan and purge,
To visit all the Wicked, with his sore Plagues and Scourge.
Oh Egypt, Sodom, thy Inhabitants must know,
The Wind and Breath of GOD over thy Land to blow,
To curse the increase of Cattle, and all which thou call'st good,
Thy Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and all increase of Food:
And what one Plague does leave, another shall devour,
Till seven Vials of Wrath God on thy Land does pour;
Thy Fountains he will dry up, like standing Pools of mud,
Thy Princes fairest Wells also shall become Blood:
The Flower of thy Field, the Herb and Grass that is green,
The Locusts come to eat that none in thee be seen,
God from thee all thy strength and praise will rend and tear,
And compass thee full sore, with trembling and with fear:
Thou would not let the Holy Seed free for to go;
Therefore upon thee comes sore pangs of Wrath and Woe.
Ye Pharaohs of the Earth says GOD, What is your Host?
Why say ye, What is GOD? Why do ye vainly boast?
For GOD in Righteousness to save his Seed has sworn
Throughout the Land to slay, and cut off the Firstborn.
You Are folded in the thickness of the cloudy night;
Yet GOD for Israel has prepared a shining LIGHT,
Whose Seed he will lead by strength and power out of your Land,
By his outstretched Arm and mighty dreadful Hand.
WOE then at last when you the SEED pursue and follow,
Saying within your hearts, This Remnant we will swallow:
For there is a Sea that is set as Walls for their Salvation.
A Pit for Sodom's fall, for Egypt thy damnation.
Read this your doleful Doom, you that in darkness dwell,
The portion of the Wicked, the burning Lake and Hell.
Your cursed wicked hearts, have robbed GOD of his Right,
In that you have chosen Lust, and hated the true Light.
To the Seed of the Kingdom.
BUt Thou, O Holy SEED! a flame art in my breast,
In whose sweet Life my soul has its true Joy and Rest;
Thy Life's a stream of Peace, which Consolation brings,
And crowns with Glory more than Royalty of Kings.
What shall I liken Thee unto, to show thy love,
Which stands in Innocence, like the spotless Dove?
Stronger than all that can be named, in which is breath;
Thy Love, thy Light, thy Life, thy Love stronger than Death.
Oh SEED! you are Zion's Covenant, and wedded Band,
Seal of Everlasting Marriage, given under hand;
The Glorious Clothing of the Lilly Field is thine,
Brighter than Sun or Moon thy Countenance does shine.
The Nations of the Earth know not, nor can discry
The Diadem, the depth of sight that is in thine Eye;
With Thee I Am filled, I flow, I Am overcome with Love,
I Am settled here in Thee, whom Nations cannot move,
Says Zion now which trav'ls, her Children forth to bring,
That they may witness to the Glory of the King.
Oh travel! full of travel! my soul cries out in pain!
When shall I see Worm Jacob's rise from loss to gain?
The time of Trouble's come, I Am overwhelmed with Grief,
Till Jacob's time does come Redemption and Relief;
The feeling of my sorrows, who is set to see mine hours
Of Lamentations streams; like Brooks, falling like showers.
Oh blessed yet, that I have feeling for to see,
For Jacob's sake my travel, like a little Be.
Here I would dwell, if happily to see his birth,
Rather than feast in Dive's house to enjoy his mirth.
Oh SEED you are his Redeemer, when will thou his life raise?
That he unto thy Name may be ev'rlasting praise.
And give him a Possession, as his perpetual right,
T'inherit in the Land of Life, thy 'ternal Light.
My head be thou lift up like a fiery Cloud,
To Judgment and to Slaughter, of all the high and Proud;
Oh! bend thy Bow, and shoot thine Arrows and thy Dart,
And pierce the Wicked sore, and wound even to the heart;
Send forth thy dreadful Voices, by Lightning and by Thunder;
Astonish all the Heathen, and make the Nations wonder;
Feed them with Terrors, as thou do thine own with Bread,
And let the Nations feel thy Vengeance and thy Dread.
Oh! my right hand, draw out thy shining glittering Sword,
Smite all the Shepherds of the Earth with thy pure Word.
Gather thine own Remnant from East, West, North and South,
From all the Sluggards and the slumbring Shepherds mouth.
And bring thy Seed from Death and Darkness, to the Day,
And from the Voice of such as have made them a prey;
Let nothing hinder now, but work and let none let,
Set Gins, set Snares, set Traps, to catch them in thy Net.
They Have slain and led thy Seed into Captivity,
Reward them double the Wages of Iniquity;
Cut off, destroy, The SEED Cries utterly confound,
Pluck up, spare not a branch, nor leave a root in ground;
That we the least, who are thine own, thine own Creation,
May sing much Praise of Thee, the LORD of our Salvation.
Let all the Heavens shout, for BABYLON's undone;
Let all the Earth now fear, for her just Judgment's come;
Her End is Misery, broken are her Childrens bones,
For GOD has seen it Just, to dash them all against stones.
To BABYLON.
THou that did sit as Queen, and could not then think
Of this thine hour and portion, the Cup which thou must drink;
Thou then were merry in thine heart, and could sup
Idolatry, but now the dregs of Wrath's thy Cup.
Thou did not think when in thy Lusts thou were full hot,
The sealing up of Vengeance to be thy last lot.
To the Man of Lust.
YE sons of men, that live in Sin and Lust,
That is your Canker, it will eat like rust;
You that are ignorant of the Serpent's seed
Of Enmity, and what in you 'twill breed,
Hear this, and read the nature and the ground,
That you in the true Wisdom may grow sound,
To see the windings of the Serpent's path,
To flee his snares, and so escape the wrath,
Which on the ungodly comes, as a flood,
To sweep them all, from all, which they call Good;
And bring the end of sore perplexity
Upon all workers of Iniquity.
O man, incline thine ear to me, and read
The fruits of that corrupted ground and seed,
Which, as the plant of Satan, forth does spring
Pride, Lust and Drunkenness, and all that is sin,
Whoredoms, Adulteries, Theft and all Evil,
Oaths, cursed Speeches, Lies, works of the Devil;
All flattering Titles, smooth deceitful words,
Which wounds the Innocent, even as with Swords.
These are the fruits of that plant of corruption,
Which does deceive the soul and bring destruction.
Read this the Issue, when that GOD at last
Blows over Fruit and Trees with his strong blast;
That is the SEED which in thine heart does spring,
Telling thee what advantage Lies do bring
Of the corrupted Mammon to thy store,
And how false Oaths increase thee more and more;
Still that is the Seed which tells thee sure thou must
Have pleasure in this life, in Wine and Lust,
In these and all persuasions unto Evil
Working thy mind, that is the seed of the Devil.
And yet if thou would wisely further know,
Thy heart's the ground in which that seed does grow,
Which seed must dye through breaking of the ground,
Else thou to Endless WOE and WRATH art bound.
And now I'nquire of you, what are your hopes
Which draw Iniquity, as with Cart-ropes?
What is the fruit of Hope, Life and Salvation?
And what is the ground in which is sealed Damnation?
And you that live in Lust and full of mirth,
Declare your gladness by your life and birth;
And tell me, what is the Kingdom you possess
As Heirs and Lords? your own you may confess.
Tell me the end of all your Vanity,
Feasts, Sports, Games, Mirth, Music and Melody?
What is your Love affected hearts delight?
To all this, if you can, answer the LIGHT,
And give Account, How comes the Increase with Curse
In Field, in House, in Basket, Store and Purse?
Answer the SEED, what is the End of all
Which live and dye in sin, even in the fall?
And thou that liv'st in sin whilst thou have breath,
Consider well thy last end when comes death.
Come all you Sects and answer, What Is the ground
In which Iniquity is always found?
Put all your Worships forth in your best order,
And I will show how you join and border
As Brethren, Neighbors, Nations, under one Power
Of Satan's Kingdom, DARKNESS, in one hour,
All linked in Sin together in a Chain,
Which is the substance of the Devil's Reign:
To that of GOD in Gentile and in Jew
This savoureth as Salt, this thing is true.
For what if you to all your forms are bound
Of Worship? yet you standing in one ground
Of Lust, of Sin, and Nature of Transgression,
That binds in Unity beyond Confession.
In substance there is but two, that is NIGHT and DAY,
Sin DARKNESS the broad one: LIGHT the true way.
And you in whom is love, and not of GOD,
You are to drink his Wrath, and feel his Rod.
If you have another love, then GOD's forgotten,
Then the Affection's lost, the Heart is rotten,
And that is not sound which wants any part:
For GOD requires whole Man, Mind, Spirit, Heart;
So this in Man is the Iniquity,
Where Is fleshly love, that is the Idolatry;
For all that stands brought forth in the first nature,
Sticks only fast to the Lust of the Creature,
Here GOD's unknown, for in man's heart he'th set
The World, with which he is snared as in a Net;
So that GOD's Work Man knows not, not his Way,
All which GOD brings to pass in his own Day.
Nor can find out, although his days he spend
In seeking, from beginning to the end.
So all you that are in the History,
Read if you can, and reach this Mystery,
The Life that is hid in bottom of the Deep,
What Is that? and where is the place that Virgins weep?
Because that of their own Affinity
With them, has lost the Life of Unity.
Do you know what the swelling Seas devour,
On which the Heavens once did smile, and shower
Down drops of pleasant Rain, and made it spring,
Like to a Lilly-flower for the King?
The Wilderness whereto the Woman fled,
What Is that? how lodged SHE in a secret bed,
To keep her Innocence undefiled,
That she the Lamb's Wife justly might be styled?
From all the unconverted and unheal'd,
The Myst'ries of GOD's Kingdom are all sealed,
From Ignorant and learned in the World,
That in Invention to and fro are hurled.
The Parable is brought for all to see,
The Unlearned says, this is too hard for me;
The Learned says, to me it is also sealed:
By which I know they yet remain unheal'd.
Some in their time have swollen like the Seas,
And chose them paths, even what their hearts did please.
Invention up did spring, and they were bound,
In Chains of blackness; and cast to the ground;
For they a work among them had begun,
BABEL to build to mount above the Sun.
To the Apostatized.
TO them which heard the sound of GOD's great DAY,
And came to see the straitness of the WAY,
And owned the Testimony of the LIGHT,
Confessing it which gave them the true sight
Of all Sin, Evil, and Ungodliness,
And saw some cleansing from their filthiness:
But turning to their Vomit like the Dog,
And to the Mire, like to the unclean Hog,
Thy Judgment's just to Woe and Misery,
Being double wrought under Iniquity.
Remember how thy heart and mind did grudge,
To give up Life and all; which GOD will Judge;
For thou unto the World in their distrust
Art joined, to crave and seek to feed thy lust:
And here thou say thou sin'st, and it is thy grief,
Hopeless of cleansing here, in Unbelief.
But mark the end of all that live and dye in sin,
I tell thee their sad doleful doom, Death is their sting.
Nations, Professors all in sin bound in a bundle,
Like as the sheaf of Tares, GOD in the Lake will tumble.
To the simple Seeker.
THou that do pant, as one in want,
and earnestly do look,
Like as the Roe, in places low
to find the Water-brook.
In travel great, in pain and sweat
the River for to find,
To bath and cool, in the fresh Pool,
like as the Heart and Hind.
I see thy face, thou seek'st for Grace,
my Lilly Seed come prove,
Whilst it is day, I Will show the Way,
the LIGHT's my Joy and Love.
Oh he which has, trodden in this path,
has seen the glorious Mountain,
Which from whose top, Springs fall and drop,
this is the endless Fountain.
No longer think, but come and drink,
refresh thee with the good;
It Is pleasant Wine, of the true Vine,
the substance of all food.
Be no more tossed, as one that is lost;
but come unto the LIGHT,
Which shows men's deeds, to be but weeds
which grow in time of Night.
And that within, which shows thy sin,
if thou love it sincere,
Awe and fear GOD, and love his Rod,
from sin it will thee clear.
Be at a beck, when LIGHT does check
the secrets of thy mind;
Let it reprove, join thou in love,
and so true Peace thou wilt find.
Do not gainsay, but still obey
the Motions of the LIGHT;
Through Fire to come, as one that is won
against Deceit to fight.
And thou will rest, as at the breast,
sucking the Milk of pleasure,
The Babe to nourish, the Life to flourish,
this is th'everlasting Treasure.
So in this hour, dwell in the Power
which all the World does chain,
Prosper in the Light, conquer in fight,
and in Dominion reign.
To the Babes of Blessing.
TO my dear pleasant Babes and Lambs,
Skipping like Rams
over the Little Hills,
Like leaping Roes on Mountains high,
as Doves do fly
whom Innocence fills.
My Life and Spirit does you greet,
and with you meet
in the sweet Fields of pleasure,
The Garden where the Roses grow,
and Waters flow,
the Husbandman's own Treasure.
When I beheld the lovely streams,
and the Sun beams
which comes from on high,
The shining Glory of the Sun,
which you have won,
unto the LORD so nigh.
I Am filled beyond what words can measure,
with Virtue's Treasure
of Love to Virgins pure,
Who were in many Tempests tossed,
and yet not lost,
which dwell in Sion sure.
Who knows the Ships path in the Sea?
So is your way,
where Lions cannot tread,
In which you witness strength and skill,
to wound and kill
and bruise the Serpent's head.
Oh Lambs the fairest of all Flocks,
upon you drops
all Blessing from above,
Fresh streams of Oil upon your head,
lay'n in the Bed
of Everlasting Love.
Myrrh, Frankincense and Aluice,
sweet Wine and Spice,
and all that the Earth yields,
Herbs, Flowers, Milk and pleasant Trees,
Honey of Bees
is Yours, in Woods and Fields.
Oh! holy Land full of the Seed's increase,
which cannot cease
multiplying to the store;
Being sealed in Covenant and Band,
given under hand
to this for evermore.
SION'S ORATION.
Says Zion, all the Gold which Mountains hide
In all the compass of the World so wide,
And all the substance which the swelling waves
Have swallowed in her Womb, like as the Graves;
All precious Stones and Pearls, covered with Rocks,
Hid under rotten roots of stumbling blocks:
All pure Silver that lies deep in ground,
The time approaches it must all be found.
Arise, fair Daughter, gather quick and bring
The Consecrated Substance to the King.
And all ye sons, which Zion's womb did bear,
Take Instrument in hand, work without fear
Of Wolf, Fox, Tigre, Bear, or Lion;
For GOD is the Salvation of Sion,
Till that be finished which GOD has decreed,
The Restoration of his Holy SEED.
Come, hunt the Wolves, and Wild-beasts of the Wood,
Which slew the Lambs, and feasted on their Blood;
For they are appointed in all times hereafter
For starving, restless pangs of death and slaughter.
Now GOD in Judgment comes to reprove Kings,
To show their Counsels like as foolish things,
Who seek with briars and thorns to stop the way,
Which GOD by's Breath will burn in a day.
Mark this your End ye Potsherds, GOD will rent
Your Kingdoms; wherefore prize time and repent.
The Babe's breathing to his Brethren.
MY Sisters Sion's daughters joined in hand
In Unity in the Heaven's swaddling band,
Which binds the World with Clouds, as under chains,
There stands your Glory where the Eternal raigns.
Our Mother bare her Children in much pain,
In the house where Judgment separated twain,
Slaying the Seed of enmity and strife,
The Seed of Promise to inherit Life;
And brake the Covenant with Death and Hell,
Under which, all the World, the Seed did sell.
Shout, shout ye Sons, and fright the World, which boast
Themselves in the great number of their Host.
Oh! Heavens declare, and let the World wonder,
Strike Terror in the hearts of all their number:
Let all their Consolation fade and quail,
And let their strength in day of Battle fail:
You in whose mouth the Word of Judgment stands,
Lade all the World with WOE, and fill their hands,
Utter your Voice and let the Thunders rattle
Through Elements and Air, sound to the Battle
The Trumpet of the dreadful LORD of Hosts
Among the Nations, throughout all their Coasts.
The DAY of God's at hand, the LIGHT's his Word;
GOD comes with Fire, Plague, Famine and with Sword,
To plead with all flesh, living in Corruption,
Upon their heads to bring swift fierce Destruction.
Here I am set one of the living number,
A Sign in Egypt, to Sodom's brood a Wonder.
GOD's Power with His, is like a Fort of Steel,
My Brethren in the Life you may me feel;
For I am with you all under your Deep,
Where all the Fishes swim, and Worms creep:
Where Turtle-Doves do fly with out-stretch't wing,
And where you hear the little Lark to sing,
In that hid path, which all the World's Line
Cannot justly measure, to the End of Time,
Even in that Bed where every soul is blessed,
I Am wrapped in fold for ever, for to rest
With you, in all conditions to hold fast,
That of the first in him, who is the last.
From Venice Lazzaretta, J. P.
When the Fountains of the Deep were broken open, I was in the Valley of the
Mountain, and then I was moved to make mention of the Streams thereof.



THE END.

