A DEMONSTRATION OF FAMILY-DVTIES: OR Certain Propositions and Reasons of
them, taken ^^t of the holy Scriptures, tending to show the necessity, nature,
and manner of performance of such Religious duties, as Christian Families ought
to spare some time unto from common affairs every day.

BY T. P.

Joshua, 24.15. -- But as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord. M DC
XLIII.

Printed by H. A. for Thomas Underhill dwelling at the sign of the Bible, in
Woodstreet, LONDON.

To the truly Noble and much honored GEORGE BOOTH, Esquire of Dunham-Massie,
together with the Right Honorable, the Lady KATHARINE BOOTH, his pious
Consort: And also to the vvel-affected Gentry and Commons in CHESHIRE, and in
Manchester Parish in LANCASHIRE,
THOMAS PAGET

SINCERELY WISHES an increase of the power of godliness, which is profitable
unto all things, and has the promises of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come: AND HUMBLY PRESENTS the ensuing discourse touching
Religious Family Duties, in testimony of his real engagements to serve them in
the LORD, as long as he is in this tabernacle.

THE PREFACE.
THe Tit. 2.11.
grace of God that brings salvation, has abundantly appeared unto his people
in these latter days of the Christian world, in their effectual Revel. 18.4.
calling and coming out of mystical Babylon, that they partake not of her
sins, nor receive of her plagues. The Revel. 11.11.
Spirit of life from God has entered into his two witnesses (who Revel. 11.7.8.
had been warred against, and slain by the beast, and whose dead bodies did
lie in the streets of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and
Egypt) so that they have stood upon their feet, and Revel. 6.2.
gone forth conquering and to conquer by the Ephesians. 6.17.
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
the strong holds of Antichrist, and all spiritual adversary power whatsoever.
And hence it is come to pass that Revel. 11.13.
a great part of Romish Babylon is fallen, and a most glorious remnant in
England, Scotland, Ireland, the United Netherlands, Germany, Bohemia, Denmark,
Sweden, Poland, Hungary, Helvetia, France, Geneva, etc. are become Protestants,
giving glory to the God of heaven, Zach. 4.7.
shouting Grace Grace, and Revel. 15.3, 4.
singing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and marveilous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just, and true
are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest.

The dispensation of Ephesians. 3.8.10.
the unsearchable riches of Christ according to the manifold wisdom of God in
the behalf of his Churches and people, which have obtained deliverance from
their spiritual captivity, has likewise been 1 Cor. 12.11.
made manifest in dividing to every one severally as he will, Math. 13.23.
either thirty, sixty, or an hundredfold. As may further appear by a short
survey of the state of his several Churches. viz.

I. The Lutherane Churches (as they are commonly called) through the grace of
God, 1 Timothy 3.13.
have purchased unto themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the
faith, which is in Christ Jesus, by their separating from Antichristian
heresies, and entertaining the fundamental doctrines of justification and
salvation by Christ alone. For howbeit they 1 Cor. 3.12, 15.
have built in some part wood, hay, stubble etc. upon the foundation, and in
that respect shall suffer loss, yet they shall be saved notwithstanding as by
fire.

II. The Reformed Evangelicall Churches (as Act. 17.11.
the Bereans were more noble the^ the Thessalonians) have 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
glorified the Word of God, not only in their orthodoxall soundness in the
Hebr. 6.1, 2.
Principles and doctrine of the Sacraments, 1 Cor. 3.12.
building gold, silver, precious stones, etc. on the foundation; but also in
the vindication of the glory of Gods free grace touching his absolute Election
of some to grace and happiness; The efficacy of the death of Christ for his
chosen, called, and faithful ones; Effectual conversion; Saving faith;
Certainty of Salvation; and Perseverance in grace unto the end. All which may
be fully read over in the acts of that most renowned, and most profitable Synod
assembled at Dort in Holland, Anno 1618. and 1619.

III. The French, Scottish, and Belgic Reformed Churches, have been singularly
beautified with their Coloss. 2.5.
comely order, and decently 1 Pet. 5.5.
clothed with amiable humility; Romans 12.3.
not thinking more highly of themselves, then they ought to think, nor
hierarchically 3 John. 9.
affecting preeminence, but thinking soberly: As appears not only by their
demeaning and deporting of themselves, as God Romans 12.6, 7, 8.
has dealt to every one in office his gift of exhorting, teaching, ruling, and
distributing, for the benefit and comfort of the Congregatio^s, to which they
do minister, and the Congregations submitting themselves to their
Church Officers in the Lord; but also by their combining themselves into 1 Timothy
4.14.
Presbyteries, Act. 15.2.
Classes, and Synods, for the better and more Prove. 11.14.
prudent determination of their more weighty affairs, Math. 18.17.
according to Christ's order and rule of Discipline.

IV. The people of God in England (howbeit their Ecclesiastical officers have
been too like to the Revel. 3.15, 17.
Angel of the Church of Laodicea, as he is notified in the Apocalypse, yet they
themselves) are like unto those Revel. 3.4.
few in Sardis, which defiled not their garments, and who shall walk with
Christ in white, as being worthy of 1 Chronicles. 4.9.
a more honorable name then any of the Reformed Churches, for their Psalm. 16.3.
excelling in the power of godliness.

There are three choice virtues (as Eccles. 4.12.
a threefold coard that is not quickly broken) which have truly ennobled, and
renowned the people of God in England, and greatly magnified the grace of God
conferred on them above other Churches; viz. 1. The Jer. 17.24.
high prizing and conscionable sanctifying of the Lords day. 2. The Act. 13.44.
due esteem and joyful frequenting of Lectures. 3. The Genes. 18.19.
careful and constant performance of religious family duties.

First, the unfeigned respects of the people of God in England to the
sanctifying of the Lords day, are Romans 1.8.
spoken of throughout the Christian world, both in regard of their
godly-learned treatises in justification of the morality of the fourth
commandment and keeping holy of the Sabbath day, beyond what is ordinarily to
be seen in the books of foreign Divines; and also in regard of their most
spiritual exemplary practice, Isa. 58.13.
Calling the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and honoring
him, not doing their own ways, nor finding their own pleasure, nor speaking
their own words, etc.

True it is, the generality both of the Ministers and People in England have
conceited too meanly, and unbeseemingly of the Lords day, as is palpably argued
by the common neglect and contempt of preaching, and by the unwarrantable
liberties given and taken on that day: Yea there have been found some in
England (like those of Act. 6.9.
the Synagogue of Libertines, that co^tradicted the blessed martyr Stephen) who
have employed both their wits, and tongues, and pens, to plead against the
necessary and strict keeping holy the Sabbath day. But albeit the more
number-some and greater sort do Hos. 11.12.
compass God about with lies, and deceit: yet the better and more pious people
do rule with God, and are faithful with the Saints; being heartily Ezekiel. 9.4.
greived for the abominations done in the midst of the land on the Sabbath day.

Secondly, the sincere respects of the people of God in England to Lectures,
appear both by their great 2 Samuel 24.24.
costs to uphold and establish them, where maintenance has been wanting
otherwise; and likewise by the fullness of the assemblies, not only in London,
and greater cities, but also in other parts of the country, where they are
used. Oh how my spirits are revived and cheered, and my heart Psalm. 122.1, 2.
comforted within me, when I call to mind the great concourse of well-affected
Christians in several parts of Lancashire and Cheshire (where sometimes I had
my station) who have resorted to Lectures and monthly exercises (as Isa. 60.8.
doves fly to their windows) going from strength to strength many miles round
about till they appeared before God in the assembly of Saints. Such their
course seemed to be a real and experimental commentary on the 84 Psalm.

True it is, there has been special opposition against Lectures in England
(I tremble to mention it) through the absurd unreasonablenesse of some seeking
2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
to hinder the free course of the Gospel. But such their 2 Timothy 3, 8, 9.
folly and madness in resisting the truth is made manifest to all men.

Thirdly, the respective performance of religious family duties by the people
of God in England, crowns their keeping of the Sabbath, and attendance on
Lectures: since thereby it is demonstrated, that their Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
Christian profession is to purpose, turning words into works, and attaining a
power of godliness, as well as the form of it.

True it is, that some professing themselves to be the people of God,
notwithstanding that family duties are Hos. 8.12.
of the great things of the law, yet do count them as a strange thing: Not
unlike those ignorant baptized Act. 19.2.
disciples at Ephesus, who being asked, whether they had received the holy
Ghost since they had believed, said, They had not so much as heard whether
there be any holy Ghost. But Hebr. 13.22.
I beseech such to suffer the words of instruction and exhortation in the
discourse ensuing. True it is also, there are some Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.29.
scoffing Ismaels and 2 Samuel 6.16, 20.
giering Micals, who do despise in their hearts, and persecute what in them
lies the families that call upon Gods Name for their performance of
family duties. But let such know, that godly families are not wont to be
daunted by Hebr. 11.36.
the trial of cruel mockings, as being resolved in their measure with David,
to be 2 Samuel 6.22.
yet more vile then thus, if this be to be vile; and with Joshua, that however
it may seem evil to others to serve the Lord; Yet Josh. 24.15.
as for them and their houses, they will serve the Lord.

Now forasmuch as many of the Lords approved workme^ have taken in hand to set
forth their well studied labors, to defend and promote the religious
observation o^ the Lords day, and to justify and encourage effectual preaching
and fruitful hearing of the word* It seemed good to me also, knowing that I am
Philip. 1.17.
set for the cause of the Gospel, to put forth my slender talent in composing
an Essay touching the necessity, nature, and manner of performance of religious
family duties, if so I may give an Math. 25.19. Hebr. 13.17 Luke 16.2. Neh.
13.22.
account of my stewardship with joy, and be spared according to the greatness
of Gods tender mercies, when I shall be summoned to a reckoning in that day. And
this I have attempted the rather Psalm. 122.8.
for my brethren and companions sakes, whose spiritual good and prosperity I
unfeignedly desire and seek after: partly to stir up and help forward the
sincere and zealous devotions of such as desire to Psalm. 10.2.
walk within their houses with a perfect heart; partly likewise to provoke
such as are of greater abilities to contribute our of their Math. 13.52.
old and new store into our Lords treasury, who stands Mark, 12.41.
to behold and observe, and will graciously accept and commend the liberality
of offerers, be the gift never so mean. It is undoubtedly Math. 25.22.23.
well done of Gods good and faithful servants, the godly-zealous preachers in
England, that in their sermons and treatises, they do most seriously call for,
and frequently inculcate an exercise and practice of religious family duties:
but yet me thinks it may seem to be some upbraiding of the reformed times,
that there is no peculiar treatise bestowed on this subject; at least that I
have either seen or ever heard of.

The blessing of God Ephesians. 3.14, 15.
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (of whom the whole family in heaven and on
earth is named) and Jerem. 31.1.
the God of all the families of the English Israel, go along graciously with
this poor and weak endeavor, for the glory of his great Name, and the
spiritual welfare of my most endeared countre^ men: Even so prays his Lord
unworthy servant and humble p^^titioner at the throne of grace.

THOMAS PAGE

A Series or order of the several Propositions in the ensuing Demonstration.
1. IT is a grand concernment to know and believe that the Lord is God. 2. Such
as know and believe that the Lord is God, ought to worship and serve him. 3.
God ought to be worshipped and served according to his own appointment. 4. The
word of God is the rule of the worship and service which God has appointed. 5.
The rule directed in the Word is not only expressed in doctrinall precepts, but
also is implied in the promises, threatenings, and examples. 6. One chief
direction is, that God be served every day in some religious exercises. 7. A
religious sanctifying of the Sabbath day, does not exempt any from religious
duties on the working days. 8. The kinds of religious exercises to be
observed every day, are Prayer, Exercise in the Scripture, and Meditation. 9.
Prayer ought to be performed every day. 10. Conceived prayer is best approved.
11. Yet it is lawful, and may be expedient for some to use set forms of
prayer. 12. Exercise in the Scripture ought to be every day. 13.
Scripture-exercise consists in Reading, Singing of Psalms, Catechizing, and
Conferen^^ 14. Reading of the Scripture ought to be used daily 15. It is a good
course for the most part to read the Word in order. 16. Singing of Psalms
ought to be used frequently 17. Catechizing ought to be used frequently. 18. It
is lawful, and may be expedient to use a s^ form of some approved Catechism.
19. Conference of Scripture matters ought to be frequent. 20. Meditation ought
to be daily. 21. The most seasonable time of every day should be taken for
religious duties. 22. Morning and Evening are the most seasonable times of
every day for the service of prayer and Scripture-exercise. 23. In some cases
the performance of religious services, may sometimes be omitted. 24. When such
cases are, it ought to be grievous to such as by occasion are necessitated to
such omissions. 25. Unjust or slight pretenses for omissions should be taken
heed of. 26. More or less time must be taken unto religious duties, according
as circumstances will allow. 27. The Families of Gods people ought both morning
and evening to perform such religious services. 28. Such religious services
for every day ought to be performed by the whole family jointly, and together.
29. But Meditation ought notwithstanding to be performed by the several
members of the family apart by themselves. 30. In performance of religious
family duties, some one of the family should be as the mouth of the rest, for
the utterance of what is performed. 31. Yet in singing of Psalms all the
members of the family ought to lift up their voices together. 32. The Governor
of the family ordinarily is the fittest person to be as the mouth of the rest
of the family. 33. The Governor of the family may according to his place and
gift instruct his family; as well as pray with them. 34. Yet he may not presume
above his place and abilities in a course of instructing of them. 35. The
Governor of the family in some cases may lawfully depute some fit person of
his household to perform some service which he himself otherwise ought to see
unto. 36. If the Governor be remiss or indisposed hereunto, then the wife, or
some other ought to put the work forward. 37. If the Governor be froward, so
as not to admit of family duties; then the inferiors ought to redeem time,
with as good convenience as possibly they may. 38. The several members of the
family ought to perform religious services in secret, besides their joint
service of God. 39. Upon extraordinary occasions, religious families ought to
spend more then ordinary time yea sometimes whole days together in religious
services. 40. Upon occasion of extraordinary service, it lawful and may be
expedient to crave the asistance of neighbor godly-brethren. 41. In
extraordinary cases and occasions, relig^ous fasting may and ought to be added
to the other religious services. 42. Religious fasting may be used in families
with assistants, as well as publicly, as occasi^^ shall require. 43. There are
sundry extraordinary occasions for religious services to be accompanied with
fasting. 44. As the occasions may be more frequent, so ough^ the services to be
frequent also. 45. As sanctifying the Sabbath day exempteth m^ from
working-daies service in families, ss neither do working-daies services
exemp^^ from keeping the Sabbath day holy, wholly. 46. Public services in the
solemn Congregation ought chiefly to be seen unto on the Sabbath day. 47. Yet
it concerns Christian families and the members thereof to see to other
services als^ on the Sabbath day, both in the family and in secret. 48. All due
caution and circumspection ought to be used for the declining of finister
carriage in any kind of religious duties. 49. All religious services ought to be
performed by all sorts, in a spiritual and holy manner, and due order. 50. The
performance of religious family duties ought not to be rested in, but God is to
be depended on for his blessing the same. 51. Such families as call not on Gods
Name, are in a most dangerous state. 52. So likewise are such families as do
perform religious duties amiss. 53. So are they also that are careless of
learning to read, and of procuring, or making use of Bibles. 54. Those
families are altogether inexcusable, as do walk contrary to the good ways of
God. 55. Governors of families ought to endeavor earnestly after soundness
of judgment, and godliness of conversation. 56. Governors ought to see to the
ways of the members of their families, committed to their charge. 57. Members
of families ought to be tractable and ready to join in family duties,
submitting to their Governors therein. 58. Those families are happy as, having
the Lord to be their God, do serve him according to his will.
A DEMONSTRATION OF FAMILY DUTIES.
I. PROPOSITION. It is the chief and grand concernment of all people to know
and believe that the Lord is God.
Infallible proofs taken out of the word of God to confirm the Proposition.
THe importance of this first Proposition is declared by two sure witnesses,
even the two most eminent Prophets of the old and new Testament, Moses, and
Christ. Moses the man of God does effectually inculcate it to the Israelites
in the book of Deuteronomie, according to all that the Lord had given him in
commandment unto the^, Deuteronomy. 4.39. Know therefore this day, and consider it in
thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth
beneath: there is none else. And Christ Jesus (who was faithful to him that
appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house, Hebr. 3.2.) being
asked, Mark. 12.28. Which is the first commandment of all? Answered, verse. 29.
The first of all (...) commandments is, Hear O Israel, the Lord (...) God, is
one Lord.

Reasons or arguments taken out of Gods word to demonstrate the 1. Proposition.
I. REASON. Because God himself (who is infinite in wisdom and understa^ding,
Psalm. 147.5.) does plainly testify, th^^ the most seeming, considerable and
valuab^^ estimates of people, are of no worth in comparion of knowing him to
be the Lord Go^ See Ierem. 9.23, 24. Thus says the Lord, (...) not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, neither (...) the mighty man glory in his might; let
not then man glory in his riches: But let him that glorie^^ glory in this; that
he understands and known me, that I am the Lord, etc.

II. REAS. Because knowledge and be leefe that the Lord is God, is both a go^^
means, and also a clear evidence of life ete^nall: For so our blessed Savior
acknowledges and affirms in his heavenly prayer (...) the behalf of his
disciples a little before h^^ sufferings; John. 17.3. This is life eternal is
they might know thee the only true God, (...) Now that this is of grand
concernment, may be gathered from Moses his solem^ attestatio^ mentioned, Deuteronomy.
30.19. I call haven and earth to record this day against you, the have set
before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life that
thou and thy seed may live.

III. REAS. Because ignorance of God, or a not knowing him to be the Lord, will
expose people to everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power at the latter day: As it is written, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7,
8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, In
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, etc. So that the
terror of the Lord should persuade men to look seriously after the knowledge
of God: 2. Cor. 5.11. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and loose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for ^is
soul? Math. 16.26.

Observation for better understanding the meaning of the 1. Proposition.
Albeit the nature of the Majesty of God is infinite and incomprehensible, and
therefore cannot perfectly be known of any people; As it is most excellently
argued, Job: 11.7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou
find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as heaven, what can
thou do? deeper then hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer
then the earth, and broader then the sea: And 1. Timoth. 6.16. -- dwelling in
the light, which no man can approach unto, whom man has seen, nor can see:
Yet the Lord ha^^ made manifest in his works, that which may be known of God.
Romans 1.19, 20. Ye^ and he has so revealed and declared himself in his word by
his only begotten son, John 1.18. Hebr. 1.1. that his people may in the^^
measure attain unto all riches of the fu^^ assurance of understanding to the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God. Colos. 2.2.

II. PROPOSITION. Such people as do know and believe that the Lord is God,
ough^ to perform religious worship and service unto his divine Majesty.
PROOF. Moses the servant of the Lord infers this second Proposition from
the proof alleged to confirm the former or of Deuteronomy. 4.39. concluding thus
ver. 40. The shall keep therefore his statutes and commandments, etc. Now this
is one of his commandments, that he be worshipped: for so o^ Savior Christ
expounds Moses, Math. 4.10. It is written thou shall worship the Lord t^^
God. In like manner the Psalmist having occasionally showed how it was made
known to Judah and Israel that God is the Lord in^ dispensation of his word,
and ordinances, and works; Psalm. 76.1, 2, 3. infers thence, verse. 11. Vow
and pay unto the Lord your God; let all that be round about him bring presents
unto him that ought to be feared; that is to say, Let Gods people that do know
and believe that the Lord is God, perform religious hommage and worship to him.

I. REAS. Because the Gentiles, who have not the use of the holy Scriptures,
are convinced by the light of the law of nature, their consciences bearing
witness, Romans 2.14, 15. that he that is God, ought to be religiously
worshipped; and accordingly have been wont (albeit superstitiously) to order
their course, as is evident not only from their own books, but also in sundry
passages of the Bible. See for this the Apostle Paul's testimony touching the
Athenians, when by occasion he sojourned at the University of Athens, Act.
17.22, 23. Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too
superstitious: For as I passed by and beheld your devotions, I found an Altar
with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD; whom ye therefore ignorantly
worship, him declare I unto you.

II. REAS. Because a knowledge and belief that the Lord is God, implies a
knowledge in some measure, of his Name, Attributes, and Works; how great, how
gracious, how dreaded, and how glorious they are: the worth and excellency
whereof do ch^^lenge and call for hommage and worship, (...) due thereunto.
For even so the holy servant of God in Scripture do argue. See Ieren 10.6, 7.
Forasmuch as there is none like unto the O Lord, thou art great, and thy Name
is great^ might; who would not fear thee, O king of nations, etc. Psalm. 95.6.
O come let us worship, (...) fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Make
Revel. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to recei^^ glory, and honor, and power,
for thou have created all things, etc.

OBSERVAT. It is an infallible signe^ profane folly, and of abominable Atheist
in heart (notwithstanding any professor otherwise with the lips) when God is
noth prayer worshipped and served. This is demonstrated, Psalm. 14.1, and verse.
4. being compared together; The fool has said in his he there is no God: --
They call not upon the Lord.

III. PROPOSITION. The religious worship and service, which people should
perform unto God, ought to b^ such as God himself does inst^tute and appoint.
PROOF. The scope and sum of the affirmative part understood in the second
commandment of the Decalogue, Exodus 20.4. is, that God ought to be worshipped
according to his own institution and appointment. Moreover likewise the sum
of the commission given by our Savior Christ in the new Testament to the
Ministers of the Gospel, is, that they do only teach his commandments; as it
is expressed, Math. 28.19. Go ye, and teach all nations, -- Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.

I. REAS. Because God himself is the only Lawgiver and sovereign King of his
Churches; as it is both taught and aknowledged in the old Testament, and also
in the new. See Isa. 33.22. For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, (or statute-maker) the Lord is our King. Iam. 4.12. There is one
Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy.

II. REAS. Because such religious worship and service as is tendered unto God,
which is not according to his own institution and appointment, is a vain
worshipping of him, notwithstanding any pretense whatsoever, either of
antiquity, custom, seeming reasonableness, or humane authority; etc. For so
our Savior Christ alleges and approves out of the prophecy of Esaias, Mat.
15.9. In vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men. Year hence it is that the Lord God in high displeasure has sometimes
executed fearful punishment on transgressors in such kind; as (...) to be
seen in his proceedings against the sons of Aaron very remarkably, Levit.
10.1, 2. Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron, too^^ either of them his censer,
and put fire therein, and p^^ incense thereon, and offered strange fire before
t^^ Lord, which he commanded them not. And the^^ went out fire from the Lord,
and devoured them and they died before the Lord.

OBSERVE. Like as Monarchs and kings o^ the earth are wont to take just offense
at any of their subjects, that do usurp upon the^^ royal prerogative, in
presuming to do, (...) requiring any thing to be done, or executed in their
own names, and not in the name o^ their Prince; accounting such disloyalty i^
the compass of Praemunire: Eve^ so the God of heaven and earth (who is King of
kings, and Lord of lords Revel. 19.16.) will be highly offended at all those
presumptuous ones, as are bold to serve him otherwise then he has given
direction; as may appear by the Apostle Paul his intimation to the Churches of
Galatia, Galat. 1.8, 9. But though we or a^ Angel from heaven, preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed.

IV. PROPOSITION. The revealed will or word of God, which is contained in the
holy Scripture, or Canonical books of the old, and new Testament, is the
absolute rule of direction unto such worship and religious service, as is of
Gods own institution and appointment to be observed and performed unto his
most divine Majesty.
PROOF. This Christ shows in the parable of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16.29.
Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.
Thus Moses teaches, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our
God: but those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our children
for ever, that we may do all the words of this law. And thus the godly Bereans
approved themselves, as it may appear in that honorable testimony given unto
them Act. 17.11. These were more noble then those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether th^^ things were so.

I. REAS. Because the holy Scripture divinely inspired, were therefore given
un^^ us, that we might walk in the light of th^^ and so be made wise unto
salvation by obse^ving the directions in them. Isa. 8.19, 2^ And when they
shall say unto you; Seek unto the^ that have familiar spirits, and unto
wizards the peep and that mutter: Should not a people see^ unto their God? for
the living to the dead? (...) the law, and to the testimony: if they speak not
(...) cording to this word, it is because there is no li^^ in them. 2. Timoth.
3.16, 17. All Scripture given by in spiration of God, and is profitable for
d^^trine, for reproof, for correction, for instruct^^ in righteousness: That
the man of God may be p^^fect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

II. REAS. Because God (who is a Spirit; John. 4.24. Infinite; Psalm. 147.5.
Ete^nall Immortal, Invisible, only wise; (...) Timoth. 1.17. Almighty; Genesis
17.1. Good Psalm. 136.1. Gracious and Merciful; Exo^ 34.6. Holy; Josh. 24.19.
Just; Deuteronomy. 32.^ Perfect; Math. 5.48. and Glorious; Exo^ 33.18.) cannot have a
worship suitable an^ proportioned unto his excellent Majest^ save as he has
appointed and revealed to same in his Word. See Prove. 30.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The
words of Agur the son of Iakeh, even the prophecy; The man spoke unto
Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Vcal. Surely I am more brutish then any man, and
have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the
knowledge of the holy. Who has ascended up into heaven, or descended? Who has
gathered the wind in his fists? who has bound the waters in a garment? who
has established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his
sons name, if thou can tell? Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto
them that put their trust in him. Add thou not unto his words, lest he
reproove thee, and thou be found alyar. As if Agur had said, Such is the
Majesty, and Mystery of the incomprehensible God even the Father, and of Jesus
Christ in his hypostaticall union, being Ithiel, or Immanuel, God with us; that
no man further then he is taught by the pure word of God, and orders himself
according to it, without any adding thereunto, can aright worship him in
Spirit, and in truth, as the Father seeks.

OBSERVAT. Albeit the invisible things of God seen in the Creation of the
world, Romans 1.20. and in the works of his Providence, Act. 14.17. and in the
law written in men's hearts, Romans 2.15. do serve to leave men without excuse,
for their not worshipping of God, as is meet: Yet none of these do
sufficiently and effectually clee^ men's understandings touching the ways (...)
God, where Scripture is not likewise mad^ use of; as Christ convinces the
Sadduces Math. 22.29. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures.

V. PROPOSITION. The direction or pattern of religious worship and service unto
God, contained in the holy Scripture, is propounded and set down in a various
method or manner viz. Sometimes some parts of i^ are directly expressed in
Precept and Doctrines; and sometimes some parts of it are only employed, and to
be gathered by good consequence from Promises, Threat^nings, Examples, etc.
mentione^ and historically related.
PROOF. I. The books of Moses, a^ the Prophets do in great part consist of
P^^cepts and doctrines: See Exodus 20.1. etc. containing the Decalogue. See also
Math 5. and 6. and 7. cap. containing Christ's sermon on the mount, etc.

II. The Scripture abounds in precious Promises unto the conscionable
observers of some religious courses, that are not expressly commanded. An
instance hereof is in Revel. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that
hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein: Albeit there is no express commandment to read the book of the
Revelation, and to observe the contents of it: yet the blessing promised to the
reading, hearing, and keeping, implies that such course is wel-pleasing to
God, and consequently that he wills and requires the same.

III. The holy Scripture is full of Threatenings of judgments and curses to be
inflicted and executed on people in case of some courses omitted, which yet are
not expressly commanded to be practiced. An instance hereof is in Ierem. 10.25.
Power out thy fury upon the families that call not upon thy Name. Howbeit there
is no where in Scripture an express Precept given to families to call upon
Gods Name, yet this prophetical imprecation or threatening of Gods fury to
families for omission or contempt of such course, implies that God requires
families to call upon his Name: For God in punishing any does always proceed
justly. Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

IV. Sundry books both in the old and new Testament, are in great part
historical and exemplary, containing diverse examples of imitable practices,
which have no express commandment. An instance hereof is in Act. 14.23. When
they had ordained Elders in every Church, etc. This historical example
implies, that although there is no express direction to ordain Elders in
every Church, yet notwithstanding that every Church ought to have Elders.

I. REAS. Because if the directions in the holy Scripture should not be as well
gathered and drawn by just consequence from Promises, Threatenings, and
Examples, as from Doctrines and Precepts, then it would follow, that sundry
portions of the Scriptures, could not be applied for common instruction: which
yet is a principal end of all Scripture. See Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things
were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience
and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. 1. Corinthians. 10.11. Now all these
things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

II. REAS. Because such directions as are implied by good consequence in the
holy Scriptures by way of Promise, Threatening, or Example, may be said to be
the exposition or intimation of some commandments, the which are not directly
expressed: As namely the observatio^ of the Lords day, or first day of the
week, instead of the seventh day, or Sabbath of the old Testament, Revel.
1.10. Act. 20.7. 1. Corinthians. 16.2. The baptising of women as well as men, Act.
16.15. etc. For our Savior Christ after his Resurrection, and before his
Ascension spoke unto his Apostles of things perteining to the kingdom of God,
as it is written, Act. 1.3. So that doubtless things practiced by them
afterward, which are mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, were observed by
virtue of such his direction. And whereas it is said, 1. John. 3.4. Sin is
the transgression of the law; The meaning seems to be extended thus far,
that the law is transgressed not only in sinning against express precepts: but
also against implied commandments in any of the forementioned ways of
Promises, Threatenings, or Examples recorded in the Scriptures.

I. OBSERVAT. The ten commandments being exceeding broad: Psalm. 119.96. cannot
be interpreted according to their just latitude, unless their exposition be
extended unto Promises, Threatenings, Examples, etc. throughout the Scriptures,
implying the true and full meaning of them in sundry particulars: As is most
evidently to be seen in the affirmative part understoode, of the second and
third commandments of the first table.

II. OBSERVAT. The Examples registered in the holy Scriptures may be said to be
imitable, or that ought to be imitated, against which no just exception can be
taken, nor any good reason given, why they should not belong and apperteine
unto all the people of God indefinitely, as well as to them themselves which
have so walked and practiced. True it is, God did some things, which men cannot
imitate, neither is it lawful for any to seek to enterprise. Christ likewise
being God, and the Messiah, did such things, which Christians neither may
attempt, nor can effect. The Patriarchs, Prophets, Jews, Apostles, and
Evangelists, did some things as Patriarchs, as Prophets, as Jews, as Apostles,
and as Evangelists, wherein it is not lawful to imitate them. Magistrates,
Ministers, Parents, Masters, etc. have done, and may do some things, which
their inferiors subjected to them may not do. But in some other things, God,
and Christ, and the Patriarchs, and the Prophets, and the Jews, and the
Apostles, and the Evangelists, and the Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, and
Masters may and ought to be followed, being of general or of special
concernment for all, or several sorts of persons. See Ephesians. 5.1. 1. Corinthians.
11.1. James, 5.10. Hebr. 6. 11, 12. and 12.1. Philip. 3.17. Josh. 24.15.

VI. PROPOSITION. One important direction, and special concernment which God
requires in the holy Scripture, is, That his people shall worship and serve
him, in some religious performances every day, in the whole course of their
natural lives.
PROOF. Zachary, the father of John the Baptist, filled with the holy Ghost in
his prophetical song, thus expresses this lesson, Luke 1.74.75. That we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear; In
holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life. And thus
indeed the godly Israelites were wont to approve themselves, as the Apostle
Paul testifies on their behalf occasionally, Act. 26.7. Unto which promise
our twelve tribes instantly serving God day and night hope to come.

I. REAS. Because every day through Gods most wise dispensatio^ and government,
does serve the Lord in its kind, ministering cause and occasion unto his
people, to serve him daily. See this in Psalm. 19.2. Day unto day utters
speech, and night unto night showed knowledge.

II. REAS. Because God is the same every day, unchangeable in his power, in his
will in his justice, and in his mercy, and other his divine attributes. See
Malac. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. Hebr. 13.8. Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Lament. 3.22, 23. His co^passions fail
not; They are new every morning. And therefore his people ought every day in
their measure to walk answerably; for so they shall walk worthy of the Lord
unto all pleasing. Col. 1.10.

III. REAS. Because Man's short life is reckoned by days. See Job 14.1. Man the
is borne of a woman is of few days. This is four times in one sentence
mentioned by the Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 47.9. Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days
of the years of my pilgrimage an^ an hundred and thirty years: few and evil
have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the
days of the years of the life of my fathers, in the days of their
pilgrimage. Moreover no man knows whether he shall live till to morrow,
James. 4.14. Nor yet what a day may bring forth; Prove. 27.1. And therefore it
greatly behooveth to redeem the time, Ephesians. 5.16. for otherwise we may be
surprised by the coming of the Lord, in a day when we look not for him, and
in an hour that we are not ware of. Math. 24.50.

OBSERVAT. In the old Testament God instituted and ordained that a daily
sacrifice should be offered unto him. See Exodus 29.36, 38. Thou shall offer
every day, day by day continually. This his ordinance seems to signify and to
teach his people in all ages, that no day should go over their heads, without
performance of some religious service unto him; like as they do day by day
continually expect and seek daily bread at his hands. Math. 6.11. Luke 11.3.

VII. PROPOSITION. The observing and sanctifying of the Lords day wholly in
religious exercises, publicly and privately, by virtue of the fourth
commandment of the moral Law, (viz. Exo. 20.4. Remember the Sabbath day to
keep it holy) does not exempt or free the people of God from spending some
time in religious exercises every day of the week besides, according to that
which has been declared in the sixth Proposition.
PROOF. David a man after Gods own heart (1. Sam. 13.14.) that conscionably
observed the Sabbath day, as appears Psa. 9^* 1 Title; A Psalm or song for
the Sabbath day, etc. was conscionable also of daily service. Psalm. 61.8. I
will sing praise unto thy Name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows. So
the Christians in the new Testament had respect not only unto the Lords day to
keep it holy, Act. 20.7. Upon the first day of the week the disciples came
together to break bread, etc. but also to religious exercises daily, Act.
17.11. And searched the Scriptures daily.

I. REAS. Because God is the absolute and sovereign Lord of every day, to
order and dispose of it, as seems good unto the will of his divine pleasure.
Psalm. 74.16. The day is thine, the night also is thine; thou have prepared the
light and the Sun: And therefore he has authority to command and appoint such
service to be done as he pleases, either in our general or particular
callings.

II. REAS. Because in the old Testament there were sundry times set apart unto
divine worship by Gods own institution and appointment, besides the moral
Sabbath day. Levit. 23.4, etc. These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy
convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons; viz. The Passover, The
feast of the first fruits, of Pentecost, of Trumpets, of Tabernacles, the day
of atonement, etc. So that the keeping of the moral Sabbath should be no
prejudice to religious service at any other seasonable times.

OBSERVAT. The meaning of the argument used to persuade unto the religious
keeping of the Sabbath day in Exodus 20.9. Six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work, etc. seems to be, that the works of men's particular callings
may and ought to be done only within the space of the six days of the week,
and not on the seventh, or Sabbath day. But it does not follow hence, as if men
were not allowed to serve God religiously at any time within the six days.
And this will further appear, if it be also observed, that labor in men's
particular callings is not commanded in the fourth commandment of the
Decalogue, since it is in the first table, which enjoyneth our duty toward God:
but it seems to be required in the eight commandment, which is in the second
table, directing our duty toward our selves, and our neighbors.

VIII. PROPOSITION. The worship and religious se^vice which ought to be
perfo^med unto God every day, is, t^ Prayer; 11. Some exercise in the holy
Scripture, and III. Godl^ Meditation.
The Proofs and Reasons of this Prop^sition are to be seen in the declaration
(...) these kinds of religious services distinctly as follows.

IX. PROPOSITION. Prayer unto God is a princ^pall part of such religious
wo^ship and service, as is taught in the holy Scriptures, in which the people
of God ought to spend som^time every day.
PROOF. This Proposition is by good^ just consequence implied in the Lords
pr^yer (as it is usually styled) in that fourth ^^rection or petition, Math.
6.11. Give us (...) day our daily bread; which is also expressed* the same
effect, Luke 11.3. For here^^ we are given to understand, that it is our duty
to seek unto God every day, for a supply of daily requisites for subsistence
in this life. And this is manifest the rather, if we do observe that the term
or adverbiall particle of time, This day, or To day, implies Every day as it
shall succeed other, day by day continually.

I. REAS. Because whereas the evils and miseries of sin and punishment are
every day incident, Math. 6.34. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof:
Prayer to God is a most effectual means to prevent, or stay, or remove the
same. See this, Amos, 7.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1. Chron. 4.10. Amos and Iabez by their
prayers prevented, stayed, and removed invading evils; God accepting them. And
thus much may also be gathered from the following directions and deprecations
in the Lords prayer, Math. 6.12, 13. Forgive us our debts; Lead us not into
temptation; but deliver us from evil. For God is able to keep from falling;
Jude, ver. 24. to subdue iniquity; Micah 7.19. to deliver out of temptation; 2.
Pet. 2.9. to uphold in weakness; 2. Cor. 12.9. and to stay the course of
evils: 2. Chron. 30.20. Yet notwithstanding he will be sought unto therein.
Ezekiel. 36. verse. 37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of
by the house of Israel to do it for them.

II. REAS. Because Prayer to God, that most powerful way and means which God
has ordained and sanctified, for the obteining of such blessings, as he
purpose^ to bestow upon his people: As it is direct^ taught, Math. 7.7, 8.
Ask, and it shall be giv^^ you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it sh^^^^
opened unto you. For every one that asks, ^^ceiveth; and he that seeks,
finds; and to b^ that knocks, it shall be opened. Ierem. 29.1^ 13. Then shall
ye call upon me, and ye shall go (...) pray unto me, and I will hearken unto
you. A^^ ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall se^^^^ for me with all
your heart.

III. REAS. Because Prayer gives (...) sanctified and comfortable use of such
bl^^sings and mercies, as are already possessed a^^ enjoyed by the people of
God. See 1 Ti^ 4.4, 5. Every creature of God is good; etc. for (...) is
sanctified by the word, and prayer.

OBSERVAT. When God is sought un^^ every day by prayer, for a bestowing of
da^^^ requisites; it is a good testimony, that the^^ is an acknowledgment, and
dependence t^ his gracious providence, and fatherly dispe^sation continually,
as it is implied in Psalm. 6* 2. O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall
(...) flesh come. The Psalmist David in time of the famine, which lasted three
years, sough^ unto God for daily bread; 2. Sam. 21.1, etc* And having received
an answer of peace, he penned (as may be probably conjectured) the 65th Psalm;
to express his gratitude, and to teach others, how to demean themselves in
time of straits, and wants, namely, to go to God, that hears prayers, when
he is sought unto, and called upon.

X. PROPOSITION. The best and most acceptable way and course for the people of
God to approve themselves in the performance of the service of prayer, is, that
having a gift of knowledge and utterance, they do not limit and stint
themselves unto a set form of words; but rather that they do conceive their
Prayer, as cause and occasion shall justly require.
PROOF. The holy servants of God mentioned and approved of in Scripture in
their course of praying, have been wont usually and for the most part to
co^ceive their prayers. Daniel, greatly beloved, when he understood by his
reading in the book of the prophesy of Jeremiah, the number of the years to
be accomplished in the desolations of Jerusalem, conceives his prayer
accordingly. See Dan. 9.1, etc. The book of God is plentiful in instances of
this kind, as may be seen in the book of Psalms, and other historical
books.

I. REAS. Because every gift of God Spirit, and consequently the gift of
prayer, ought to be stirred up, and exercised, according to just occasions
offering themselves, See 2 Timoth. 1.6. I put thee in remembrance, that thou
stir up the gift of God that is in thee. For therefore God does bestow the
gift (...) prayer upon his people, that they may exercise the same, and so
attain the fruit thereof* Zach. 12.10, 11, etc. compar. with chap. 13.1. And I
will power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
Spirit (...) grace, and of supplications, and they shall loo^ upon me whom they
have pierced, and they sha^^ mourn, etc. In that day there shall be a fountai^
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitan^^ of Jerusalem, for sin,
and for uncleanness.

II. REAS. Because there are varieties (...) necessities and occasions which
do oftentimes fall out, and present themselves daily unto the people of God:
So that it is therefore requisite, they should frame their prayers suitable
thereunto. Solomon in 1. King. 8.33, etc. gives instances of sundry occasions
of prayer, and of suitable seeking of God; as namely, Trespasses, Captivity,
Drought, Famine, Sword, Pestilence, Blasting, Mildew, Locusts, Caterpillars,
etc.

III. REAS. Because when the gift of prayer is exercised and stirred up, in
conceiving and uttering of our requests according to the present occasion; then
the Spirit does more sensibly help our infirmities (as a voice speaking in our
ears behind us, Isai. 30.21.) dictating and giving matter, words, and
affections according to the will of God; whereas we ourselves for the most part
are ignorant, dull, cold, unaffected, and indisposed dat such time. See Romans
8.26, 27. Likewise the Spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession for
us, with groanings which cannot be expressed. And he that searches the hearts,
knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the
Saints, according to the will of God.

OBSERVAT. The gifts of knowledge and utterance, wherewith some persons are
enriched (1 Corinthians. 1.5.) being common gifts of the Spirit; that is to say,
such gifts as are common to some natural men, and hypocrites, and given to
them as well as to the regenerate ones (Isaiah, 58.2, 3, etc.) ought to be
exercised and improved carefully, and conscionably to the advantage of the
giver, that has committed them to their trust to such ends; as the parable of
the talents shows: Math. 25.14, 15, etc.

XI. PROPOSITION. Albeit conceived prayer (as has been said, Proposit. X.) is
the best and most approved way ordinarily, to express the desires of the
soul; as proceeding and issuing from a more special assistance of the Spirit
of God: yet it is not only lawful, but may be also very expedient and
requisite, for some persons, and at some times, to use set forms of prayer.
PROOF. The Lords Prayer, is not only a rule of prayer, but also a form of
praver: As appears by comparing together Math. 6.9, etc. and Luke 11.2. For
in Matthew it is said, After this manner pray ye; etc. But in Luke it is said,
When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. There are also sundry forms of prayer,
which were prescribed for some persons, and on some occasions. See Numb. 6.23,
24, 25, 26. and 10.35, 36. Psalm. 20. and 102. etc.

I. REAS. Because many of the people of God at their first entrance into the
profession of the Gospel, being newly converted, are as yet very ignorant of
the ways of God, not knowing how to walk or order their religious course, or
to pray aright; but do stand in great need of some helps: for so it was with
the disciples of John the Baptist, and with the disciples of our Savior Christ
also; as may be gathered from that request which one of Christ's diciples made
unto him, Luke 11.1. Lord teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples.

II. REAS. Because many members of Christian Congregations, and Families, are
dull of hearing, and slow of conceiving of what is said and uttered in the
ministry of the word touching some divine trueths: for so the Apostle
affirms of the believing Hebrews, Hebr. 5.11. Ye are dull of hearing. Which
affirmation is as well appliable unto praying, as to the hearing of the word
preached, since understanding and discerning is requisite in prayer, as well as in
hearing of the word; as is employed in that demand of the Apostle Paul, 1. Corinthians. 14.16. How shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say
Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? As
if he should say, Unless he that is present at prayer do understand what is
prayed, he cannot be a fruitful partaker of such prayer. And therefore as it
is very meet, that in the ministry of the word, the same things be often
repeated and inculcated, Philip. 3.1. So it is likewise is prayer.

I. OBSERVAT. Prayer is an expressio^ of our will to God. See Psalm. 25.1. Now
whatsoever condition or qualification is required unto prayer (or lifting up
the soul to God) to make it lawful and acceptable, the same may be made use
of in a set form o^ prayer, viz. Knowledge, Conscience, Faith Hope, Sincerity,
Fervency, etc.

II. OBSERVAT. The words of him that utters a prayer in the presence of
others, are unto them as a set form of prayer, and for ought they know, may be
a form premeditated and prepared to be expressed word for word: And they are
bound to confine their spirit thereto, and in no sort to suffer their hearts to
wander, or to be otherwise occupied; as it is implied, Deuteronomy. 27.14, etc.

XII. PROPOSITION. Some exercise in the holy Scripture is also a part of that
religious service which the people of God ought to observe daily.
PROOF. God himself does prescribe this daily practice to his people, Josh.
1.8. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according to
all that is written therein, etc. And the noble Bereans walking according to
this doctrine had singular approbation and commendations, Act. 17.11. They
searched the Scriptures daily, etc.

I. REAS. Because the word of God is the spiritual man's daily bread, wherewith
his soul is fed, and his spiritual strength and stature promoted; as it is
intimated, 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word,
that ye may grow thereby. This spiritual food is as necessary and useful for
the soul every day, as corporal repast for the body: And accordingly the
godly-wise have esteemed of it. See Job, 23.12. I have esteemed the words of
his mouth, more then my necessary food.

II. REAS. Because daily exercise in the Scripture is an effectual
preservative against the danger of daily sinning against God, notwithstanding
the deceitfulness of sin is such as it is: For I. The word will discover
sin, Romans 7.7. and so give prevention to it. See Psalm. 17.4. By the words of
thy lips, I have kept me from the path of the destroyer: As if David had said,
The knowledge I have of thy word through my daily converse in it, has
restrained me from the killing of Saul when temptation and opportunity serve^
thereunto. II. The word daily conversed (...) will cleanse from such sins, as
by occasion any do fall into, or are overtaken withal^ See Psalm. 119.9.
Wherewith shall a young m^^ cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto accordi^^^
to thy word.

III. REAS. Because the word of Go^ is a part of our Christian and spiritual
armour^ even the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.1^ to defend against Satan, who
daily goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Job, 1.7. and 2.^. Our blessed Savior Christ by his skillful us^ of this
spiritual weapon fully defeated Sat^^ in his three most violent assaults, Mat.
4.4.

OBSERVE. The holy Scripture for the excellency thereof, is called Bible or
books by way of eminency, because these books do far surpass all others in
respect of their authority and use. See Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures; for
in the^ ye think to have eternal life 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure
word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, a unto a light
that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise
in your hearts.

XIII. PROPOSITION. The Scripture-exercise requisite every day, consists
either I. In reading of it; II. In singing of Psalms; III. In Catechizing; or
IV. In Conference. In any one, or two, or all of these, as opportunity may
serve and permit.
The proofs and reasons of this Proposition, are to be looked for in the
declaration of these distinct kinds of Scripture-exercises in the Propositions
immediately following.

XIV. PROPOSITION. Reading of the Scripture, or hearing it read, is a religious
service, which ought frequently to be performed.
PROOF. Daily reading of the word is enjoined to Kings. See Deuteronomy. 17. verse. 18,
19. He shall write him a copy of this law in a book, out of that which is
before the Priests the Levites. And it shall be with him and he shall read
therein all the days of his life, etc. If a Kings weighty affairs do not
exempt him from this daily service unto God, much less may others be dispensed
with.

REAS. Because frequent reading of the word is very effectual for the
bettering of our spiritual state daily. See Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20 The King shall
daily read, That he may lear^ to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the wor^
of this law, and these statutes to do them: That (...) heart be not lifted up
above his brethren, and t^^ he turn not aside from the commandment, to t^^
right hand, or to the left, etc.

OBSERVAT. Albeit much reading men's writings and books, is a weariness (...)
the flesh, and there is no end therein: y^^ by reading the words of truth in
the hol^ Scripture, we may be daily admonished (...) our whole duty: The sum
whereof is Fear God, and keep his commandments. S^^ Eccles. 12.10, 11, 12,
13.

XV. PROPOSITION. In reading the Scripture daily it seems to be most
expedient and profitable to read in order the several books and chapters, from
the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation.
PROOF. This Proposition is considerable from the course and method that the
penmen of the Scripture have observe^ (speaking as they were moved by the hol^
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.) in their setting down in order for the most part the
contens (...) their writing. See this implied by the Evangelist Luke his
preface to his history of the Gospel, Luke 1.1, 2, 3. Forasmuch as many have
taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are
most surely believed among us; Even as they delivered them unto us, which from
the beginning were eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word: It seemed good to
me also, having had prefect understanding of things from the very first, to
write unto thee in order, etc.

I. REAS. Because there is for the most part some coherence both in the books,
and the chapters, either in regard of time or matter, for giving further light
to the understanding thereof; which by reading in order may be better observed.
This is evident to any that are at all versed in the Bible.

II. REAS. Because a reading in order all the Bible respectivly, argues a due
esteem of the Author and contents thereof, as being wholly and equally the
word of God, and wholly profitable. See 2 Timoth. 3.15, 16. From a child thou
have known the holy Scriptures. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable, etc.

I. OBSERVAT. Some portions of the holy Scripture in respect of our use may at
some times, and on some occasions, be more fruitfully conversed in then others.
The book of Psalms and of Isaiah, are both of them made use of about sixty
times in the new Testament; some books are mo^^ doctrinall then others; as the
book of Proverbs, etc. So are some chapters; as Matther 5.6. and 7. chap. etc.
yet this hinders n^^ but that in daily reading an order is to be observed.

II. OBSERVAT. Any portion of Scripture being read, observed, and remembered
though it be not understood for the present yet it may be useful and
profitable for afterward. This may be seen by that which (...) testified of
the Disciples, John. 2.22. Wh^^ Jesus was risen from the dead, his Disciples
^^membred, that he had said this unto them; and the believed the Scriptures,
etc. One special bene^ of such reading, is that it prepares and fitte^ to a
better profiting by the ministry of the word; as appears by the Eunuchs
profiti^^ by Philips Sermon, although he was ignorant of that which he read
before that time See Act. 8.35, etc.

XVI. PROPOSITION. Singing of Psalms is a Scripture-exercise of divine
institution that ought to be used frequently by the people of God.
PROOF. See Coloss. 3.16. Let the (...) of Christ dwell richly in you, in all
wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts unto the Lord. Ephesians. 5.19.
Speaking to your selves in Psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing,
and making melody in your hearts to the Lord.

I. REAS. Because inasmuch as we ought always to serve God with joyfulnesse,
and gladness of heart, as it is implied, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Philip. 4.4. Singing of
Psalms is an effectual way and means to express such rejoicing: as is
taught, James, 5.13. Is any merry? Let him sing Psalms.

II. REAS. Because God does graciously accept and reward a due serving of him
in singing of Psalms. This may be gathered from his gracious respect to King
Iehoshaphat and the people of Judah, after their consultation and appointment
of Singers, according to his ordinance. For at the same time that they began to
sing, he confounded their enemies. See 2 Chronicles. 20.22. And when they began to
sing and to praise, the Lord set ambushments against the children of Ammon,
Moab, and mount Seir, which were come against Judah, and they were smitten, etc.

OBSERVE. Gods will is done on earth daily in some good degree (according as we
are directed to pray, Math. 6.10.) as it is done in heaven by singing of
Psalms daily since singing of spiritual songs is a heaventh service performed
by the heavenly host continually. See Luke 2.13, 14. And sudden there was with
the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying; Glory
(...) God in the highest, and on earth peace, good wa^ toward men, Compared
with Revel. 4.8, 9, 10, 11. And the four beasts had each of the^ six wings
about him, and they were full of eye within, and they rest not day and night,
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty; which wa^ and is, and is to come,
etc.

XVII. PROPOSITION. Catechizing in the Principles of Christian religion is a
divine ordinance, and a Scripture-exercise, which ought to be used and
practiced by the people of God frequently, as occasion offers and requires.
PROOF. This doctrine God himself commands and commends unto his people,
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. The words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart.
And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, etc. Prove. 22.6. Train
up (or Catechize) child in the way he should go, etc.

I. REAS. Because Catecheticall instruction and information is very requisite
and necessary for such Christians as are novices, and unskilful in the word of
righteousness. For so the Apostle Paul convinces some of the believing
Hebrews, Hebr. 5.12. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have
need that one teach you again, which be the first principles of the Oracles
of God, and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

II. REAS. Because the good fruit and effect of frequent Catechizing and
teaching will be found to be great, as there is a growing up in Christianity,
even from childhood to old age; as Solomon advertiseth: See Prove. 22.6.
Catechize, or train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old,
he will not depart from it.

OBSERVE. Catechism properly considered, is an occasional Scripture-exercise,
to be used amongst such specially, as are young and novices in the profession of
Christian religion, that so a foundation may be laid (Heb. 6.1.) for an
admission to the Lords table, which requires an ability of selfe-examination
to become a worthy communicant; that there may be a growing up in Christ, and a
going forward to perfection. See 1 Corinthians. 11.28. Hebr. 6.1. And yet
notwithstanding a proposal and opening of Catecheticall doctrine from time to
time i^ the hearing of grown Christians may be very useful. See this implied,
Luke 1.4 That thou might know the certainty of these things wherein thou
have been instructed, or Catechized.

XVIII. PROPOSITION. In the religious exercise of Catechizing, it is not only
lawful, but also it may seem to be expedient to make use for the most part of
a set form of some approved Catechism.
PROOF. The Apostle Paul instructed his scholar Timotheus in a Form of sound
words, which probably was a set form of Catechism. See 2 Timoth. 1.13. Hold
fas^ the form of sound words which thou have heard of me, etc. It seems also
that the believing Romans had been taught a form of Catechism, which they
willingly learned, and heartily submitted unto; as is testified of the^, Romans
6.17. Ye have obeyed from the heart, that form of doctrine, which was
delivered you.

I. REAS. Because it is a great help to our understanding and memory to have
the sum of Christian religion, which is promiscuously set down here and
there in several parts of the Bible, to be compendiously abridged and
methodically digested with good coherence in a set form of Catechism. It may
seem that the Apostles of Christ in the purest primitive times did frame such
a Catechism, which was called the Principles of the doctrine of Christ, or the
Foundation; consisting of six principles, viz. I. Of Repentance from dead
works; II. Of Faith toward God; III. Of Baptism; IV. Of Laying on of hands;
V. Of the Resurrection of the dead; And VI. of Eternal judgment. See Hebr.
6.1, 2.

II. REAS. Because in a form of Catechism (as in a Map, in one prospect or
view, as it were) much may be discerned with ease and delight in a short time.
As Moses was showed the land of Canaan on the top of Pisgah; Deuteronomy. 34.1, 2, 3,
4. So by way of allusion, it may be said touching a form of Catechism.

OBSERVAT. It is one of Gods most gracious dispensations in these latter days,
that he has granted the pen of the godly-learned interpreters, men of
thousands, to write so many orthodoxe forms of Catechism, for the instruction
of the ignorant in the grounds of Christian religion. Oh that such as have a
price in their hand to get wisdom, had hearts likewise to make use of it! See
Prove. 17.16.

XIX. PROPOSITION. Religious conference, repet^tion of Sermons, asking and
answ^^ring of good questions, is a divi^^ ordinance, which ought often be
practiced.
PROOF. The example and practice Christ and his disciples argues this. S^^
Mark. 4.10. When he was alone, they that (...) with him, with the twelve, asked
him of the Pa^^ble which he had insisted upon in his S^^mon. So Math. 13.51.
Jesus says unto th^^ (viz. to his disciples, after his public pre^^ching was
ended) have ye understood all th^^ things? They say unto him, Yea Lord, etc.

I. REAS. Because religious conference and mutual exhortation is a good
reme^^^ against the most dangerous spiritual mala^ of hardness of heart,
occasioned and su^^ thered by the deceitfulness of sin; as implied Hebr.
3.13. But exhort one anoth^^ daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you^
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

II. REAS. Because godly talk and gracious speech tending to edification, is
ve^^ effectual to minister grace to the hearers, i^ moving and stirring up the
affections to^^ zealous temper. See Luke 24.32. Did (...) our hearts burn
within us while he talked with us ^y the way, and while he opened to us the
Scriptures?

OBSERVAT. Like as the Galilean dia^ect or manner of speech did bewray Peter ^o
be one of Christ's disciples: Math. 26.73. Mark. 14.70. So the language of
Canaan made use of by such as serve the Lord (Isai. ^9.18.) argues them to be
religiously affec^ed and disposed. The Psalmist notes it to be a mark and
property of godly persons. Psalm. 37.30. The mouth of the righteous speaks
wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment. Since ^s our Savior Christ
teaches, Math. 12.34. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.

XX. PROPOSITION. Meditation on the Word (as likewise on the works) of God is a
divine ordinance, in which the people of God ought to exercise themselves daily.
PROOF. This Proposition is directly expressed, Josh. 1.8. This book of the
law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and
night. And accordingly the godly-wise have been wont to exercise themselves.
See Genesis 24.63. The Patriarch Isaac went out into the field to meditate at
eventide: It seems it was his usual course, David was frequent herein. See
Psalm. 119.^ O how I love thy law! it is my meditation the day.

I. REAS. Because godly meditation very profitable and helpful to furnish a
store the heart with good matter to be u^red, according to occasion offering it
sel^^ The most wise king Solomon had good ^^perience herein. See Psalm. 45.1. My
he^^ inditing a good matter; I speak of the things wh^^ I have made touching
the King: My tongue is ^pen of a ready writer, etc.

II. REAS. Because good meditation (...) much affect the heart, according to
(...) subject that is meditated upon. See Ps^^ 119.15. I will meditate (says
David) on (...) precepts: and have respect unto thy ways: A^^ he had said, A
meditation on Gods precep^ is singularly useful to work my heart u^^^ a
respect of Gods ways, and therefore I w^^ meditate on them. So likewise verse.
55. ibi^^ I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, in the nig^^ and have kept thy
law; As if he had said, M^^ remembering and meditating on thy Na^^ in the night
season has been effectual ^^ stir me up, unto the observing and keeping of
thy law.

OBSERVE. Meditation is either occasio^nall; or set and deliberate.

I. Occasional meditation is a making use ^f such things as by the providence
of God ^o offer themselves to our eyes, ears, etc. (...) we are in our
callings, as the circumstances will permit. Thus Peter meditated on his
^eliverance out of prison. See Act. 12.11.

II. Set and deliberate meditation is, when here is a purposed sequestring ones
self part, to perform this exercise more tho^oughly, and a making use of some
fit and ^lect matters to be meditated on; and then ^^larging the mind and
affections there^bouts. See Genesis 24.63.

XXI. PROPOSITION. The most seasonable and fitting ^ime of every day, ought to
be ^llotted and taken for the daily ^orship and service, which God ^equireth
his people to perform unto him.
PROOF. The Lord himself gives this direction unto his people of Israel. See
Numb. 28.1, 2. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying; Command the children of
Israel, and say unto them, My offering, and my bread for my sacrifices, made by
fire for a svveet savor unto me, shall ye observe to offer unto me, in their
due season. Levit. 23.4. These are the feas^^^ the Lord, even holy
convocations, which yee^^^ proclaim in their seasons.

I. REAS. Because Time being a nece^^ry and unseparable adjunct of every
actio^^ be done, therefore the most seasonable^ convenient time ought to be
discerned^ laid hold on thereunto. Eccles. 3.1. (...) every thing there is a
season, and a time to (...) purpose under the heaven, etc.

II. REAS. Because seasonable perform^^ces of any businesses taken in hand, do
m^^ beautify and adorn the same. Eccles. 3.1. God has made every thing
beautiful in his ti^^ Prove. 15.23. A word spoken in due season (...) good is
it?

OBSERVE. When in Scripture the peo^^^ of God are required to do any duty
(...) ways, or continually; viz. 1 Thessalonians. 5.^ 17. Rejoice evermore. Pray
without ceasing, (...) The meaning seems to be that thank^^^ving and prayer,
and other religious duti^^^ and exercises, ought to be performed at s^^sonable
and fitting times for performa^^^ thereof. Otherwise the duties of their
p^^ticular callings would be wholly interrup^ and neglected, which yet are
allowed (...) enjoined to be done. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Alb^^ these are not to be
left undone. Math. 2^* 23. Allus. For as Mephibosheth his ea^^^ ^read
continually at David's table, 2 Samuel 9.7. ^mported that he did eat every day at
Da^ids table, at usual meale-times, or at the ^ccustomed times of eating: so
it is in this ^ase also of time for religious duties, viz. in ^he seasons
thereof.

XXII. PROPOSITION. Morning and Evening are the most seasonable and fitting
times of every day for the performance of the religious duties of prayer. and
Scripture-exercises above mentioned.
PROOF. God the Father who has put ^he times and seasons in his own power,
Act. 1.7. did appoint the morning and the ^vening for his service, day by day,
even his ^aily burnt offering of two lambs, Numb. ^8.4. The one lamb shall
thou offer in the mor^ing, and the other lamb shall thou offer at even, etc.
And accordingly the godly, who have ^ehaved themselves wisely in their ways,
^ave ordered their course. See Psalm. 5.3. My voice shall thou hear in the
morning, O Lord, ^n the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee. Psalm. 141.2.
Let my prayer be set forth before thee ^s incense; and the lifting up of my
hands as the ^vening sacrifice.

I. REAS. Because the variety of the ^^^casions and affairs of every day, and
the ^^cessities of every night, are such as have (...) of Gods counsel and
encouragement in (...) outgoing of the morning and evening (...) every day and
night; if so they may be m^^^ to rejoice. Now this shall be effected (...) a
seasonable converse with God morning (...) evening every day. See Psalm. 65.2.
O^^^ that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh co^^^ compar. verse. 8. Thou
make the outgoing of (...) morning and evening to rejoice.

II. REAS. Because in the morning u^^ally men's spirits are most fresh and ap^^^
any undertakings, as is implied, Job, 11.^^* So that it is meetest to give unto
God s^^^ first fruits. Allus. Prove. 3.9. Honor (...) Lord with thy substance,
and with the first fr^^^ of all thine increase. And in the evening u^^ally men
are freest from the distractions (...) their worldly businesses and imploymen^^
in regard of darkness overtaking, as is i^plied, Psalm. 104.23. And in that
respect (...) freest at such time for Gods service. S^^^ Psalm. 3. verse. 4, 5. I
cried unto the Lord with (...) voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill.
Sel^^^ I laid me down, and slept, etc.

OBSERVE. Prayer and Scripture-exercis^^ morning and evening, are the godly
(...) his keys, to unlock and open for him (...) blessings to be enjoyed in
the day time; and to lock and shut up the discomforts and dangers of the night
season: So that the Sun shall not smite by day, nor the Moon by ^ight. Psalm.
121.6.

XXIII. PROPOSITION. Albeit Prayer and some Scripture-exercise ought to be
conversed in both morning and evening every day; yet in some cases, viz. of
mercy and necessity, there may be an omission thereof: otherwise not.
PROOF. The Passover, that solemn ordinance of God for the Israelites, might
^n some cases be forborne and omitted for time; viz. in case of a journey, or
some uncleanesse, etc. Numb. 9.13. So the religious duties for the day, when
such works do interpose, as the time and occasion will not permit to be
performed, may be omitted at such time. See Math. 12.7. I will have mercy, and
not sacrifice.

I. REAS. Because the Lord God, who ^s the only absolute lawgiver (Isaia.
33.22.) may dispense with his own law as seems good unto himself, and as
sometimes he has done. He dispensed sometime wi^^ the sixth commandment of the
Decalogue* Thou shall not kill; when he appointed Ab^ham to offer up his son
Isaac. See Ge^^ 22.2. And with the eight commandemen^ Thou shall not steal;
when he directed the Israelites to spoil, or rob, the Egyptian See Exodus 3.22.

II. REAS. Because God the Father wh^^ has put the times in his own power,
h^ving an absolute sovereignty over them; (...) is expressed, Psalm. 74.16. The
day is thine, (...) night also is thine; may therefore dispose^ them according
to the will of his ow^ pleasure. See Matthew. 12.8. The son of m^^ Lord, even
of the Sabbath day.

OBSERVE. The Sovereign Lord Go^ may do with his own, what he will Math.
20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do w^^* I will with mine own? He may
appoint the same time to a work of mercy or necessity which he has ordinarily
designed unto the solemn serving of him. See Math. 12.7, 8.

XXIV. PROPOSITION. When by occasion of works of necessity, any one is
necessitate^ to an omission of such religious serving of God in Prayer and
Scripture-exercise, which ought to be performed morning and evening every day;
Then such omission ought notwithstanding to be very grievous, and taken to
heart greatly by him, that is exposed to so great straits.
PROOF. This Proposition is implied in another case intimated by our Savior
Christ when he had foretold the destruction of Jerusalem unto his disciples.
See Math. 24.20. Pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath day. For it would
be grievous to fly on the Sabbath day, consecrated to religious serving of God,
though necessity did compel thereunto; since by such flight there must needs be
an unavoidable omission of the solemn worship of God. So it is in other cases
likewise.

I. REAS. Because through an omission of solemn serving of God, there must
needs be a want of that blessed comfort and reviving, which is wont to be found
in sweet communion with God therein. This is evident from that complaint of
David in his necessitated want of Gods solemn worship, occasioned by Saul's
persecuting of him. Psalm. 63.1, 2. My soul thirsts for thee; my fl^^ longs
for thee; in a dry and thirsty land, who no water is: To see thy power and thy
glory, as have seen thee, in the Sanctuary. There is the same reason for
complaint in regard of necessary omission of solemn serving of God morning and
evening.

II. REAS. Because there is great dange^ of spiritual distemper in the soul
of a Christian, through omission of any daily duty (...) religion. For so the
Apostle Paul gives (...) understand, as it is implied, Hebr. 3.13. But exhort
one another daily, while it is called* To day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin.

OBSERVE. As the want of corporal repa^^ although it be but for a day, will
occasion and cause some faintings of spirits; as is to be seen in that
fainting that was in the people in Saul's army, when they had had no foo^ for
the space of one day: See 1 Samuel 14.2^.29. So likewise in the want of spiritual
repast to be tasted in Gods ordinances, the soul or inward man, will be apt and
ready (...) faintings; as David professes, Psalm. 84.^^ My soul faints for
the courts of the Lord, etc* This is likewise appliable in the case of dai^^
serving of God.

XXV. PROPOSITION. Unjust and slight pretenses of want of leisure, through
some urgent necessity, for performance of religious service at seasonable
times, ought carefully to be taken heed of and avoided.
PROOF. The Prophet Haggai does notably convince the Jews after their return
from the captivity, of gross failing, for a slight excusing their delay of
reedifying the Temple. Hag. 1. verse. 2. Thus speaks the Lord of hosts,
saying, This people say, The time is not come, the time that the Lords house
should be built, etc.

I. REAS. Because vain pretenses and excuses do argue and bewray unsoundnesse
of heart and notorious hypocrisy, which God (the searcher of men's hearts and
ways, Jerem. 17.10.) takes notice of, and convinces, as tending to apostasy.
See 1 Timoth. 4.2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared
with an hot iron.

II. REAS. Because such hypocritical pretenses and excuses will affoard no
solid comfort in the latter end, to such as make use of them; as is noted, Isa.
33.14. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites: who among us shall dwe^^ with the devouring fire? who amongst us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

OBSERVE. It is utterly a fault, to be addicted to excuses; yea it will find out
in du^ time, and cause ruin. It was inexcusable on Saul's part to command the
Priest to withdraw his hand by occasion of an unjust fear of danger. 1 Samuel
14.19. It was the fault of Felix to dismiss the Apostle Paul as he was
preaching, upon a pretense of taking a more convenient season to send for him
again. Act. 24. verse. 25. It was the sin of Jeroboam the son of Nebat (who
made Israel to sin) to hinder the ten tribes from going up to Jerusalem to
worship, pretending it would be too much pains for them. 1 King. 12.28. Thus
it is in all vain and unwarrantable excuses.

XXVI. PROPOSITION. More or less time ought to be spent every day in religious
exercises according to the gifts, state, degree, calling, and condition of
persons, as they shall require, or admit.
PROOF. See Luke 12.48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.

I. REAS. Because God, who dispenses his gifts diversely, even to every one
according to his ability of employing them, viz. giving to one five talents, to
another two, to another one: Math. 25.15. He does accordingly reckon with them.
verse. 19. ibid.

II. REAS. Because God graciously accepts, and abundantly recompenseth the
religious service, that any one does perform in truth and sincerity,
according to his talent, whether it be more or less. See 2 Corinthians. 8.12. For
if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has,
and not according to that he has not.

OBSERVE. In the time of the Ceremonial law the people of God were required to
offer, only as their state and ability would suffer. See an instance hereof in
the case of a woman's purification, Levit. 12.8. If she be not able to bring a
lamb, then she shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the
burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering: and the Priest shall make
an atonement for her, and she shall be clean. Our Savior Christ likewise does
highly value the widows farthing cast into the treasury. Mark. 12. verse. 4^^

XXVII. PROPOSITION. The daily worship and service to be observed unto the
Lord. Morning and Evening, ought t^ be performed by the Famili^^ and households
of the people o^ God.
PROOF. This Proposition may be endently inferred from that prophetical
imprecation, or threatening, Jerem. 10.2^ Power out thy fury upon the Families,
that call (...) upon thy Name. And also from the approved testimony, which God
himself gives un^^ Abraham touching this matter. See G^^^ 18. verse. 19. I
know Abraham, that he will command his children, and his household after him and
they shall keep the way of the Lord.

I. REAS. Because God has made a special covenant of grace with the Families
(...) his people: and therefore he expects a^^ looks for special religious
family duties from them. See Jerem. 31.1. At the same ti^^ says the Lord, will
I be the God of all the famili^^ of Israel, and they shall be my people, etc.

II. REAS. Because the members of the same family, do usually, and for the
mo^^ part share and partake more or less both in the welfare, and in the
miseries of one another mutually. And therefore they ought to use the means
that God has sanctified and ordained for the mutual good and benefit of one
another. Noah and his household were preserved in the Arc. Genesis 7.1, etc. Rahab
and her household were saved at the overthrow of Jericho. Josh. 6.23. Obed-Edom
and his household were blessed because of the Arc. 2 Samuel 6.11, 12. Nabal and
his whole family were in danger of destruction together. 1 Samuel 25.17. Achan
and his household perished together. Josh. 7.24.

OBSERVE. It is remarkable throughout the holy Scriptures, how whole families,
with their Governors, are many times made mention of together. Salvation came
into Zacheus his house, when he became a son of Abraham. Luke 19.9. Cornelius
feared God, and his house. Act. 10.2. Lydia was baptized, and her household.
Act. 16.15. The Jailer with all his house believed. Act. 16.34. Paul baptized
the household of Stephanus. 1 Corinthians. 1.16. The house of Onesiphorus is prayed
for by the Appstle Paul jointly. 2 Timoth. 1.16, etc.

XXVIII. PROPOSITION. Family Duties of religion ought to be performed both
mornin^ and evening, every day, by the whole family of the people o^ God,
jointly, and together.
PROOF. Worthy Joshua, that most vic^^rious General of the Israelites, when h^
had gotten the land of Canaan into the possession, and driven out the
inhabitance professes this for himself, and for his who^^ family; Josh.
24.15. As for me, and my ho^^ we will serve the Lord. And according (...) this
his most pious resolution, the Israeli^^^ do at the same time profess in like
manner. See Josh. 24.16, 17, 18 -- 21 -- 24.

I. REAS. Because every family of the people of God, is, as it were, a little
Church or Congregation of Saints. See Romans 16.^^ Philem. verse. 2. And to the
Church in thy ho^^ Now in a Church-assembly the worship (...) service of
religion ought to be perform by the congregation jointly. See this Ne^^^ 8.1.
And all the people gathered themselves together, as one man, etc. 1 Corinthians.
11.33. Wh^^ ye come together, tarry one for another.

II. REAS. Because God has order the condition of families, for the most pa^^
in such sort, that there is convenient oppo^tunity for the members of the^ to
be prese^^ together morning and evening every day; albeit in other parts of the
day their affairs may call them to be abroad, and severed one from another.
And this may seem to be some reason of that direction, Deuteronomy. 6. verse. 7. Thou
shall teach them, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: that is, both
morning and evening.

OBSERVE. As it was one ordinance of the Passover in the celebration of it,
that it should be eaten in every family by the members of it jointly, and
together: Exodus 12.46. And accordingly it was observed by our Savior Christ,
and his disciples, who were his family: See Math. 26.18, 20. Mark. 14.14, 17,
18. Luke 22.11, 14. So it ought to be in other religious family duties; the
Governor and the rest of the family ought to join together.

XXIX. PROPOSITION. Albeit in prayer and Scripture-exercises, there ought to be
a joining together by the members of the family, morning and evening, every
day, as has been showed in the former Proposition; yet notwithstanding in the
religious exercise of meditation it must be otherwise: viz. The several
members of the family ought to meditate alone and apa^^ by themselves; as
opportunity i^ the day time, or in the night season, serves thereunto.
PROOF. See this in the examples of God servants. Genesis 24.63. Isaac went out
into the field to meditate at eventide. Psalm. 119.14^ David says, Mine eyes
prevent the nigh^ watches; that I might meditate in thy word.

REAS. Because meditation is a work (...) the inward man, or an act of the
mind, a^^ heart, seriously discoursing of this or that and answerably
affected. This is implied Psalm. 19.14. and 45.1. and 49.3. The meditation^ my
heart. And therefore others cannot joy^^ therein. See 1 Corinthians. 2.11. For what
m^^ knows the things of a man, save the spirit of m^^ which is in him?

OBSERVE. If meditation indicted in the inward man of the mind and heart, sha^^
afterward be uttered by word of mouth i^ the presence of others; such an
utterance o^ it, alters and changes the nature of the service; whether it be
in preaching, prayer conference, etc. Since such uttering is the good fruit of
godly meditation of the heart. See Psalm. 45.1. My heart is inditing a good
matter: I speak of the things which I have made touching the King: my tongue
is the pen of a ready writer.

XXX. PROPOSITION. For the more decent, orderly, and edifying performance of
religious family duties morning and evening daily, some one of the Family ought
to be, as it were, the mouth of the rest, going before them in the reading of
the Scripture, and in making their requests known by prayer and supplication
with thanksgiving: And the others of the family ought to testify their assent
only by a reverend and silent attention, and at the end of prayers, saying
Amen, or So be it.
PROOF. See both of these: First, for Scripture-exercise, 2 King. 22.10.
Shaphan read it (the book of the law) before the ki^^ Josiah. Secondly, for
prayer, Act. 27.35. He (the Apostle Paul) gave thanks to God in the presence
of them all: that is, He being in the ship, and to eat something with the rest
o^ the company, was, as it were, their mo^^^ in the requisite thanksgiving at
that time. See also in our Savior Christ's course, when he prayed with his
disciples, John. 17.1. Th^^^ words speak Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven
and said, Father, etc.

I. REAS. Because the Lord, who is a God of order, and not of confusion, does
require a decent and orderly performance (...) religious services, which is
when one speaks, and others keep silence; as the Apostle Paul shows more
fully, 1 Corinthians. chap. 1^ and then concludes thus, verse. 40. Let (...) things
be done decently, and in order.

II. REAS. Because an orderly performance of religious services, is highly
commended and approved as prayse-worthy (...) the practisers and observers
thereof, and indeed matter of special rejoicing to the beholders, and partakers
thereof. See Colos. 2.5. Joying, and beholding your order, etc. The Apostle
Paul rejoiced to behold the come order amongst the Saints at Colosse, an^ gave
good approbation of the same.

OBSERVE. Like as when religious worship and service is performed in the public
and solemn assemblies, or Church-meetings; the Pastor or teacher is as their
mouth to God, and as Gods mouth to them; as is showed unto us, Nehem. 8.5, 6.
And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people (for he was above all
the people) and when he opened it, all the people stood up: And Ezra blessed
the Lord the great God: and all the people answered Amen, Amen, with lifting up
of their hands; etc. So it ought to be in the performance of family duties:
since the families of Christians are, as it were, little Churches; as has been
formerly manifested, Proposit. 28. Reas. 1.

XXXI. PROPOSITION. Yet notwithstanding in the Scripture-exercise of singing of
Psalms, all the members of the family (as well and like as all the members of
the public assembly) ought to lift up their voices together, to make a sweet
spiritual melody, and an holy harmony before the Lord, to the praise of his
glory.
PROOF. Thus the Lord by the prophet Isaiah expressly shows, Isaia. 52.8. W^^
the voice together they shall sing; etc. that is* They shall sing, all of them
together.

I. REAS. Because the lifting up of voice together, and joining together in
singing o^ Psalms, is most pleasing and delightful (...) the Lord; as may be
seen by the graciou^ testimony which he has given of his approbation and
acceptance thereof. See 2 Chro^^ 5.13. It came to pass as the trumpette^ and
singers were as one, to make one soun^ to be heard, in praising and thanking
the Lord: and when they lift up their voice, with the trumpets and cymbals, and
instruments of music, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good, for h^^
mercy endures for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the
house of the Lord.

II. REAS. Because it greatly gladdeth and affects the godly themselves, when
by the lifting up of their voices in singing, they do make a joyful noise
unto the Lord, as it is employed in that saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 95.2. Let
us make a joyful noy^ unto him with Psalms. It seems that the people of God
did apprehend, that spiritual joy was bred, increased, and stirred up by the
melodious noise, which is made in sin^ging of Psalms. See for further proof
of this, that which is advised and exhorted unto Ephesians. 5.18, 19. And as has
been already observed Proposit. 16.

I. OBSERVE. Albeit all the Christian family ought to lift up their voices
together in singing of Psalms, yet some one should begin the tune, for the
better avoiding of confusion. This may be observed from that appointment of
David of the chief Musicians, unto whom the Psalms were committed. See 1 Chronicles. 25.1. and likewise the Titles prefixed unto sundry of the Psalms, To
the chief Musician, Psalm. 4.1, etc.

II. OBSERVE. In case that some of the members of the family cannot read; then
it is most requisite that some one of the family do read the Psalm line after
line, as it is sung, that so all may sing, and be better edified thereby. See 1 Corinthians. 14.26.

XXXII. PROPOSITION. The Governor or master of the family is the fittest
person usually to go before, and to be as the mouth of the rest in
Scripture-exercises, and in expressing and uttering of the petitions,
confessions, and thanksgivings, whi^^ are put up to God in Prayer.
PROOF. This may appear from (...) practice of our Savior Christ, the maste^
his family, leaving us an example tha^ should tread in his steps: 1 John. 2.6.
as^^^ in performing of other family duties, Jo^ 17.1. as in giving of thanks at
the table, (...) at meal time. See Math. 14.19. Looking to heaven, he blessed,
etc.

I. REAS. Because the special charge the family, does belong to the master
governor of it. See Genes. 18. verse. ^ I know Abraham that he will comma^^ his
children, and his household after hi^ etc. Genesis 35. 2, 3. Then Jacob said (...)
his household, and to all that were (...) him, Put away, etc.

II. REAS. Because the governors families are special instruments of bless^^
unto their families, when they do pray (...) them and for them, etc. See this
Job, 1.^ Job sent and sanctified them (his children and rose up early in the
morning, (...) offered burnt offerings according to (...) number of them all.
For Job said, It (...) be that my sons have sinned, and cur^^^ God in their
hearts; Thus did Job continually.

OBSERVE. Without all contradiction the ^esse is blessed of the greater. See
Hebr. 7.7.

XXXIII. PROPOSITION. The Governor of the family who has special abilities
and ^ifts of knowledge, utterance, and memory, may not only read ^he
Scripture, use a form of Ca^echisme, repeat sermons, and ^ray with his family,
but also ^each and instruct them out of ^he holy Scripture.
PROOF. This Proposition is implied, Corinth. 14.35. If [wives] will learn any
thing, let them ask their husbands at home. For ^even hence it may be
concluded, that go^ernours of families at home may instruct and teach all those
that depend on them, ^oth their wives, children, and servants, etc. See also
Deuteronomy. 6. verse. 7. Thou shall teach dili^ently, or whet and sharpen them by
application, and examination, etc.

I. REAS. Because inferior persons in the family, even wives, may in the
family teach their children, and give precepts and laws of instruction to them;
which they ought to learn and submit unto. For so it m^^ inferred from that
divine sentence, Pro^^ 8. Forsake not the law of thy mother. Yea S^mon
records in holy writ the Proph^^ which his mother taught him. See P^^^ 31.1,
etc. Now if inferiors may teach i^ family, much more the superiors and
vernours thereof.

II. REAS. Because the wholesome ^^^vate admonition and instruction of the
^^vernours of families has a powerful v^^ and efficaciousnesse for the
benefit of admonished: for so it is affirmed touching Prove. 6.22. When thou
go it shall leaded then thou sleep it shall keep thee, and when (...)
awakest, it shall talk with thee.

OBSERVE. As every man has recei^^^ the gift, even so ought he to minister
(...) same to others, as a good steward of the ^^nifold grace of God, and in no
sort hide (...) talent in a napkin; etc. See 1 Petr. 4.^ Math. 25.18, etc.

XXXIV. PROPOSITION. Albeit the Governor of the family be the meetest person
(...) go before, in the presence of the rest, in the performance of
fam^ly-duties, as has been showed ^roposit. 32. and may according ^o his gift
teach them, as has ^eene declared, Proposit. 33. ^et notwithstanding if the
said Governor of the family be a pri^ate man only, and not an ap^roved
teacher of the word, then ^e may not presume above his ^ift and calling to
interpret and ^pply the Scriptures, since he is ^^bordinate to the ministerial
^ffice.
PROOF. To this effect the Apostle Paul ^iveth special advertisment and
caution, Romans 12.3. For I say, through the grace given unto men, to every man
that is among you, not to think of himself more high^ly then he ought to
think, but to think soberly, as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith.

I. REAS. Because God himself has ^istinguished and put a difference betwixt
^he gifts and callings of his people: So that therefore they ought to walk
answerably. See 1 Corinthians. 12.4, 5. Now there are di^^ versities of gifts, but
the same Spirit. And there are differences of administration but the same Lord.

II. REAS. Because although any one competently qualified and endowed (...)
gifts, yet he may not presume to mini^^^ until his gifts be approved, and
after app^^bation he do receive a calling. See such ^^rection given touching
Deacons, 1 Timothy* 3.10. Let them be first proved: which se^^ as a president much
rather to such as a^^ exercise their gifts for the spiritual goo^ others,
either in the Church of Family.

OBSERVE. A special calling is req^^^ unto a special dispensation. See Hebr. ^
No man takes this honor unto himself, (...) that is called of God, as was
Aaron.

XXXV. PROPOSITION. The Governor of the fam^^^ in some cases, upon just and
go^^ grounds and reasons moving the^ unto, may lawfully depute (...) substitute
some one in the fam^^^ whom he judges fittest, u^^^ such service and
employment, (...) himself should ordinarily p^^forme and execute: And
con^^quently to perform the duties of ^eligion in his stead; or to be as (...)
were the mouth of the family (...) that service to God.
PROOF. It belonged to Abraham (ac^ording to Gods ordinance, Deuteronomy. 7.3. and as
^e godly have approved themselves, Ruth. ^ verse. 1.) to take a wife for his
son; unto which yet he substituted his servant. See ^ Genesis 24.2, 3, 4. And
Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he
had, Put I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: And I will make thee swear by
the Lord the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shall not take
a wife unto my son, of the daughters of the Canaanites amongst whom I dwell.
But thou shall go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my
son Isaac.

I. REAS. Because all Christians indefi^^^ely, and consequently the several
members (...) families, are members of the mystical ^^dy of Christ, and
therefore in due ways ^ay be useful and serviceable for the good ^^d benefit
of the whole body. See 1 Co^inth. 12.21, 25. And the eye cannot say unto the
hand, I have no need of thee; and again, the head to the feet, I have need of
you. The members should (...) the same care one for another.

II. REAS. Because under one case ab^^ doing of any thing expressed in the
(...) Scripture, all cases of the like nature may comprehended. For so our
Savior Ch^^ does clear this point, in the case of w^^ of mercy and necessity
to be done on (...) Sabbath day. See Math. 12. verse. 1, 2, ^ 5, 7, 11. Luke
13.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. (...) therefore it is lawful for governors of (...)
milies to depute some meet person to (...) performance indifferently, as well as
to (...) performance more specially, if no just ^^ception can be taken
thereunto.

OBSERVE. Cases of such deputation:

1. In greater families (such as are the milies of Princes, Noblemen, Gentle^^
of higher degree, etc.) where there is m^^titude of business, and a great
number inhabitants, they may there have their S^^ wards and deputies. So
Abraham havi^^ large family, Genesis 14.14. he had is Stew^^^ See Genesis 15.2.

II. In case of old age, and weakness body, there may be just occasion to m^^
some use of deputies: Even as Samuel be^^ old, made his sons to be Judges.
(...) 1 Samuel 8.1.

III. Want of good utterance in expressing what is to be said, may require some
use of another to be a spokesman in weightier affairs. As Aaron was Moses his
spokesman, and instead of a mouth unto him. See Exodus 4. verse. 10, 16.

IV. Want of boldness and audacity, arising from a consciousnesse of
weakness, modest bashfulnesse, and unworthiness in any one, may become an
occasion to make use of the assistance of others. As the good Centurion sent
the Elders of the Jews to Christ to intercede for him. See Luke 7.3.

V. In case that a Minister of the Gospel do sojourne in ones family, as
Archippus did in Philemon his house, Philem. verse. 2. it may be convenient in
respect of his gifts, to make use of him for the performance of religious
family duties: since we ought to covet the best gifts. 1 Corinthians. 12.31.

VI. In case of the necessary absence of the Governor of the family for some
time, there may be a use of some one of the family to be deputed by him unto
the performance of the duties: As the Apostle Paul made Timotheus his deputy to
the Christian Thessalonians. See 1 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. etc.

XXXVI. PROPOSITION. If the Governor of the family be remiss, or careless,
and d^^ want zeal to perform fami^^ duties in his own person, b^^ yet can be
prevailed with by (...) wife, or some other, to give w^^ thereunto: Then ought
some (...) gifted for the work, to put t^^^ same forward by setting upon the
performance thereof, havi^^ the approbation of the said g^vernour.
PROOF. As the noble Shunamitish (...) man did in another case go to the man
God, having with some importunity p^^vailed with her husband for consent, al^^^
he was not free thereunto: see 2 King. 4.1^ 23. So it may be done herein. See
Prop^^^ sit. 35. Reas. 2.

I. REAS. Because it is matter of joy wh^^ the work and duty which God has
a^pointed to be done, is promoted by (...) means whatsoever, seem it never so
(...) likely. This is implied in another case by (...) Apostle Paul. See
Philip. 1.18. Wh^^ then? Notwithstanding every way, whether in p^^tence, or in
truth, Christ is preached, and l^^^ therein rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

II. REAS. Because a discreet and zealous course in such kind is a probable
means to win the Governor of the family, through Gods blessing, to set upon
the exercise and practice thereof himself in due time, as it is implied, 1
Pet. 3.1. Husbands that obey not the word, may without the word be won by the
conversation of the wives.

OBSERVE. Albeit it be some dishonor, and may justly occasion shame, when
Governors in the Commonwealth, Church, or family, failing in what is meet to
be done by them, are outstripped in zeal by inferiors; yet God does approve
and accept the service both of the one, and the other, joining together in
duty. See Judge. 4.8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 30.15.

XXXVII. PROPOSITION. If the Governor of the family be froward and refractary,
and neither will observe, nor allow, nor permit the exercise and practice of
religious duties, in the presence of the whole family, jointly and together:
Then the several members of the family, that fear God, ought to redeem some
times thereto, apart b^ themselves, with as good convenience as possibly they
can.
PROOF. Queen Esther, albeit she co^^ not expect that King Ahashuerus wo^^
allow openly in his house a setting upon (...) religious exercise of prayer and
fasting, according to occasion, but rather that (...) would be wholly averse
thereunto; yet (...) resolved that she would not be wanti^^ therein in her own
particular, nor when she had any power. See Esth. 4.16. I (...) and my maidens
will fast, etc. Good Obad^^ the servant of King Ahab, in another case
considering what was meet to be done (...) the evil times in which he lived,
approve himself as became him, notwithstanding Ahab the King, and Jezebel the
Queen were averse, and contrary minded. S^^ 1 King. 18.13. Prudent Abigail, the
wife (...) Nabal, did in another case as became he although her husband was a
froward a^^ foolish profane man, even a son of Beli^^ as it appears, 1 Samuel
25.23, 24, 25, 26, etc.

I. REAS. Because every one ought to a prove his own ways to God. See Gal.
6.4. Let every one prove his own works; etc. For there is a possibility for
Christians that are discreet and zealous, to walk as becomes Saints, even in
wicked families. There were Saints in that tyrannous and persecuting Emperor
Nero his house. See Philip. 4.22.

II. REAS. Because it may come to pass through Gods abundant mercy and
gracious dispensation, that the whole family may fare better for their sakes
who do behave and demean themselves therein religiously, walking in all the
ways of God: Even as the Lord blessed the house of Potiphar the Egyptian for
pious Joseph his sake. See Genesis 39.5.

OBSERVE. It need not seem strange that the reasonable service of God, as it is
styled, Romans 12.1. does sometimes meet with opposition from unreasonable and
wicked men, fith all men have not faith, as it is implied 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. But yet
in such cases the work of God ought to be put forward notwithstanding. See
this Act. 4.19, 20. and chap. 5.20, 21.

XXXVIII. PROPOSITION. Every member of a Christian family, who fears God
(notwithstanding his partaking and joining in the family-exercises both morning
and evening, every day) ought to perform some religious duty unto God daily i^
secret and alone, as occasion offers, and opportunity will mo^^ conveniently
permit so to do.
PROOF. This is implied in the direction given by our Savior Christ, Math.
6.^^ When thou prayest enter into thy closet, etc. tha^ is to say, When thou
prayest privately, a^^ do not join with others in prayer, the enter into
thy closet, or take some secr^^ place thereunto, etc. And answerable here unto
was Christ's own practice, redeeming some time to private prayer. See Mark. 1.
verse. 35.

I. REAS. Because every Christian man ought to do something himself, for the
stirring up of the gift of God that is in him: 2 Timoth. 1.6. since he is to
live by his ow^^ faith, Hab. 2.4. and must have his joy i^ himself alone, and
not in another. Gal. 6.4. See 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, etc.

II. REAS. Because every member of the family may have some particular cases,
or special occasions of their own, which peradventure either are not known,
or else, it may be, are not meet to be mentioned by him, that utters the
requests and supplications of the family: for so it seems, it was in Hannah
her case, since it had not been convenient that Elkanah her husband in the
presence of Peninnah, and the rest of the family, should have uttered her
petition at that time: Neither did Eli the priest understand or know what her
condition was. See 1 Samuel 1.10, etc.

OBSERVE. A performance of religious duties by particular persons in secret and
apart (Zach. 12.12, 13, 14.) tends notably to good evidence and comfortable
assurance (which requires special diligence to be given unto it, 2 Pet.
1.10.) of the truth and sincerity of their hearts, and that there is no guile
nor hypocrisy in their spirits; as it is intimated in our Savior Christ his
directions and encouragements unto secret prayer and fasting, etc. See Math.
6.6 -- 18.

XXXIX. PROPOSITION. Albeit morning and evening every day, being the fittest
seasons for the performance of family duties (as has been already showed)
ought therefore to be observed; as likewise some ti^^ ought to be redeemed to a
priva^^ course; yet upon extraordinar^ occasions, and as opportuni^^ serves
thereunto, Christian families or persons may, yea an^ ought to exercise
themselves i^ prayer, and in the word, an^ other Spiritual duties, severa^
times on a day, and sometime whole days together.
PROOF. Thus David professes of himself: See Psa. 55.17. Evening and morning
and (...) noone will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hea^^ my voice. Psalm.
119.164. Seven times a day (...) I praise thee, because of thy righteous
judgment. Daniel the Prophet, a man greatly beloved did thus approve himself
on the extraordinary occasions of evil times. See Dan. 6.10. Now when Daniel
knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house; and his windows
being open in his chambe^ toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three
times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.
And when he understood by reading in the book of the Prophet Jeremiah, the
number of the years determined touching the desolations of Jerusalem, he
prayed a whole day, continuing therein, even to the evening. See Dan. 9.2, 3 --
21.

I. REAS. Because extraordinary causes and occasions do require and call for
extraordinary services of prayer, and exercise in the word. See Isaia. 22.1 --
12. when there was a burden of the valley of vision -- In that day the Lord
called to suitable demeaning of themselves. And thus the godly brethren have
been wont to order their course. See Act. 12.5. When Peter was kept in prison,
Prayer was made of the Church unto God without ceasing for him.

II. REAS. Because otherwise God will have a controversy with his people; since
it is some sleighting, contempt, and controlement of his infinite wisdom, and
other his divine attributes according to his diverse manner of working; when a
proportioned and answerable deportment is not observed. For so the Lord God
professes himself, Isaia. 22.14. Surely this inquity (of unsuitable walking)
shall not be purged till ye dye, says the Lord of hosts.

OBSERVE. The people of God ought to be, and are in their measure zealously
affected, Tit. 2.14. Revel. 3.19. John, 2.17. 2 Cor. 7.11. that is to say, such
whose affections and p^^tises are enlarged and increased according just objects
and occasions offering themselves. See Gal. 4.18. It is good to be zeal^^
affected always in a good thing, etc. And therefore according to just occasion
may and o^^ to enlarge their religious services, and t^^^ more time thereunto.
See 2 Chronicles. 30.^^ And the whole assembly took counsel to keep o^^^ seven
days: and they kept other seven days (...) gladness.

XL. PROPOSITION. Moreover, it is not only lawfu^^^ and expedient, but also
usef^^^ and necessary, that the governor of a family sometimes, (...)
extraordinary occasions require and opportunities serve thereunto, do call for
and crave the company and assistance of some godly brethren and Christian
neighbors, for the more solemn performance of religion duties together.
PROOF. It having been an usual coun^ in the primitive Churches, planted by
the Apostles in the purest times, that godly neighbors did come and meet
together for their mutual edification, as occasion served, but as it seems,
being begun to be neglected by some of the^; the Apostle Paul therefore
endeavors to quicken and stir them up again thereunto, in that his most
effectual exhortation, Hebr. 10.24, 25. Let us consider one another to provoke
unto love, and to good works: Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves
together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the
more, as ye see the day approaching. And this duty is implied also in an
admonition given by the Apostle James, chap. 5. verse. 16. Confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for another. For how could the duty of mutual
confession, accompained with mutual prayer, be performed, unless there had
been a meeting together to such end and purpose?

I. REAS. Because it is lawful and may be requisite upon special or
extraordinary occasion to invite and call friends and neighbors to rejoice and
feast together, as appears by that which is written of our Savior Christ and
his Disciples, who being called to a marriage feast in Cana of Galilee, were
present at it. See the history, John, 2.1, 2. And the third day there was a
marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there: A^^ both Jesus
was called, and his disciples, to the ^^^riage, etc. Therefore also upon
special (...) extraordinary occasion, it is lawful to in^^^ Christian friends
and neighbors to (...) mournfully and to pray together: For th^^ is the same
reason of contraries. This argument is excellently illustrated in that demand,
and answer to it, propounded, Ma^^ 9. verse. 15. Can the children of the bride
chamber mourn, as long as the bride groom is with them? But the days (...)
come when the bridegroom shall be tak^^ from them, and then shall they fast.
(...) that hence it follows, that according (...) occasion justly offered, as
friends and neighbors may feast and rejoice together; so likewise according to
occasion they may fast (...) pray together. For it is a divine advise a^^
monition, Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them (...) rejoice, and weep with them that
weep.

II. REAS. Because it may sometime come to pass that one family is too little
s^^ the performance of some kinds of religion services to God. Thus God
himself (...) suppose and foresee it might happen in the celebration of the
Passover, and therefore it was one of his ordinances in the institution
thereof, that there should be some assistance accordingly. See Exodus 12. verse.
4. And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbor
next unto his house, take it according to the number of the souls: every man
according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb. As it was in the
Passover, so on like occasions it might be in other services.

III. REAS. Because God does graciously accept, and is very well pleased with
all those who do apply themselves, to edify one another in the ways of
godliness; as it is most remarkably expressed, Malach. 3.16, 17. Then they
that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and
heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that
feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. And they shall be mine, says
the Lord of hosts, in the day when I make up my jewels, and I will spare them,
as a man spares his son that serves him. See also Math. 18.20. Where two or
three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them; says
our Lord Jesus Christ.

I. OBSERVE. The more weighty and extraordinary any employment and service for
God is, the more need there is of help and assistance; even as Moses his
father in law does convince and persuade at large, Ex^^ 18. verse. 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23* 24, 25, 26. And accordingly the godly-wi^^ have
been wont to menage their weigh^ affairs. See Judge. 1.3. And Judah said^
Simeon his brother, come up with (...) into my lot, that we may fight against
t^^ Canaanites, and I likewise will go wi^^ thee into thy lot. So Simeon went
wi^^ him. and verse. 17. And Judah went with S^^meon his brother, and they slew,
etc.

II. OBSERVE. Two are better then one, bec^^^^ they have a good reward for their
labor. For (...) they fall, the one will lift up his fellow, but wo^^^ him
that is alone, when he falls, for he has (...) another to lift him up.
Again, if two lie together (...) then they have heat, but how can one be wa^^^
alone? And if one prevail against him, two sh^^^ withstand him; and a
threefold coard is not quick^^ broken. See Eccles. 4.9, 10, 11, 12.

XLI. PROPOSITION. Religious fasting is a singular help and means, ordained
by God, to promote and further a due performance of the extraordinary
occasional services of prayer and exercise in the Word
PROOF. This is expressly set down Joel, 1.14. Sanctify ye a fast, etc. See
also Joel, 2.12. Turn ye to me, says the Lord, with all your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. And according to this ordinance
the people of God have been wont to frame their course. See Dan. 9.3. And I set
my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer, and supplications, with fasting,
and sackcloth, and ashes, etc. 2. Sam. 12.16. David therefore besought God for
the child, and David fasted and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

I. REAS. Because fasting (being an abstinence from all the helps and comforts
of this life, so far as necessity and decency will suffer, as is to be seen,
Levit. 23.28. Exodus 33.5. Dan. 10.3.) does argue and imply a self accusing,
and self judging in a holy revenge, so as the heart is thereby wrought to
humiliation, and stirred up to devotion. See this in Nehemiah and Cornelius,
who when they fasted, were thereby quickened to pray more fervently and
effectually, upon their special occasions, as appears, Nehem. 1.4. and Act.
10.30.

II. REAS. Because fasting and prayer are most powerful means to effect some
things of great and weighty consequence, and that otherwise cannot be brought
to pass. An instance hereof is rendered by our Savio^ Christ in the case of
some possession by t^^ Devil. See Mark. 9.29. This kind can (...) forth by
nothing, but by prayer and fasting.

OBSERVE. A putting on sackcloth (...) ashes, a renting of clothes, a falling
dow^ to the ground on the face, etc. used by so^^ in their fastings, were such
customs (...) fashions, as some people in some countre^^ in former ages, did
many times use to (...) press their grief by; but were no way peculiar to
Gods worship, nor yet appropriated thereunto. See 2 King. 5.7, 8. and cha^
11.14. And therefore Christians in th^^ days of the Gospel are in no sort
bound^ the use thereof; who yet are bound to ex^^cise fasting and prayer,
according to oc^^sion; since it is a divine ordinance as well (...) the new
Testament, as it was for the old.

XLII. PROPOSITION. Religious fasting being such a^ excellent and quickening
help (...) devotion, as has been dec^^red in the former Proposition may and
ought therefore to b^ exercised by godly families, and sometimes with their
assistant (as has been showed likewise formerly) according to the
extraordinary causes and occasions that do move and call thereunto.
PROOF. Queen Esther, as is seems, was very well instructed and grounded in
the ^nowledge of this practical point of doc^rine, as appears by her prudent
and religious direction and charge she gave to her ^ncle Mordecai touching the
same. See Esther, 4.16. Go gather together all the Jews that are present in
Shusan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or
day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise, and so I will go in unto the
King, which is not according to the law, and if I perish I perish.

I. REAS. Because if heavy judgments and overflowing calamities do invade and
take hold on a nation, country, or family, through a general neglect of being
seriously humbled, and seeking the Lord, as being ^he means of preventing or
removing the said judgments and calamities; yet notwithstanding godly
Christians that do walk in their families religiously mournful as becomes
them, shall have the mourners mark set on their foreheads; and consequently
shall prevail for the sparing of their fam^^^ and friends; or at least for
their own de^^verance. See Ezekiel. 9.4. And the L^^^ said unto him, Go through
the mid^^^ of the city, through the midst of Jer^^^lem, and set a mark upon
the foreh^^^ of the men that sigh, and that cry for all (...) abominations that
are done in the (...) thereof. This may be seen in a few in^^^^ces of some
blessed effects of such co^^^^ I. Noah walking with God in evil time^ he and
his family was saved from perish^^^ in the universal deluge. Genesis 7.1, (...)
II. Lot with his was spared in that fea^^^ destruction of Sodom, 2 Pet. 2.7,
8. thro^^^ the intercession of his friend Abraham. (...) Genesis 19.29. III.
Baruch walking mou^^^ fully had his life given him for a prey in^^^ places
where he should come. Jerem. 4^.^^

II. REAS. Because if families profess^^^ godliness do not humble themselves
(...) the sins of the times, and for judgme^^^ which are the fruit of sins;
then they (...) in great danger to partake of the puni^^ments, and to receive
of the plagues, when with transgressors are wont to be scourge^ as may appear
at large, Amos, 6.1, 2, 3, ^ 5, 6. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, etc.
(...) they are not greived for the affliction of Iose^^ that is to say, Such in
the Church as (...) ^^t to heart (so as to walk mournfully) ^e sins of the
Church, and miseries over^king it, shall be exposed to woe and judg^ent.

OBSERVE. It seems to be more then ^obable that there were so many Jews in
^^usan (See Esther, 9.15.) as could not ^^semble or gather together in any one
place according to Esthers appointment: Esth. 4. (...) 6. specially considering
the danger that in ^^l likelihoode might have ensued at that ^^me, matters
standing as they then did: But ^ther their meeting was private in some
^onvenient houses or families, where least ^otice might be taken of them; and
yet that ^^ere were competent numbers assembled ^^gether both to excite and
also to assist one ^^other in that weighty and serious exercise ^^f religious
fasting and humiliation.

XLIII. PROPOSITION. Extraordinary causes and occasions of more solemn seeking
of God by prayer and fasting, and of being more seriously humbled before him,
are either I. When ^ome notorious wickedness and gross sin is committed in
the land or family; II. Or when so^^ fearful and grievous judgment (...)
imminent, and ready to surprise^ III. Or when some heavy calamity is already
inflicted and executed; IV. Or when some important and weighty affairs a^^ to
be taken in hand, and go^^ about; V. Or when some choy^^ and special blessings
are desired (...) and sought after.
PROOF. I. The notorious and odio^^ sin of the Jews in making strange
man^ges, after their return from the Baby l^nish captivity, was a cause and
occasion^ Ezra his approved solemn humiliation, (...) he himself professes,
Ezra, 9.3, 5, ^ When I heard this thing, I rent my g^^ment and my mantle, etc.
I fell on (...) knees, and spread out my hands unto the Lord my God. And said,
O my God (...) am ashamed, etc.

II. The good King Jehoshapat saw special cause of an extraordinary seeking
the Lord by prayer and fasting, when he hea^^ of certain potent enemies that
were con^^derate and came against Judah. See 2 Chronicles. 20.2, 3. Then there came
some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There comes a great multitude against
thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria, and behold, they be in
Hazazon-Tamar, which is Engedi. And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to
seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah, etc.

III. God complains of the Israelites again and again sundry times, that he
ha^ing executed judgment after judgment upon them, even famine, drought,
mildew, worms, pestilence, sword, fire, etc. yet they were not deeply humbled.
See Amos, 4.6, 8, 9, 10, 11. Yet ye have not returned to me, says the Lord.

IV. Upon occasion of weighty affairs there is ground for such course, as
these instances do show: First, Ezra going from Babylon to Jerusalem to
reedify the Temple, which was an important business, proclaimed a fast. See
Ezra, 8.21. Then I proclaimed a fast there at the river Ahava, that we ^ight
afflict our selves before our God, to seek of ^im a right way for us, and for
our little ones, and for all our substance. Secondly, when the great work of
the ministry was to be specially gone about. See Act. 13.2, 3. The holy Ghost
said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called
them. And (...) they had fasted and prayed, and laid their h^^^ on them, they
sent them away.

V. Gracious hannah, the wife of El^^nah, in the want of a special blessing
wh^^ she much desired, even a son; it is no^^ thus of her, 1 Samuel 1.10, 11.
She was (...) bitterness of soul, and prayed unto (...) Lord, and wept sore.
And she vow^^ vow, and said, O Lord of hosts, if th^^ wilt indeed look on the
affliction of (...) handmaid, and remember me, and (...) forget thine handmaid,
but wilt give u^^^ thine handmaid a manchild, etc.

I. REAS. Because there is a great dif^^^rence of the things mentioned as
extraor^^nary, even in Gods own estimate and ^^count of them, and therefore
ought acco^dingly to be regarded by us. For,

I. Some sins are esteemed by him m^^ crying and heinous then others. See G^^
18.20. And the Lord said, Because the cry (...) Sodom and Gomorrah is great,
and because t^^ sin is very grievous, etc. True it is, God ^^^teth all sin
and iniquity with a perfect ^^tred. See Psalm. 5.4, 5. Hab. 1.13. Yet he hate^^
some sins with a more special hatre^^ Deuteronomy. 16.22. Psalm. 11.5.

II. Some judgments are in Gods estee^ more heavy, albeit he would have none
(...) ^his proceedings in judgment to be slighted. See Ezekiel. 14.21. For thus
says the Lord, How much more when I shall send my four sore judgments upon
Jerusalem; the sword, and the famine, and the noisome beast, and the
pestilence, to cut of from it man and beast?

III. Some blessings which God bestows, he accounts more excellent and
precious then others, albeit there is a real goodness in all his gifts.
James, 1.17. See this in his giving and promising of Isaac unto Abraham his
friend, Genesis 17.21. But my convenant will I stablish with Isaac, which Sarah
shall bear unto thee, etc. See this also in Moses his prophecy touching the
blessing of Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And of Joseph he said, Blessed
of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and
for the deep that coucheth beneath; And for the precious fruits brought forth
by the Sun, and for the precious things put forth by the Moon. And for the
chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the
lasting hills. And for the precious things of the earth, and fullness thereof,
and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush. Let the blessing come upon
the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from
his brethr^^ His glory is like the firstling of his b^ lock, and his horns
are like the hon^^^ of Unicornes: with them he shall p^^^ the people together,
to the ends of (...) earth: and they are the ten thousands (...) Ephraim, and
they are the thousands (...) Manasseh.

I. REAS. Because there is a great dif^^rence of the things mentioned as
extraord^nary, in regard of their greater or lesser consequence to the people
of God, and in su^^^ respect ought to be accordingly esteem^ and regarded. For,

I. Some sins are more polluting (...) wounding to their souls, albeit every
sin^ in it kind polluteth and hurts. And th^^ David intimates in that his
penitenti^^ Psalm, deprecating Gods displeasure to^ching his foul murder of
Uriah by the Ammonites, according to his direction See Psalm. 51.14. Deliver me
from blood-gu^nesse, O God, thou God of my salvation: (...) my tongue shall
sing aloud of thy righteousness.

II. Some crosses and afflictions are m^^ sharp and piercing unto them, then
(...) others; viz. The loss and taking aw^^ of their children; as it is
implied in the amplified denunciation thereof, Ezekiel. 2^ verse. 25. Also thou
son of man, shall it not (...) in the day, when I take from them their
strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon
they set their minds, their sons, and their daughters, etc. Parents in such
cases are wont to be most disconsolate. See Genesis 37.35. Jerem. 31.15. Zach.
12.10.

III. Some blessings do more affect them then others, as is easily observable
in Abraham's speech, Genesis 15.2, 3. And Abram said, Lord God what will thou give
me, seeing I go childlesse? And the steward of my house, is this Eliezer of
Damascus. And Abram said, behold to me thou have given no seed: and lo, one
borne in my house is my heir. It seems hence that Abraham preferred the
having of a child before his great wealth, and his flourishing outward
condition.

OBSERVE. The people of God having their eyes in their head, Eccles. 2.14. being
furnished in their measure with the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the
Lord; are made quick of understanding in the fear of the Lord, to judge
impartially, and with righteousness, Isaia. 11.2, 3, 4. Yea they discern both
time and judgment which is to every purpose, Eccles. 8.5, 6. And they guide
their affairs with discretion, Psalm. 112.5. according to occasions, Romans
12.15, etc.

XLIV. PROPOSITION. As causes and occasions of extraordinary religious services
man happen or fall out, and continue for some time, accordingly the^ ought to
be more frequent and renewed answerable courses hel^ in the performance of the
said religious duties.
PROOF. In this sort the weldisposed I^raelites demeaned and approved
themselves, as occasion required: For when the Be^^mites their enemies
prevailed several time against them; they accordingly several da^^ sought the
Lord, and wept and fasted before him. See the history, Judge. 20.23, 26, etc See
this also in Amos his iterated course (...) prayer, according to occasion of
iterate and continued judgments of grasshoppers and fire, etc. Amos, 7.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6.

I. REAS. Because a continuing and persevering in an iterated and renewed
cour^^ of supplicating the Lord, will argue an^ witness a sensiblenesse and
due apprehensio^ of his proceedings in the way of his judgments. See Psalm.
80.3, 7, 19. The people of God being in great distress and troubl^ of long
continuance, they do oftentimes renew the same prayers, and in a holy manner
complain in this wise, verse. 4. How long will thou be angry against the prayer
of thy people? In which complaint or expostulation of theirs, there are these
particulars intimated: viz. 1. Gods displeasure was great against his people at
that time. 2. They were very sensible of Gods so great displeasure. 3. They did
deprecate, and seek by prayer the turning of Gods wrath from them. 4. They often
renewed their prayer, whilst his displeasure seemed to continue.

II. REAS. Because renewed and iterated importunity is very prevalent for
obteining grace and help at Gods hands in time of need. For so our Savior
Christ teaches in his parable of the importunate widow, propounded for this
same end. See Luke 18.1, 2, etc. And he spoke a parable to them to this end,
that men ought always to pray, and not to faint, Saying, There was in a city
a Judge, which, etc.

OBSERVE. There is a mark and brand of infamy and disgrace set upon King Ahaz,
for his incorrigiblenesse and impenitency, albeit he was again and again
distressed greatly. See 2 Chronicles. 28.22. And in the time of this distress, did
he trespass yet more against the Lord: This is that King Ahaz.

XLV. PROPOSITION. As the sanctifying and religious observing of the Sabbath
day, does not exempt and excuse Christians from the performance of some
religious duties upon the six working days (as it has been showed and
proved above, Proposit. 7.) so neither does the performance of some religious
duties on the six working days morning and evening usually, and at other
times of the day, or whole days occasionally, give any exemption or liberty
unto them, from their sanctifying o^ the Sabbath day wholly: But they are bound
to keep the Sabbath day holy, both in a forbearance of all civil works and
recreations; and also in an applying of themselves to pious services throughout
the day, either in public or private, or secret, as occasion and opportunity
serves.
PROOF. This is the maine scope of the fourth commandment of the Decalogue,
Exodus 20.8, 10. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. -- In it thou shall
not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant,
nor thy maidservant, etc. And thus the godly have been wont to approve
themselves, both in the old and new Testament. See this in the religious
Eunuchs, and sons of strangers, who kept Gods Sabbath, and did not pollute it:
Isaiah, 56.4, 6. The Apostle John being in the Isle called Patmos, was in the
spirit, or spiritually exercised on the Lords day: Revel. 1.10. The disciples
at Troas observed the first day of the week or Lords day, coming together to
the word and Sacrament, and conversing therein throughout the day.

I. REAS. Because the Lord has blessed and hallowed the Sabbath day unto
religious exercises, and propounded his own example to be a president herein.
See Exodus 20.11. And he rested the seventh day: Wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

II. REAS. Because such families as keep the Sabbath day holy, do thereby
declare themselves to be the people of God: for^ hallowing the Sabbath is an
indicant sign of acknowledgment of respect unto the affirmative parts of the
three first commandments of the first Table; viz. of having the Lord to be
ones God, and worshipping, and honoring him, etc. See Ezekiel. 20.19, 20. I am
the Lord your God: walk in my Statute^, and keep my Judgments, and do them:
And hall^^ my Sabbaths, and they shall be a sign betweene^ and you; that ye may
know that I am the Lord your God.

III. REAS. Because the Lord has made very precious promises to all such as
do conscionably keep and sanctify the Sabbath day. See Isa. 58.13, 14. If
thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy
day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words: Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord,
and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, an^ feed thee
with the heritage of Jacob the father; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken
it. This goodness of God should prevail with his people to fear him, an^
keep his commandments. See Hos. 3.5.

IV. REAS. Because of the severity of God against profaners, and breakers of
the Sabbath day, manifested by his threatening and executing of punishments. See
Jerem. 17.27. But if you will not hearken unto me, to hallow the Sabbath day,
and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the
Sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall
devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. Exodus 35.2.
Whosoever does work therein, shall be put to death. Numb. 15.36. And all the
Congregation brought him (the Sabbath breaker) without the camp, and stoned
him with stones, and he died, as the Lord commanded Moses. This terror of the
Lord should persuade men. See 2 Cor. 5.11.

I. OBSERVE. The law of the Sabbath day is one of the ten commandments, Exodus
34.28. It is one of the laws of nature written in men's hearts, that sufficient
time be taken unto Gods solemn worship; which God according to his infinite
wisdom has appointed and determined shall be one of seven. See Romans 2.14, 15.
Eccles. 3.1. compar. Exodus 20.10, 11. Act. 20.7.

II. OBSERVE. The doing of the works of piety, mercy, and necessity, on the
Sabbath day in a due way, are not any breach or profanation of the day, but
rather such duties as ought to be done, and which do also tend to the
sanctifying thereof; as being agreeab^^ to the mind of God, who is the Lord
(...) the Sabbath day, and will have mercy an^ not sacrifice; inasmuch as he
made the Sabbath for man, and not man for the Sabbath See Math. 12.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. Mark. 2.2^. Luke 13.15, 16.

III. OBSERVE. It is a vain and sinful pretense of Anabaptists and Libertines,
that i^ these days of the Gospel our Christian l^berty freeth us from the
strict observation of any one day of the week unto the Lord, more then any
other of the six, pretending that every day ought to be a Sabbath day to
Christians; alleging and objecting Coloss. 2.16. Hebr. 4.10. in defense of
their error, and so for want of understanding, learning, and stability, do
wrest these, and other places in the Apostle Paul's Epistles, to their own
destruction, as the Apostle Peter shows, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16.

The text, Coloss. 2.16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink,
or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days, is
to be understood of Jewis^ festivities in their several kinds, and not of the
moral Sabbath day. But if the moral Sabbath day be at all meant, then it is
only in respect of observing the last day of the week; since the first day of
the week was now appointed to be observed for the Sab^ath day in the days of
the new Testament. ^ee Act. 20.7. 1 Corinthians. 16.2. Revel. 1.10.

The text Hebr. 4.10. For he that is entered unto his rest, he also has ceased
from his own ^orke, as God did from his, is to be understood ^ouching the
state and condition of the people ^f God, that did live and were under the old
Testament, as well as of their state that do ^ive and are under the new
Testament, and therefore ought not to be restrained unto ^hese days and times
of the Gospel: For so ^he scope and coherence of the text does ^asily and
plainly make manifest to any considerate and judicious reader thereof.

XLVI. PROPOSITION. The religious duties and services which Christian families
ought to observe and attend on the Sabbath day, are chiefly those which ought
to be performed and conversed in, in the public and solemn assemblies of the
Church or Congregation assembled together to such end.
PROOF. The members of the Church at Troas, and other brethren occasion there,
assembled on the first day of the we^^ or Lords day, to join together in the
^^lemne worship of God, besides any ot^^^ course held and observed on the other
(...) days in their general or particular calling See Act. 20.7. And upon the
first day of (...) week, when the disciples came together to br^^^ bread, Paul
preached unto them, etc. This (...) appear likewise from what is noted of
(...) Jewish people, Act. 13.15. And after then ding of the law, and the
Prophets (on the Sabath day, verse. 14.) the rulers of the Synag^^ sent unto
them, saying, Ye men and brethren, ye have any word of exhortation for the
people, (...) on, etc. Act. 15.21. For Moses of old time b^ in every city them
that preach him, being rul^^ the Synagogues, every Sabbath day. Yea he^^ it was
that our Savior Christ's custom (...) (when he fulfilled his ministry in the
d^^^ of his flesh) to go to the Synagogues the Sabbath days. See Luke 4.16.

I. REAS. Because the due keeping of (...) Sabbath day holy, seems to be
specia^ argued and approved by a due frequentl^ of the public assemblies at
the times of ^^lemne worship. This argument may be ^^ferred from the connection
of the two cla^^ses in a direction given by the Lord himself Levit. 26.2. Ye
shall keep my Sabbaths, (...) ^everence my Sanctuary: I am the Lord. As if he
had said, ye shall approve your keeping the Lords Sabbaths by a due respect
unto the public assemblies.

II. REAS. Because public communion in the solemn ordinances of God on the
Sabbath day, is a principal and chief end, though not the only end, of our
union and consociation with particular Churches, since Church-ordinances are of
a public nature, and dispensed by public persons called thereunto. See 1 Cor.
10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which we bless; is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body
of Christ? For we being many, are one bread, and one body: for we are all
partakers of that one bread. The public ordinances conversed in, are as it
were badges of Gods people. See Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto
Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; He has not dealt so with
any nation, etc.

III. REAS. Because of the special blessing which God has appointed unto such
sanctifying the Sabbath day in the public assemblies and Church-meetings. See
Isa. 56, 6, 7. Also the sons of strangers that join themselves to the Lord,
to serve him, and to love the Name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one
that keep the Sabbath from polluting it, and taken hold of my covenant: Even
them will bring to my holy Mountain, and ma^^ them joyful in my house of
Prayer: the burnt-offrings, and their sacrifices sha^^ accepted upon mine
Altar: for my hod shall be called a house of prayer for all people. See also
Psalm. 133.3. In Zion the Lord commanded the blessing: even la^^ for evermore.]
Like as the Prophet Eli^^ went a long journey in the strength of the meat and
drink, which the Angel of Go^ provided for him; 1 King. 19.7, 8. Even^^ the
members of godly families, feedinger their spiritual food dispensed on the
Lord day in the congregation of Saints, may w^^ in the strength of it, till
they appear before the Lord again in Zion the next Sabba^^ day. See Isa.
66.23.

I. OBSERVE. A consociation or joyn^^ together in Church Fellowship, is a me^
eminent, and more worthy relation, the^^ the relation that is in families. See
Act. 2.4^ And the Lord added to the Church daily, such (...) should be saved.
Howbeit that relation whi^^ is in families is a most comfortable and goe^
condition. See Psalm. 68.6. God sets these litary in families, etc.

II. OBSERVE. The solemn and public ordinances to be observed and conversed in
on the Sabbath day, in the Congregation or Church-meeting, are, the Ministry
of the Word; the Administration of Sacraments, if occasion serve thereunto;
Prayers; Distribution to the Poor; and Singing of Psalms. See Act. 2.42. and
20.7. 1 Corinthians. 16.2. Psalm. 92.1. Title.

III. OBSERVE. Such as are conversant in Gods ordinances in the public
assemblies on the Sabbath day, ought to be disposed as one man, attending
seriously the sacred business in hand, not suffering themselves to be taken up
with private reading, prayer, meditation, wandering thoughts, drowsinesse, etc.
See Act. 2.1. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with
one accord in one place. See also Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot when thou go
to the house of God, and be more ready to hear then to give the sacrifices of
fools: for they consider not that they do evil.

IV. OBSERVE. They deceive themselves greatly, who under a pretense of better
profiting themselves in reading of good books at home, and private devotions,
do neglect to converse with God and his people in the public ordinances on
the Sabbath day; as may appear by a consideration of what is written, Romans
10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. 1 Cor. 1.21.
For after that in the wisdom of God, the world b^ wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. 1 Pet.
2.2. As newborn babes desire the sinc^^ milk of the word that ye may grow
thereby. Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even
his prayer shall be abomination.

XLVII. PROPOSITION. Albeit a converse in religious services in the solemn
assemblies of the Church, does in special tend to a sanctifying of the Sabbath
day: Yet the members of Christian families ought likewise to serve God in the
family, and in secret, on the Sabbath day, as opportunity serves thereunto
when they are not employed in public.
PROOF. Our Savior Christ and his family, notwithstanding their respective
frequenting the Synagogues on the Sabbath days; yet after the public
ministry was ended, they also redeemed the time in private unto religious
exercises. This may appear, Math. 12.1. and 13.1. compared with Math. 13.36,
37. Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his
disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of
the field. He answered and said unto them, He that sows the good seed, is the
son of man, etc. See also Mark. 1.21, etc.

I. REAS. Because the Sabbath day ought to be sequestered wholly from a pursuit
of profits and pleasures of this life, and to be spent wholly in holy
exercises, publicly or privately, as the Lord has commanded, Exodus 20.8.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; etc. for here is no exemption nor
exception given to any part of the day, that it should not be sanctified, and
kept holy, as well as the other parts of the day. See also Isaiah, 58.13, 14.

II. REAS. Because a performance of religious exercises in private on the
Sabbath day, tends much unto a better profiting by the administration of the
public ordinances; viz. A preparation in private before the public ordinances
be taken in hand, and prayer, conference, and meditation after the public
ordinances are ended, touching the same, conduce much to a good success
thereof. This is in part implied in Hezekiah the King his prayer and its
success, in the behalf of the people of the Jews at the celebration of the
Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20. -- But Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The
good Lord pardon every one; That prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God
of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary. And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.] See also
for after-course what is recorded, Act. 13.42. Now when the congregation was
broken up, many of the Jews, and religious Proselytes followed Paul and
Barnabas, who speaking to them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God,
etc.

OBSERVE. Such as having conversed with God in the religious use of his public
ordinances, on the Sabbath day, in the assemblies, do go forth after cares,
and riches, and pleasures of this life, as soon as the assemblies are
dismissed, they cannot bring forth fruit unto perfection: as is to be seen in
the state of that sort of unfruitful hearers of the word, who are by our
Savior Christ resembled unto the thorny ground, Luke 8.14. And that which fell
among thorns, are they which when they have heard, go forth, and are choked
with cares, and riches, and pleasures of this life; and bring no fruit to
perfection.

XLVIII. PROPOSITION. All due caution and circumspection ought to be used by
the people of God, for the declining and avoiding of vain and sinister walking
in the performances of religious duties, whether in the congregation, or
family, or in secret, whether the services be ordinary or extraordinary.
PROOF. Such caveat is given by our Savior Christ touching prayer and fasting;
and is appliable likewise unto other religious services. See Math. 6.5. And
when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to
pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corner of the streets, that they
may be seen of men, etc. And ibid. verse. 16. Moreover when ye fast, be not as
the hypocrites, of a sad countenance; for they disfigure their faces, that they
may appear unto men to fast.

I. REAS. Because the Lord is a God that searches the heart, and takes exact
knowledge of the ways of his people, and will reward them accordingly as they
walk in singleness and sincerity of heart, and integrity of conversation. See
Jerem. 17.^ I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, (...) to give every
man according to his ways, and ^^cording to the fruit of his doings. Revel.
2.^ All the Churches shall know, that I am he (...) searches the reins, and
hearts, etc.

II. REAS. Because such cautelous ^^wary sincere walking does tend much the
stopping of the mouths of absurd a^versaries, and to a restraining of their
f^^^ who are apt to traduce and persecute t^^ good ways of the people of God.
See P^o^^ 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, (...) makes even his
enemies to be at peace with his See also 1 Pet. 3.15, 16. But sanctify the L^^^
God in your hearts, and be ready always to g^^^ an answer to every one that
asks you a reason the hope that is in you, with meekness and f^^^ Having a
good conscience, that whereas they sp^^^ evil of you, as of evil doers, they
may be ashe^^ which falsely accuse your good conversation in Chr^^^

OBSERVE. Hypocrites may gain the^ ward of popular applause and reputation upon
a vain and sinister course in religi^^ held by them. See Math. 6.2, 5, 16,
etc. 2 King. 10.15, 16. But such are not accept^^ of God. See 2 Corinthians. 10.18.
For not (...) that commends himself is approved, but what the Lord
commends.

XLIX. PROPOSITION. Special care and regard ought ^^kewise to be had, that
religious duties and services be performed ^y the people of God, both in an
holy and spiritual manner, and ^lso in a due order, according to ^he Lords
own direction and commandment.
PROOF. For so our blessed Savior informed and taught the woman of Samaria.
See John, 4.23. But the hour comes and now is, when the true Worshippers,
shall worship the Father in spirit, and in truth: for the Father seeks such
to worship him. Yea and our Lord and Savior Christ did thus approve himself
by walking according to Gods commandment. See John, 14.31. And as the Father
gave me commandment, even so do I.

I. REAS. Because the Lord God, unto whom religious duties and services ought
to be tendered, is of a spiritual nature, and therefore must be served
spiritually, and in an holy manner, proportioned unto such his incomprehensible
essence. See John, 4. verse. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in spirit, and in truth. 2 Cor. 3.^ The Lord is a Spirit, etc.

II. REAS. Because God has been w^^ severely to punish such as have been
n^^gent and careless to worship and serve (...) after the due order; as King
David by occ^sion acknowledges and makes menti^^^ 1 Chronicles. 15.13. The Lord
our God made a b^^^^^ upon us, for that we sought him not after the (...)
order. And this is also declared by the ^postle Paul, touching some of the
Chur^^ of Corinth, in regard of their coming (...) the Sacrament in an undue
way, 1 Cor. 11.3^ For this cause many are weak and sickly am^^^ you, and many
sleep. See verse. 27, 28, 29.

OBSERVE. A holy and spiritual man^^^ and due order of religious performances,
(...) consists in such qualifications and dispo^^tions as these following;
viz.

I. Understanding, or distinct knowledge in the religious service in hand: 1
Cori^^^^ 14.14, 15. For if I pray in an unknown tong^^ my spirit prays, but
my understanding is (...) fruitful. What is it then? I will pray with the
spirit, and will pray with understanding also: (...) will sing with the spirit,
and will sing with the understanding also.

II. Conscience of God, to sway unto, and in every religious duty; as may be
gathered from the Lords expostulation, Zach. 7.5. When ye fasted and mourned in
the ^^ft and seventh month, even those seventy years, ^^d ye at all fast
unto me, even to me?

III. Sincerity, or truth in performing ^hereof. See Josh. 24.14. Fear the
Lord, and ^^rve him in sincerity and truth.

IV. Faith on God through Christ. See Mark. 11.24. Whatsoever things ye desire,
when ^^e pray, believe that ye receive, etc. See also Hebr. 11.6.

V. Hope, or waiting for the accomplishment of the promises. Psalm. 130.5. I
wait ^or the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word ^oe I hope.

VI. Willingness, or cheerfulness in the service. See what is particularly
said touching works of charity, as being generally ^ppliable in the case in
hand; 2 Corinthians. 9.7. Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let
him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loves a cheerful giver.
See likewise, Deuteronomy. 28.47.

VII. Reverence, and godly fear, or ^rembling. See Hebr. 12.28. Let us have
grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence, and godly fear. See
also Psalm. 2.11.

VIII. Humility; 1 Pet. 5.5. Beclothed with humility, for God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble.

IX. Contrition of heart; Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of God, are a broken
spirit: a broken a contrite heart, O God, thou will not de^^ See also Psalm.
34.18.

X. Poverty of spirit; Isaiah, 66.2. (...) this man will I look, even to him
that is poo^ (...) See also Math. 5.3.

XI. Sense of spiritual wants and weak^^ (...) with a desire of supply; Math.
5. verse. 6. ^^^^sed are they which do hunger and thirst aft^^ ^^^^teousnesse,
etc. See also Isa. 55.1, 2.

XII. Godly sorrow; 2 Corinthians. 7.9. (...) were made sorry after a godly manner.
See (...) Math. 5.4.

XIII. Self accusing; Psalm. 51.3. I ack^^^ledge my transgression. See also
Prove. 28.13.

XIV. Self judging; 1 Corinthians. 11.31. (...) we would judge ourselves, we
should not be jud^^^^^ See also Genesis 32.10.

XV. Fervency of spirit, or holy ze^^ (...) Romans 12.11. Not slothful in
business, fe^^^^^ in spirit, serving the Lord. See also Galat. 4^

XVI. Perseverance, and patient consta^^^^ Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with
all pr^^^^ and supplication in the spirit, and watching th^^^unto with all
perseverance, etc. See also Co^^^ 4. verse. 2.

XVII. Love of God; Exodus 20.6. (...) showing mercy to thousands of them that
lou^ (...) and keep my commandments. See also De^^ (...) 7. verse. 9.

XVIII. Love of Neighbor; 1 Corinthians. ^3.1. Though I speak with the tongues of
men and (...) Angels, and have not charity, I am become as soun^ing brass, or
a tinckling cimball. See also Ephesians. 5.2.

XIX. An honest and good heart, purified from bad qualities; Luke 8.15. They
which in ^n honest and good heart having heard the word, keep it, etc. See
also 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.

XX. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; Coloss. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in
lord or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, etc. See also Ephesians. 5.20.

L. PROPOSITION. The performance of religious worship and service in the
family, or otherwhere, may not be rested on, or trusted unto, as if the work
done, or duty performed, did, or could commend any one to God for the work
sake: but God is to be depended on only, and his blessing is to be waited for
in his ordinance, and his providence to be served in the use of the means
which he has ordained to (...) walked in.
PROOF. This Proposition may be ^^ferred from an intimation given by the
^postle Paul in another case, 1 Corinthians. 3^ So then neither is he that planteth
any thing ne^^^^^ he that waters: but God that gives the inc^^^^^ And thus
also Solomon observes in his p^^^verbs: See Prove. 10.22. The blessing of (...)
Lord, it makes rich.

I. REAS. Because whatsoever religi^^^ duties and services the people of God
(...) perform unto God according to his w^^^^ it is no more then their duty
enjoined (...) them: For so our Lord Christ teaches (...) confess and
acknowledge. See Luke 17.^^ Ye when ye shall have done all those things
wh^^^^ are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable ^^^vants, we have done that
which was our duty to (...)

II. REAS. Because many and great (...) the weaknesses and polluted
imperfect^^^^ which do adhere and cleave unto the (...) services and
performances of the people (...) God: So that they stand in need of par^^^ and
remission of such miscariage, as has ^^^tended and accompanied them therein.
T^^^ is implied in that advertisment for Aaro^^ and the people, Exodus 28.38.
That A^^ (...) may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which (...) children
of Israel shall hallow, in all their holy gifts. Yea thus the people of God in
their serious and solemn confessions have been wont ingenuously and freely to
acknowledge. See Isaiah, 64.6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, etc. See this also in that deprecation
of worthy Nehemiah, who having done that which for the matter of it was right
in the fight of the Lord, yet being conscious of his imperfections therein,
does therefore crave pardon and mercy from God. Nehem. 13.22. Remember me, O
my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy.

III. REAS. Because so far as any duty and service is performed unto God,
which for matter and manner is wel-pleasing to his divine Majesty, by any of
his servants, the same ought not to be attributed unto themselves, but to the
Lord, who graciously acts and works for them, and in them; as may be seen,
Isa, 26.12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us: for thou also have wrought
all our works in us, or, for us. See also 1 Cor. 4.7. For who makes thee to
differ from another? And what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if
thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?

OBSERVE. Every good performance and disposition thereunto ought to be referred
and attributed to Gods gracious dispe^^tion; as may appear in some instances.

1. The will and the deed are both wrou^^^ by God. See Philip. 2.13. For it is
God wh^ works in you both to will, and to do, of his g^^^ pleasure.

II. The preparation of the heart unto (...) religious duty is of God. See
Psalm. 10.1^ Lord, thou have heard the desire of the hum^^^^ thou will prepare
their heart, thou will cause th^^^ ear to hear.

III. The utterance and wel-ordering (...) what is religiously expressed and
spoken, (...) likewise from the Lord. See Psalm. 51.1^ O Lord open thou my lips,
and my mouth shall (...) forth thy praise.

IV. Help and assistance against infirmiti^^ that do usually assault, and
disfit to reli^^ous duties, is from the Lord; even from (...) Spirit. See Romans
8.26. Likewise the Sp^^^^ also helps our infirmities: for we know not (...)
we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit ^^selfe makes intercession for
us, with groa^^^^^ which cannot be uttered.

V. The faculty and ability to profit (...) any religious course is given by
the Lord. See Isaiah, 48.17. I am the Lord thy God whi^^ teaches thee to
profit, which leads thee by (...) way that thou should go.

VI. The Lord Jesus Christ graciously pe^fumeth the religious services of his
people, that so they may become acceptable to God our Father. See Revel. 8.4.
And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints,
ascended up before God out of the Angels hand.

LI. PROPOSITION. Those families are in a most dangerous and wretched state and
condition, which do wholly fail to serve the Lord in a performance of
family duties.
PROOF. See Jerem. 10.25. Power out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee
not, and upon the families that call not on thy Name. This prophetical
imprecation is as a prediction (...) way of threatening: and it implies that
families that call not on Gods Name, are like unto the heathen, and shall with
them partake in the sense of Gods wrath and displeasure. Now it will be found a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who is a consuming
fire. See Hebr. 10. verse. 31. and 12. verse. 29.

I. REAS. Because a neglect or contempt of calling on the Lords Name, and
serving him, is a sign and token of atheistic all folly and wickedness. See
Psalm. 14. verse. 1 and 4. compared together, viz. The fool has said in (...)
heart, there is no God. -- They call not upon (...) Lord. Yea such neglect and
contempt a^gueth not only some guiltiness, but also (...) high degree of
atheism and desperate p^^fanesse; as may be observed in Pharaoh Ki^^ of Egypt.
See Exodus 5.2. And Pharaoh s^^^ Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice?

II. REAS. Because such families as c^^ not on Gods Name, are most pernicio^^
and hurtful enemies to the Church and S^^^ in which they do abide and
inhabit, (...) being means what in them lies, of the ruin and destruction
thereof; and so d^^ expose themselves to the deserved punishments of destroyers
and murderers. Jere^ 10.25. Power out thy fury upon the f^milies that call not
on thy Name; for th^^ have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him and consumed him,
and have made h^^ habitation desolate.

OBSERVE. All Christian families are (...) alike convinced and persuaded
touching the necessity, nature, and manner of performan^^ of family duties every
day, both morni^^ and evening; as it may fare with them i^ other cases through
their dullness of he^ring. See Hebr. 5.11, 12. Yet such as are perfect, ought
to be minded according to the demonstration above declared, and if in so^^
particulars therein, some families are otherwise minded, God shall reveal this
unto them, walking by the same rule and minding the same thing, so far as
they have already attained. See Philip. 3.15, 16. But if any family among the
people of God have a ^oot that bears gall and wormwood, whose hearts turn
away from the Lord; and it comes to pass, that albeit they have been
convinced by the word of their duty herein, they do nevertheless bless
themselves in their hearts, saying, We shall have peace, though we walk in
the imaginations or stubbornness of our hearts, in a neglect and contempt of
calling on God; The Lord will not spare them, but his anger and jea^ousy shall
smoke against them, yea and his curses denounced in the Scriptures, shall lie
upon them, etc. See Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20, etc.

LII. PROPOSITION. Moreover, such families do ^ustly deserve and incur blame
and reproof, who do perform religious duties and services amiss ^n any kind.
PROOF. The Apostle James taxes and ^eprehendeth the brethren of the twelve
^ribes, for their faultiness and miscariage in performance of prayer. See
James, 4.3. (...) ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, and^*

I. REAS. Because every transgre^^^ does draw on a guilt with it, whether it
(...) in matter, manner, end or circumstanc^^* See James, 2.10. For whosoever
shall keep (...) whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is g^^^^^ of all.

II. REAS. Because the Lord God ^^counteth and judges services perform^^
amiss to be a grand violation of the th^^^ commandment of the first table,
which (...) will therefore severely punish. See E^^^ 20.7. Thou shall not take
the Name of the L^^^ thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold (...)
guililesse that takes his Name in vain.

OBSERVE. Religious services and du^^ are performed amiss when they are do^^
either,

1. Ignorantly, not knowing what is sa^^ or done. Herein the Papists are grossly
sa^^ty, who make use of an unknown langu^^^ in their prayers and service, both
public^^ and privately. Such error the Apostle P^^^noteth, 1 Corinthians. 14.14.
For if I pray i^ (...) unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my ^^derstanding
is unfruitful.

II. Superstitiously, as the Papists likew^^^ transgress, in saying only a
set number (...) words on their beads, without reverenc^^^ feeling,
understanding, etc. much like the babbling heathen. See Math. 6.7. But when ye
pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do; for they think they
shall be heard for their much speaking.

III. Hypocritically, regarding iniquity in the heart, albeit there be a fair
outward deportment. Such performance was prophesied of by Isaiah, and practiced
in the days of our Savior Christ. See Math. 15.7, 8. Ye hypocrites, well did
Esaias prophecy of you, saying, This people draws nigh unto me with their
mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

IV. Profanely, when such as do seem to draw nigh to God, do live
notwithstanding in a course and practice of gross and notorious
transgressions. See this Isaiah, 1.15. And when ye spread forth your hands, I
will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear
you: your hands are full of blood.

V. Deceitfully or negligently: See Jere. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the
work of the Lord deceitfully. See the margent there, in the N. translat.

VI. Unconstantly, for so was the failing of King Joash. See 2 Chronicles. 24. verse.
2 and 17. compared together; Joash did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, all t^^ days of Jehojada, the Priest. -- N^^ after the death of
Jehojada, came the princes of Juda and made obeisance (...) the King: then the
King hearkened u^^^ them, etc.

LIII. PROPOSITION. Neither can such families excuse themselves before the
Lord, when he comes to jugdment, who having opportunity and capacity to
learn to read, and ability and means to procure a Bible in their native
language; yet cannot read, nor have any Bible in their families.
PROOF. Solomon does thus describ^ his fool, who is the wicked man; Prove.
17.16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of (...) fool to get wisdom,
seeing he has no heart to it?

I. REAS. Because they are in no wise answerable to Gods expectation, in the
col^ and means he has bestowed on them; so that it is a righteous thing with
him to be provoked, and to come against them; as it is declared in the parable,
Luke 13.6, 7. A certain man had a figtree planted in his vineyard, and he came
and sought fruit thereon, and found none. Then said he to the dresser of his
vineyard; Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this figtree, and
find none: cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground.

II. REAS. Because unanswerablenesse unto Gods mercies and means vouchsafed
unto any people, does greatly aggravate their sin, and infallibly seal
their punishment. This argument is evidently drawn from our Savior Christ's
upbraiding the cities in which he had frequently and powerfully preached, and
wrought his miracles, to confirm his doctrine: and yet they were unanswerable
through unfruitfulnesse. See Math. 11.21. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee
Bethsaida: for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in
Tire and Zidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.

OBSERVE. It was the high commendation of Mary, given unto her by our Savior
Christ, that she redeemed time unto the one thing needful, when Martha did
cumber her self about much serving, and was troubled about many things. See
Luke 10.42. But one thing is needful; And Mary has chosen that good part,
which shall not be taken away from her.

LIVE. PROPOSITION. Those families likewise are (...) together faulty and
inexcusable* who do walk contrary, and do^ oppose and withstand the goo^
ways of God, walked in by h^^ people, according to the rules (...) Gods word.
PROOF. The Apostle Paul describes (...) complains of such persons, 2
Timoth. 3.^^ Now as Iannes and Iambres withstood M^^^ so do these also resist
the truth: men of cor^^^^ minds, reprobate concerning the faith.

I. REAS. Because God will walk contrary to them, as do walk contrary u^^^
him. See Levit. 26.23, 24, etc. If y^^ will not be reformed, but will walk
contrary unto me; Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you
(...) seven times for your sins, etc.

II. REAS. Because they shall have ^^thing to plead for themselves in the day:
(...) the Lords wrath, but shall remain speec^ less, as it fared with the man
in the parab^^ who came to the wedding without a ne^ding garment: Math. 22.12.
Neither sh^^^ any Advocate be found that will plead (...) them. See 1 Samuel
2.25. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him: but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?

OBSERVE. Such persons may be said to walk contrary, and to withstand the good
ways of God walked in by his people;

I. Either who plot, consult, or take counsel against the people of God, to
do them hurt, because of their sincere religious courses. See Psalm. 83.3. They
have taken counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones.

II. Or observe and watch the people of God in their walking, to get an
advantage some way to ensnare and entangle them: as the Scribes and Pharisees
did our Savior Christ. See Luke 20.20. And they watched him, and sent forth
spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold of his
words, that so they might deliver him to the power and authority of the
Governor.

III. Or who contradict and oppose such wholesome trueths, as the people of God
do hold and profess according to godliness. See Acts, 17. verse. 18. Then
certain Philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoics, encountered him.
And some said, What will this babbler say? othersome, He seems to be a setter
forth of strange gods: because he preached unto the Jesus, and the resurrection.

IV. Or who discourage and greive the people of God by lies; as the Lord
himse^^ by the Prophet Ezekiel complains. S^^ Ezekiel. 13.22. Because with lies
ye have made the heart of the righteous sa^^ whom I have not made sad, and
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that (...) should not return from his
wicked (...) by promising him life, etc.

V. Or who deride and scorn the people of God by mockings and contemptuous
behavior. See this complained of, Psalm, 11* verse. 4. Our soul is exceedingly
filled with (...) scorning of those that are at ease, and with the ^^tempt of
the proud.

VI. Or who traduce and falsely accuse the good ways of God: Either 1. of
hardness as if intolerable, and not to be endured. S^ John, 6.60. This is an
hard saying, (...) can hear it? Or 2. of over strictness; as (...)
prejudicial to liberty: as is implied, Psalm. (...) verse. 3. Let us break
their bands asunder, and (...) away their coards from us. Or 3. of
unprofitablenesse; as if no way beneficial. See Ma^^ 3.14. Ye have said, It
is vain to serve God, (...) what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinances? Or 4. of melancholious pensivnesse; as (...) void of joy and
comfort; as it is implied Eccles. 7.4. The heart of fools is in the house of
mirth. Or 5. of occasion and cause of trouble; as if therefore unsufferable.
See John, 11.48. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and
the Romans shall come, and take away both our place and nation.

VII. Or who slander and falsely accuse the good servants of God; Either 1. of
idleness in their particular callings, when they are employed in the service
of God. See Exodus 5.17. Pharaoh said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye
say, Let us go, and do service to the Lord. Or 2. of indiscretion and
preposterous zeal, bringing shame and disgrace. So Mical censured her husband
King David. See 2 Samuel 6.20. How glorious was the King of Israel to day, who
uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants? etc. Or
3. of madness; as if they were out of their wits. See Act. 26.24. Festus said
with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thy self, much learning does make
thee mad. Or 4. of pride and singularity; as if they were wholly transported
thereby. Thus Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, charged Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.3.
Saying, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy every
one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift you up your selves
above the congregation of the Lord?] Or 5. of hypocrisy; as if they w^^^ not
such indeed, as they do profess the^ selves to be, and are in show. This was
the which Jobs three friends did many ti^^ charge him withal, as may be seen
at larg^ throughout the book of Job. Or 6. of f^tiousnesse and turbulency in
the places when they dwell. Thus were the blessed disciple of Christ accused.
See Act. 16.20. T^^ brought them to the Magistrates, saying, T^^ men being
Jews, do exceedingly trouble our ci^^ and cap. 17.6. These that have turned
the w^^^ up-side-downe, etc. Or 7. of contempt of a^thority; as if they
regarded not magistracy and the laws of Princes. See Act. 17.7. These all do
contrary to the decrees (...) Caesar.] and Dan. 6.13. "Then answer they and
said before the King, That Danie which is of the captivity of the children of
Judah, regards not thee, O King nor the decree that thou have signed, b^^
makes his petition three times a day.

VIII. Or who threaten to inflict punishments on the people of God, that so
the^ may discourage them, if possibly they could do it. See Act. 4.21. So when
they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding nothing how they
might punish them, because (...) the people, etc.

IX. Or who do persecute and inflict punishments on them in several kinds,
viz. in their goods, liberties, and bodies. See Act. 8.3. As for Saul, he made
havocke of the Church, entering into every house, and haling men and women,
committed them to prison. See also 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. Hebr. 11.36.37.

LV. PROPOSITION. Governors of families ought to study and endeavor in a
special manner for cleernesse of knowledge, and soundness of judgment in the
ways and word of God, and to strive unto all godliness of conversation in
their Christian walking; that so they may be approved of God, and not need to
be ashamed in going in and out before their families.
PROOF. The Apostle Paul charge the Evangelist Titus to inculcate this lesson
to the Churches in Crete. See Tit. 2.1, 2. But speak thou the things which
become sound doctrine: That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in
faith, in charity, in patience. See also his cha^^ to Timothy, 2 Timoth. 2.15.
Study to s^^ thy self approved unto God, a workman that ^^deth not to be
ashamed, etc. This instruct^^^ and advise concerns all such persons wh^^ are
to be employed in the work of the Lo^^ in any kind, in their going in and out
before others whosoever: And consequently it c^cerneth governors of Christian
families.

I. REAS. Because such a due qualify frame of spirit, and an answerable
walking will tend much to the preservation of the authority, and to a giving
prevention of contempt of their persons with those who^ they have to do
withal. See a notable proof of this, Mark. 6.20. Herod fe^^ John, knowing
that he was a just man, and an h^^^ and observed him: and when he heard him, he
(...) many things, and heard him gladly. And th^^ the Lord is graciously
pleased to hono^^ them, as do honor him, as he has said 1 Samuel 2.30. Them
that honor me, I will ^^nour; and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

II. REAS. Because otherwise, if they be ignorant, or profane and dissolute, or
remiss and careless in their behavior; the^ their performance of duty, and
service to God in their families, will be much sleighte^ and disregarded, through
an aptness in inferiors to take occasion thence thereunto. This may be seen
in a most remarkable ex^mple, even the sons of old Eli, that were ^he Lords
Priests. See 1 Samuel 2. verse. 12. and 17. compared together. The sons of Eli
were sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord: -- The sin of the young men was
very great before the Lord: for men abhorred the offering of the Lord.

OBSERVE. King Solomon succeeding his father David in the Kingdom of Israel by
Gods designment, and it being offered unto him to ask what he would, and the
same should be granted unto him from the Lord; He very prudently and
providently asked wisdom and knowledge to go out and come in before that
great people of God, as being most behoovfull for him. Now this his petition
was so well approved and accepted of God; that he granted unto him, not only
wisdom and knowledge according to his desire, but also riches, and wealth, and
honor too, such as no Kings before him, or after him had the like. See 2 Chronicles. 1.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

LVI. PROPOSITION. Moreover, Governors of families ought to look to the ways
of their families, and to take co^^ that the members of their ho^^holds do
join in the service God with them.
PROOF. When Jacob was advertised go up to Bethel to dwell there, and to s^^
the Lord; he takes course with his fam^^ that they should join with him there
See this Genesis 35.2, 3. Then Jacob (...) unto his household, and to all that
(...) with him, Put away the strange Gods (...) are among you, and be clean,
and cha^^ your garments, And let us arise, and g^^ up to Bethel, etc.] And thus
renow^^ Joshua approved himself. See Josh. 24.^^ But as for me, and my house,
we will serve (...) Lord.

I. REAS. Because governors of famili^^ are charged to see not only to the
welfare (...) the bodies and outward state of those th^^ belong unto them: See
1 Timoth. 5.8. (...) any provide not for his own, and specially for the of his
own house, he has denied the faith, and worse then an infidel: But they
ought also (...) watch for their souls, by how much the good of their souls
is of greatest value, Se^ Math. 16.26. For what is a man profited, if (...)
shall gain the whole world, and loose his o^^ soul? Or what shall a man give
in exchange for his soul? God gave the fourth commandment to all men, but
specially to Governors of families. Exodus 20.8 -- 10. And we know God had a
controversy with old Eli for the wickedness of his sons. See the story, 1 Samuel 2.29.

II. REAS. Because if governors be careful to do their full endeavor in the
behalf of those of their families in the business of serving God; albeit
possibly they cannot prevail with them so effectually, as were to be wished;
yet they shall in so doing save their own souls. See this implied, Ezekiel.
3.19. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor
from his wicked way, he shall dye in his iniquity; but thou have delivered thy
soul. True it is, this is specially spoken of the Minister; but the governor
of the family may learn his lesson hence, since he has as fully the charge of
his family, as the minister has of the Congregation in this matter.

OBSERVE. It is the wisdom of those that are to be governors of families, to
lay a good foundation for tractablenesse unto religion in those that are to
belong unto them: First, by marrying in the Lord, and living chaste in wedlock,
that there may be an holy seed. See Mal. 2.15. And secondly, by taking heed
whom they do admit to d^^ with them, that they be tractable unto ^^gious
courses. See David's resolution h^^ in. Psalm. 101.6, 7. Mine eyes shall be (...)
the faithful of the land, that they (...) dwell with me: He that walks in
a^fect way, he shall serve me. He that ^^keth deceit, shall not dwell within
(...) house: He that tells lies shall not t^^^ in my sight. Allus. The Lord
in his (...) forbade any Proselyte, to be admitted to (...) Passover (though
he were himself circumcised, and did outwardly profess the fai^^ unless all
the males in his house were c^^cumcised also, and did profess the fa^^ as well
as himself. See Exodus 12.48.

LVII. PROPOSITION. The members and inhabitant^ of Christian families ought to
b^ willing and tractable to joyn^ readily together in the performance of
family duties of religion, and to submit to their governors going out and in
before them therein.
PROOF. This rule of direction is implied in the letter of the first
commandment of ^^e second table of the moral law: Exodus ^0.12. Honor thy
father and thy mother; It is ^^plied also Hebr. 13.17. Obey them that have ^e
Oversight of you, and submit your selves, etc. ^ee Ephesians. 6.1, 2.

I. REAS. Because in such their tractable ^ubmission in the Lord, they shall be a
great ^omfort and encouragment to their governors, who do watch for their
souls, as ^hey that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief, as is ^poken, Hebr. 13.17. See Prove. 23. verse. 24, 25. The father
of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that begets a wise child
shall have joy of him: Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare
thee shall rejoice.

II. REAS. Because unspeakable fruit and benefit shall redound unto them
themselves by such their submission and tractablenesse to their rulers in the
ways of religion. See Prove. 1.8, 9. My son hear the instruction of thy
father, and forsake not the law of thy mother. For they shall be an ornament of
grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.

III. REAS. Because of the encouragment thence to others, the people of God,
who will joy to see their order, See 2 John, verse. 4. I rejoiced greatly that I
found of thy children king in truth, as we have received a commande^ from the
Father.

OBSERVE. Any members of famili^^ even godly servants, may adorn the Gos^ by a
due approving of themselves to t^^ governors. See Titus, 2.10. When through an
undue course of theirs, (...) Name of God, and his doctrine may be ^^phemed; as
is implied, 1 Timoth. 6.1.

LVIII. PROPOSITION. Those Christian families a^^ thrice happy and blessed for
eve^^ more, whose God is the Lord and do fear this glorious a^^ fearful
Name, THE LORD THY GOD, walking in (...) ways, and departing from all in quity.
PROOF. See Psalm. 144.15. Happy is t^^ people that is in such a case: yea
happy is that people whose God is the Lord. See also Psalm. 119.^ Blessed are
the undefiled in the way; who walks the law of the Lord.

REAS. Because they shall have peace as mercy from the Lord, both temporally
spiritually, and eternally. See this Galat. (...). 16. And as many as walk
according to this ^^le, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of
God. Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ^hamed, when I have respect unto all thy
comman^ements. See also Psalm. 125, and 127, and 128. ^holly, being three of the
Psalms of degrees.

OBSERVE. O how it concerns all Christians to exercise themselves unto
godliness! since bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable
unto all things, and has the promises both of this life, and of that which is
to come. See 1 Timothy 4.7, 8.

Revel. 22.20. He which testifies these things, says, Surely, I come quickly.
Amen. Even so, Come Lord Jesus.
FINIS.

