A VISITATION OF LOVE, AND Gentle Greeting OF THE TURK, And tender trial of his
thoughts for God, and proof of the hearts of his Court, and the spirits of the
people round about him, in his own Dominion, and the Inhabitants of the Earth
that are borderers upon his skirts, in their declared Religious ways.

And is a warning to all men that are in the corrupted ways of sin and
iniquity, to repent and turn to the living God, who dwells in the light,
before the Rod of his Vengeance destroys the evil doers of the Nations.

To which is annexed a book, entitled, Immanuel, the Salvation of Israel.

Written in the Will and Countenance of God, by a Servant of the Lord, who am
called by scorners in England, Quaker, and was named in the flesh, JOHN PERROT.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

THen arose up certain of the Elders of the Land, and spoke to all the Assembly
of the people, saying, Micah the Morashite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah
King of Judah, and spoke to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, Zion shall be ploughed like a field, and Jernsalem shall become
heaps, and the Mountain of the House as the high places of the Forest; Did
Hezekiah the King of Judah and all Judah, put him at all to death? Did he not
fear the Lord, and the Lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced
against them? thus might we procure great evil against our souls.

This is recorded in the Book of the Prophisie of JEREMIAH, chap. 26. A
Visitation, Trial, and Warning to repent.
I Am the light of the world, says the Prophet whom God has raised up like
unto Moses, saying, I will raise them up a Prophet from amoug their brethren,
like unto thee, and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto
them all which I shall command him; and it shall come to, pass, that whosoever
will not bearken unto my words which he shall speak in my Name I will require
it of him. He is the true light of the world, the true Prophet, which comes in
the Name of the most high God, that sent him a light into the world, to give
light unto all Nations, that all Nations through him who is the light of the
world, may come to believe and know the Almighty power of the Lord God, who is
working a work in our days, at which the ears of many shall tingle: And in this
his mighty and terrible day which is at hand, he is bringing to pass, to make
many tongues, and languages, and people, and the people of many Nations, of one
heart, and of one mind and soul, and to set up his Standard in Zion, and his
salvation in Jerusalem: And such their Authority and Dominion will he
establish, who seeks in the spirit of pure love and meekness, to see his
Scepter of righteousness lifted over all the Heads of the ungodly, who are out
of the fear of the eternal dreadful God of life, and everlasting power, working
their own works, and establishing their own wills.

And with this voice do I cry unto thee O TURK, who are set over many Regions,
that over many more thou may reign, until all the earth be subdued for thee,
for evermore to stand under thy Authority, the Dominion of the Seed to be over
the whole Earth; being sent of the Almighty God unto thee, and unto thy whole
Nation, with the Message of everlasting Peace in my mouth, which if ye receive*
the Lord my God will be your rewarder in righteousness; and behold, thy honor
shall be made greater, and thy borders enlarged, and great prosperity shall
compass the dwelling of the desolate, the fatherless and the widows, and not
one begging bread shall be in thy Dominion from the one end thereof unto the
other; but all shall see the plentiful day of God, and the seed of the next
generation shall bless the remembrance of thee, and their posterity for ever,
even from one generation to another, shall declare thy memorial, which shall
never be blotted out.

But if otherwise thou resist, and incline not thine ear unto counsel, but
resist the Message of the Lord God of eternal life, and infinite power, behold
I return, (if unto the Tombs of my Fathers) with my peace with me, which God
has given me and no man can take from me, and the hand of the dreadful Lord
God of Hosts will follow me, which Nations shall taste of, in sore displeasure,
that resist my testimony of this Prophet whom I declare is the light of the
world.

Whom I declare, that him who is the light of the world, all Nations may come
to know, that all Nations may worship but one God, and have but one King and
chief authority to rule and reign over them, and that by him who is the light
of the world, you may be taught all things, as from the mouth of the Lord
daily, that no strength may exceed your power, as ye shall know the hand of the
Lord to be with you, and no wisdom like unto your understanding as you take
counsel of the Lord, and not of man, by which you shall see the utter overthrow
and confusion, yea the everlasting desolation of all that shall conspire
against you, and the whole strength and wisdom of man to be but as dust, and as
a thing lighter then vanity in the air, that shall imbody themselves as Hosts,
striving to work your overthrow.

And this in the remembrance of Gods Decree of loving kindness to the least in
your Nation, is tendered to try your willingness to be everlastingly established.

Behold, behold I cry, the Prophet of the Lord, the light of the would draws
nigh your gates, and knocks at the door of your hearts. Oh Turk! thou the
greatest in strength (of the arm of flesh) and mightiest in power in that which
(as grass) is subject to wither, beyond many people, yea, even all the Nations
of the Earth.

Thou ought to know this one thing chiefly, that the dreadful Almighty God
is King of the whole earth, and Lord of the Heavens also, with whom all nations
are but as the dust of the balance, and drop of a bucket, who measures the
Heavens as with a span, and holds the earth and the seas in the hollow of his
hand, he is infinite in his Decrees, and his ways past finding out; he has
overturned many Princes by his power, and overthrown Kings by his might, and
made many nations heaps of desolation, and laid the pleasant places waste;
forasmuch as the Lord of Hosts is jealous of his glory, which many have turned
into contempt, even as the proud and lofty in heart have said, Is there a God
over us, that we should fear to execute our wills upon any? And so have turned
equity backward, and have not had regard unto the Commandments of God, and
have frustrated his Law, and cast his holy Precepts behind their backs; and
have devoured the man of low degree, and oppressed the fatherless and the
widow, and have not had regard to the stranger which has visited them in
loving kindness, but rather, have sought to swallow up the innocent in his
simplicity, with their horrid abominable cruelty.

And in this the glory of the Lord has been defaced, and is defaced by all
that walk in the crookedness of the imaginations of their own hearts,
strengthening themselves in their own ways, making Fences for their safeguard in
iniquity, and Bulwarks for their strength in unrighteousness, and yet calls
upon the name of the Lord, as if God had regard unto the cries of the wicked,
who will punish the sinner in Zion, and reward the evil-worker in Jerusalem.

And therefore all nations ought to be awakened lest the sons of men are cut off
in the corruption of their ways. And thou above all Princes and Kings, as the
greatest in all parts of the earth, ought to shine forth as the brightness
of the Sun at noon day, and as the chiefest of all nations in example of
righteousness, and purity of heart, which will crown thee with everlasting
honor, far exceeding the honors of the Kingdoms of men, and cause thy name
never to be forgotten from generation to generation, for ever, to be remembered
after thee by all the Lords people, and servants of the living God; that thy
sound also may strike a dread through all the dead Worshippers of Images in all
lquarters of the whole world; and then it will come to pass, that many will
stand amazed at the excellency of thybeauty and renown, and those that hate
thee shall be tormentedbecause of thee, and gnash their teeth at thy
prosperity, and lie down in restless pangs of perplexity.

And therefore for the glory of the Almighty Gods sake, and that with it thou
may be established, and a holy seed after thee in perpetual praise.

Arise and stand up, and shine forth in the excellency of meekness, and in the
humbleness, and patience, and forbearance of thy heart, and in this most noble
and excellent understanding, and choicest wisdom, lissen for a season, and
incline thine ear in due time to that in thee which is not of the Kingdoms of
men; and behold from the Lord God, I show thee the coming of the Prophet in a
Parable.

Like as the glory of the Sun arising in the East in mighty irresistible power,
dispersing and sending all the black clouds beyond the appearance of the West,
where place cannot hide their blackness, as the Sun follows in his glorious
flaming course, making all to pass a way as in shame and great fear.

Oh what can stand before the brightness of the DAY? is not all the first in a
tottering frame when the glory of the most high breaks forth? Men of strength
may wonderfully strive, and men of prudence dive deeply, but no man is hid from
the day.

Neither knows he the wisdom of the whole World from whence the breath of
the wind comes, and out of what it breaks.

No man has descended into the deep to count the sands hid with the waters of
the Ocean. Who then can fathom wisdom to understand that which the natural
never saw nor thought of?

Under this I conclude the whole world; All flesh has corrupted it is way
before the Lord, and the wisdom of the first man Adam is not regained;
forasmuch as the restoration has been hid from ages, which unto the desolate
is tendered, that a broken wall may not remain without repair in a whole Nation.

And behold it is coming, it is coming, and with blessing thou will be blessed,
and the seed of the whole Dominion, if thou stop not the course of blessing
from thine own head.

Many generations before thee would have rejoiced to have seen this day which
is coming toward thee of good things; if thou hearken to God, and despitest
not the Messengers and Ministers of his word, but listenest with open ear to
instruction, that thou may be established for ever, the Throne of
righteousness to be the Lords, and thou the instrument in the Lords hand,
whereby Justice, Mercy and Peace may be established, and this know thee, That
the Lord God of Heaven aad Earth, whose dread reaches unto the ends of all
Dominions of the earth, Jehovah the Lord of Hosts is his Name, can work without
thee and beyond thee, and over the heads of all powers, who can change all
hearts and affections in a moment, and in the twinkling of an eye; and make
all affected only with his own glory; but my God is the unspeakable Fountain
of mercy, and long suffering, who is risen to prove and try many people, and
behold he lays this work, and is laying it now at thy gates, and one that
loves thy soul is sent unto thee, that cannot flatter thee, but speaks the
simplicity of truth unto thee, and not his own words, as a lying divination.

But this is truth from him that dwells with the truth, God is light, and in
him is no darkness at all, who is arisen to try thee that thou may be proved,
whether in the pure tender love thou fingly stand, or in the obstinacy
restest, as one sat down in a Chair of carved stone.

I say, Thus is the Lord God arisen to try thee, even as he is coming to make
true proof of thy ways, and to know therein whether thou art able to bear and
endure, and pass a trial of thy ways, in which the Lord who regards only
an humble heart will altogether sift thee as unto the bottom, and prove thee,
whether thou stand as the holy Fathers and Kings did in the days of old, as
David, who with an humble heart received the reproof and judgment of Nathan,
and many more, who were precious patterns unto thee, and Examples before thee.

May I be blamed in all this? does not Wisdom belong to the mighty, and does
not counsel become the Kings Court, and understanding the chiefest palaces?
and has God blessed me with his word, and showed me his wonders which are
coming to pass, and can I hide them from the King? Has God put understanding
in my heart, to understand the deep things which have been hid from ages, and
shall I darken and make void the blessing with silence? Has God showed me the
blessings of a people, and the curse of a Nation, and shall I bury this in the
womb of obscurity, and not publish the revelation of God, and so through a
careless heart come to be numbered among the cursed for ever?

Nay, nay, let all men shoot at me with their arrows, let their sword touch me,
and let death compass me on every hand, rather than mine Inheritance of
blessing I may loose from the hand of the Lord, and peace to my conscience for
ever.

And verily in this I know the hazard of much, whilst in all I seek but the
salvation of souls, and that thou with many may come to the receiving of the
immortal Treasure of Wisdom; and can the spirits of men take offense at me in
this thing? Can not I try the choicest in their ways, as plainly as the
greatest Apostates who have lost the state of Manhood, in whom brutishness is
seated, and violence, as the chief Governor of the bodies of people? who have
lost the first ear that could hear through the degeneration of him that begat
them, and mankind springing from the same Root of Adams polluted nature? Yea
without a Parable may I not plainly prove all Nations that stumbles, the honest
part of thy inquiry? and cannot I reach unto Rome, Pope, and over the darkness
and sottishness of all people? who blindly will speak and question things as to
matter of evil consequences, calling them so in their inquiries, before they
come to see the substance of the good which comes only from God, and thereby
in perverse ignorance calls the good evil, and are setters up of evil for good.

Should the love of God extend beyond measure, and compassion reach over a
Nation, to touch idolatry with a tender visitation of putting a people upon
enquiry, before wrath as an overflowing Flood does overwhelm; and if the people
of that Nation should rise up against the servant in that work, and slay him
that the Master sent; would not such a people plainly appear to be fallen below
the spirits of men? yea far below a beastly part which are naturally out of the
sense of rewarding their kind, so unspeakably full of evil, and wickedly.

Many such things came to pass through the cruelty of the ungodly, forwhich
cause God overturned, and utterly overthrowed the places of great renown, and
made beautiful Palaces a howling Wilderness, when in ages past their
iniquities, Whoredoms and Murders were filled up.

But this I show as to what has been chiefly; now that which is to be, I write.

I cannot run from the Porch of wisdoms Gates, or fly from the door of her
House; forasmuch as I would show the greatest among men the entrance into her
habitation, that that only beautiful habitation may be known to be the Kings
Palace, where Infamy shall never touch the Head of his Dignity.

And here is Wisdom for the Emperor, to know the birth of the Imortall Seed in
him; to know something of God brought forth unto Majesty and Dominion in him,
which shall rule the Nations as with a rod of Iron.

Many parables might my life utter, and seal up the Mystrie in hidden
sentences, and leave the sons of men in the same obscurity, grovelling as in the
night-season, and groping as in a black Dungeon, and after wearisome times to
lie down in sorrows, and never able to come to know the light of the Day of
God, which is more clear then Cristal, and the Wisdom springing from it, which
is more excellent then Rubies, and more refined and precious, then pure Gold,
which is the defense of Armies, and strength of Nations.

Oh how might the aged solace themselves in the meditation thereof? and the
yonng men take pleasure in the exercise of the infinite virtue which is hid
therein? which makes all shine as a Diadem, yet hides the comely parts from
the eye of the vulterous, that the unclean may not see the face of the King: so
that the prudent in a pure life can only draw nigh in the presence of wisdom,
to stand justified in the Kings Court.

Oh that the greatest among men in anthority did but see my affection to the
least in the Land! Oh that mine hand might touch his head: that he might suck
of the Breasts of my Mother which bare me, that he might drink and live for
ever, and have a dewlling place over death, to see the powers thereof swallowed
up into Victory!

Had I began my meditation in the dawning of the day, and written since the
timely sunrising, and continned to the hour of this season; yea, could I have
pondered since he hour of my conception, and meditated in the Chambers of the
Womb, and written since the hour of my birth, yet could not I speak of that
which is, as it is, nor that which is to come in the infinite fullness as it is
ready to break forth.

I may cry wisdom in the streets, and spread forth mine arms in the gates, and
open my mouth in the pleasant Fields, and say, Return O ye sons of men, return
to the Lord God, whom the whole world has for saken, and gone a whoring after
other gods, and sought strange things, and planted themselves Trees in a
wilderness, but behold, the fruits thereof the Lord has no regard unto; for
how is it that the sons of men are calling upon God with their mouth, whilst
they profane his holy Name in their hearts.

God hears not the prayers of the ungodly, and their cry in their early
season is but as the barking of a dog at midnight, and but as the skreech of
a devouring beast seeking his prey in his wandering course at evening in the
wilderness.



Verily I say unto all mankind upon the Face of the Earth, God is wearied, yea
the Lord God is burdened, and his soul is laden with the sacrifice of the
unclean; yea how can it be declared in this generation how the Lord has waited
for many generations to be gracious unto the sons of men; but their iniquities
have turned aside his blessing; for thus it has been even over the face of the
whole Earth, the sons of men in all their ways have spoken of Gods worship,
and have worshipped in this place, and upon that Mountain, and in this Form,
and in another Administration so called; but as soon almost as they are removed
from their seats in their Temples made with hands, where they were worshipping
the works of their own hands, and the imaginations of their hearts, they turn
into lewdn ess, and lying, and swearing, and whoredom, and drunkenness, and
robbery, and envy, and hatred, and murder, and scoffing, and scorning, and into
the lust of uncleanness, and their sacrifice the Lord God requires not, until
they have washed their hands of blood, and their hearts of iniquity, and their
whole body of the pollution of their Life.

And lo I show this unto the JEWS of all sorts, that the Jews also may come to
be converted, and come to know the healing; They must all come to the cleansiug
of the heart by blood, and the purifying of their consciences by the blood of
sprinkling; which is not used (in this the mighty day of God, which is dawned)
as an Ordinance of a carnal Commandment, but is come, and coming, as the
substance of the eternal Decree of God concerning the redemption from all the
former, and restoration unto the first, and as the fulfilling of the promise
of an endless life.

And therefore be awakened all ye that have slumbered, and are slumbering in
the night of your Fathers, who were in the rebellion against God,
notwithstanding they had the Law and the Precepts of God, even as from the
mouth of God: Oh how did your Fathers the Jews rebel and tempt the Lord God,
although his mercies unto them were the greatest! Yea* I may say there was not
a Nation that tasted of mercy as your fathers did, eat and drink of salvation
from many Enemies, and deliverance from numberless afflictions; yet how was it
from age unto ages? often in their streights they murmured, and when they were
at ease they waxed fat through mercies, and kicked against God, until Shiloh
came, the promise unto the Remnants of your Seed* but he coming not according
to your Fathers expectation, even as the wonders of God in all ages were
wrought contrary to the expectations or imaginations of the hearts of men, and
therefore they took counsel together, and put him to death: And thus the
promise came unto many, for without blood there could be no remission of sins;
although by the wilfulness of your Fathers in this matter ye have from that
time been as a curse over the whole earth.

Nevertheless for you there is a hope left, yea for you a promise remains, if
yet ye return and enquire, and seek diligently as in the morning, and be found
early, and earnestly striving as in the timely season, before the advantage of
the day pass over your heads, and ye be left as in the place of blindness,
where all your hope and expectation shall wither, and be made fruitless as a
thing of naught.

And therefore I say, Not as you will have times and seasons, and Days and
Worships, and Deliverances come to pass, shall it come to pass unto you, or be
brought to pass concerning you; but as the Word of the Lord God is and has
been the same from Ages which reaches also unto this Age, from the Dread of
which the sons of men shall not escape, nor find a hidingplace to rest
themselves, who walks in the ways of uncleanness and does traverse the paths
of iniquity and unrighteousness.

And therefore wait for the word of the Lord God unto you, that you may come to
know your motion in righteousness, that you may feel the vengeance removed
which has been long over your heads, that thereby you may come toknow the
redemption in your days, and the restoration of God in the season of his
appointed time; until which, in vain is all your Synagogue and Temple-worships,
and Altar-Offerings. And therefore all people upon the face of the Earth, Jew
and Gentile, Barbarian, Scithian, Bond and Free must all come to know that
principle and measure of the gift of God, which is in bondage in them, to be
made free by the powerful operation of the work of the Lord through them,
which thousands, and ten thousands for want of the good understanding are
strangers unto, and therefore are found actors daily in enmity to the motions
of it; and that is a dangerous state, in whom the God of this world (whom the
Heathen worships) has blinded the eye of their minds, mark, has blinded the
eye of their minds, whereby the whole world are but in the History, out of the
understanding of the Mystery and Power of godliness, and life of the Prophets,
and holy men of God of old.

I say therefore unto all flesh living, Keep silence, and listen to the word of
the Lord God in silence, (mark) listen to hear the word of the Lord in spirit,
in silence, when all reason and earthly consultations and disputings, and
questionings in the mind, is cast out, in the bed, in the vineyards, in the
secret closet, in the fields, and then it shall come to pass to your
remembrance, that there is something in man which convinces a man of the evil
of his ways, and that will show a man the iniquities of his youth and the
sins of his riper years, and bring all unto his remembrance in the fight of
the Lord; and then it will be seen, that not any Sacrifice or Oblation has
blotted out any one sin out of the remembrance of God, when as man in his own
Conscience is accused for all; yea, then is the sacrifice short of blotting out
iniquity, and his prayers short of removing his transgressions: nay further, If
a man should offer ten thousand Rivers of Oil, and the blood of a thousand
Bulls and He-Goats, and as many Rams, and were it the Fruit of his body for the
sin of his soul, it cannot purge the heart, or cleanse the spirit, and
therefore not clear the conscience from the just accusation of God in the
hidden parts of a man's mind, and secret meditations of his spirit; and if in
this state a man perishes, where is the refuge which he shall fly unto in the
last hour? and in what stands the hope of life everlasting? all sober hearts
in this may read the danger of ignorance and peril of blindness in the lust of
sin and unrighteousness, out of the true understanding of the true worship
and service of God.

And forasmuch as wisdom removes the vails of darkness, and opens the path
of iniquity, and leads to the Fountain of righteousness, and brings to the
Wellspring of truth, I hereby hold forth the ground thereof, and from whence
it springs, and how it comes to be received and stood in, to the honor of the
living God, and beautifying the Face of the just, and renown of the upright.

The dreadful God of Heaven and Earth, who is a spirit infinite, who is light,
is the Virtue, Fountain and Treasure of wisdom, peace, and life everlasting.
[Mark and read with understanding.] God who has been a stranger unto the
Inhabitants of the Earth, is light, who searches every heart, and tries the
reins, and the hidden part of the bowels, has sent his only begotten Son a
Light into the world, whose light shines in the consciences of every man that
comes into the world; by which light in a man's conscience he is convinced and
condemned for his wickedness. This light convinces a man in his own heart and
understanding, of lying and swearing, and pride and envy, and persecution, and
dissimulation, and murder and whoredom, and all unrighteousness, and
uncleanness both of flesh and spirit.

This light is pure, which shows a man every unclean spot of his life; and
unto this light in a man's conscience must a man turn in his mind, to be guided
by it in his heart, which comes from God who is light; and by it which comes
from God, who is the Fountain, a man will be led to the first principle of the
good understanding, that is to say, unto the fear of the Lord, which is the
beginning of wisdom, which Solomon the wise King spoke, which was not only his
words but also it was his life, whereby he came to grow in the wonderful
Understanding and admired wisdom, which Regions round about were amazed at.

And unto this day the Lord God is the same to all that fear his Name in truth,
and his loving kindness is not shortened, not his mercy and favor slackned,
but as man has slackned his steps in diligence, waiting upon the Lord in the
fear and dread, and awe of his Name.

Therefore I cease not to cry, Fear, fear, dread and tremble, tremble before
the Lord God of Hosts ye Sons and Daughters of Adam, be ye shaken as in a
tempest, ye strong Oaks and tall Cedars, bow down ye lofty Hills and exalted
Mountains; let the Rocks, and stony places of the Nations be rent, let al be
made as a smooth place for the Lord God to execute his judgments in
righteousness, that the Lord God alone may be exalted in majesty in every
heart; let all knees bow, and every tongue confess his Dread and infinite
Power, that under the Fountain, the Nations and People may stand, that the
streams may issue and run down upon every head, and make glad every heart, with
the oil of anointing, the living, and pouring wisdom down as Floods, making
way in the hearts of the sons of men, in counsel and prudence, to receive the
Oracles of God as a portion of a plenteous Treasure, thereby to increase in the
virtue thereof, which shall cause a man's brightness to glimmer in the eye of
his enemies, and make the Heathen wonder at the appearance thereof, and make
the fool roar out when he feels his back smitten with the Rod of Prudence,
which his younger in years bears in his right hand, ruling the heart in
uprightness.

This is the Treasure, [Wisdome] whereof the Messiah is the Fountain, who has
revealed himself the light of the understanding of the heart of man, who is the
seed made manifest, which was spoken of (after man fell into the degeneration
and subversion) should come and bruise the Serpents head, to restore again that
Image which was lost through man's disobedience.

And now unto the appearance of his grace, that is to say, the light wherewith
every man is lightened which comes from the Messiah, they must be turned, which
shines in their consciences, which (as I have said) does show a man in spirit
and in secret his sins and the reward and wages thereof, which is death
everlasting to all that dye and perish in their sins: And this light in a man's
conscience will keep his heart pure, and in pure fear, out of the offense, as
he is led by it, and it will lead into patience, temperance, meekness,
chastity, charity, peace, and all virtues, so that every day of a man's years,
shall add to the understanding of his heart, until all the gloominesse of the
former time, and darkness of the night be driven away by the dawning of the
day, and day star arising in the heart, and the revelation of the Son of
righteousness in the glory of his light and life.

And much more of the beauty and virtue then I do mention it will lead unto, as
unto quietness and setlednesse, out of strife and hard contentions, fighting
and quarrellings, or raising of tumults or seditions, or heresies, or sects, or
many Opinions, to the dividing of Nations, but will unite all, and make all of
one heart and of one mind, to establish Authority, and set the supreme in his
Seat of Dominion to rule in righteousness, and establish his Seed for ever,
and will lead all into subjection to Authority, and all unto the knowledge and
Understanding of the true Power of Authority, and Office of Magistracy in the
place thereof, which is, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well.

How might this be spoken of! Oh how might it be declared! No Scepter so
glorious, no power so strong, no Dominion so certain and stable, as his who
walks in the light, by it to be redeemed from under every curse of God; (mark)
I say, Redemption and blessing stands only to the Seed, and the Seed is the
light of the world. He that has an ear, let him hear.

And to this Seed in man must man come, that is to say, to the light wherewith
he is lightened, that the Seed may live, unto which the promise of Life and
blessing is; for not unto Seeds, as unto many, was the promise made unto
Abraham, but unto thy Seed; in which God spoke a parable to the whole world; so
that mankind in the blindness has stood, out of the knowledge of the Promise,
and that unto which the Promise was made, and therefore far from receiving the
blessing which is with the Promise unto the Seed.

This is the sum. Man must know the Light in his conscience to rule him, else
he is as a wild Ass, unruly, without a brdile in his mouth, or curb to his way,
and knows no restraint to the wickedness of his heart, but is ready to run
swiftly in the open passages of mischief, and rushes on fiercely in
wickedness, as a fed Horse in the battle, having not in his heart the regard
of God, or his soul, and so he murders Abel the just Seed in him, and that lets
out a man's heart to murder the just man upon the earth without him, as if blood
were of no price or value, or as if it should never more be required by the
Lord at the hands of the guilty and blood-thirsty.

I say, A man must know a guide in spirit, the light in his conscience to rule
his mind and heart, that by the light in his conscience he may witness and
know what the abundance of his heart is, and so see whether everlasting
blessing or cursing is to it; for thus it is, out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks, and so does every member of the body act, whether good or
evil.

Let all hearts ponder this thing, and know, That Gods blessings are not to the
wicked, murderers, blood-thirsty, Whoremongers, covetous, lustful-hearted,
abominable beastly natured; but his heavy curses, and vengeance and judgments
and plagues hangs over the heads of the ungodly and corrupt walkers; and
behold, the day comes which shall burn as a Furnace seven times overheated,
and as an oven filled with burning flames, and all the proud, and all the
Adulterers, whores and whoremongers, envious and wicked-hearted, the Drunkard
and all manner of the ungodly, shall be as straw in the drought of Summer, and
shall be consumed in perplexity and horror; many then shall seek a hiding
place, but shall not find any.

And the wicked Kings and Princes of the Earth shall arise unto that great
judgment, and shall feel the terrors of Hell, and Wrath and Woe from the Lord
God of Hosts, to compass them on every hand, and the recompense of fools shall
be the reward of the unrighteous, who have sinned out their time in pleasure
and delight in corruption.

Had I the tongues of many Orators, and the hands of many swift writers, I
could not express the misery and infinite endless horror of Gods fierce Wrath
and Vengeance, which shall overtake the wicked as a snare; and how the Lord God
will be avenged of all those that have slaughtered (mocked or reviled their
neighbors, or the man of a meek heart) his Prophets and Messengers, as in all
ages they were persecuted as heretics and seducers.

And therefore a warning to the whole Earth is sounded forth; Repent, repent,
repent, the mighty day of the Lord God of Hosts is at hand, a day of howling
draws nigh and the hour of bitter lamentation comes to pass, and thousands,
and ten thousands shall roar and lament, and curse the day that ever they were
born, and yet not find ease of their misery; behold, behold, Gods jealousy
even already burns like fire, and who can quench the flames?

Come forth, come forth, oh ye sons of men, who have had ease in the flesh for
many years, and have sported your selves in the pleasure thereof, and made your
hearts gross in uncleanness, and fatted your selves with fraud and with the
slaughter of your innocent Neighbor; repent, and turn from your sins, let the
Elders of the Nations lament themselves, and the inhabitants of the earth rent
their hearts, whilst the Lord God is warning and visiting you, before his
judgments in sore displeasure as an overflowing irresistible flood overtakes
the people, and sweeps the Nations as with a beasom of utter destruction, and
scatters the wicked as the dust and chaff of the highways, as in a tempest of
a mighty Wind, with the breath of his mouth, and there be not a resting place
upon the face of the earth left for the sons of men to inhabit, because of
their abominations and trangressions, which God will repay with vengeance.

Remember Sodom, and call to mind the destruction of Gomorah,

Nineveh also was warned, and Nineveh repented, and was spared in the days of
Jonah, and be it known unto you, this also is the day of your visitation,
written forth according to the commandment of God, and the motion of his word
from on high.

And therefore whilst ye have time, prize it, that as wise, ye may learn
wisdom, and live, and not as fools, hate instruction, and persh.

I say unto thee O Turk, the Great One, I am not come into thy Coasts to hide
knowledge from thine eyes, or understanding from thine heart, but in love to
visit thee with the Message of a goodly Treasure, which never failed to
strenghen my Fathers in a strange Land, or to nourish their seed in a
Wilderness, or to give courage to them in weakness to vanquish the mighty force
of their Enemies, that thou may come to the same, to drink of the same, and
eat of the same, to be nourished with the same, unto the same life and dignity
which the Lord gives, which excels the honor of all mortal flesh, which
the Lord God will stain, that his honor, and such as he honors, may be only
honorable.

Lo, I declare the substance of all things, that thou may apply thy heart in
diligence to the fear of the Lord, that thereby thou may know the operation
of the substance in thee, that with the virtue, power and life thereof, thou
may come to prophecy upon thy Throne, as David did upon his Throne; and
judge in Wisdom in thy Palace, as Solomon did in his Palace and Court, unto
whom a heart of understanding was given, that he judged the people aright, and
sought not for counsel, or instruction, or advice from man, but had the word
from the Lord, of Counsel, of Prudence, and of pure judgment; so that his
Courts was bounded with Peace as with an Iron Band, and fenced as with a Fort
of Brass, until Solomon committed idolatry, and then was an adversary stirred
up against him. Behold the Lord God will work mighty wonders by thee, and
through thee, if thou takes counsel of him with an upright sober heart, upon thy
bed; God is a Spirit and in spirit the Lord God will enrich thee, if thou
keep thy mind to the Light in thy conscience, to be ruled by it, that thou
may rule and govern according to it, all that are thy Subjects, the
inhabitans and people that are within the compass of thy Dominion.

And herein thou shall come to bear me testimony in the Spirit of Light (as
thou turns thy mind to the Light which shows thee thy sins) that will cleanse
thy heart, and purify thy mind from the thoughts and motions of sin and
evil, and redeem thy soul and spirit from corruption, and restore thee as in
the day of the first Adam, in innocence, out of hurt and abuse, unto that state
which God Almighty blessed, and all the creatures thou will come to have
Dominion over, and the Earth subdue, and many will bless the day of thy birth,
if Gods Seed in thee comes to live, that thy Seed may replenish every Island
and Continent of the Earth; Thou know not Gods work what he is about to do;
if thou hearken, and obey, and with one heart, and with one consent thy Nobles
and Nation says Amen, Let the work of the Lord be done. I say then, If thy
Ancients, and thy honorable men, and the Mothers of many children in thy
Coasts, with the man of low degree, turns from the evil of their walking, and
corruption of their ways, unto the Light in all their consciences, to stand in
righteousness for the renown of the Lord, even the jealous God of his glory, as
they come to honor and worship in spirit, them will he crown with dignity, and
cause their fame to spread; and make the frame of thy Dominion to be the
pattren of his mighty work, until the whole Earth be subject unto the same
dreadful authority and power; and behold, this is the good which I show thee,
and the evil I have not hid from thy heart, that thou may not meditate it
upon thy bed; but have opened both, and therefore choose thee whether; my
conscience to thee in the sight of the Lord God I have cleared (touching this
matter) in tender pure love to thy soul, and prosperity of thy Nation in every
quarter thereof.

Finally, Take this for thy standing place, that thou may never be removed,
Stand in the Light, as thy heart comes to be turned to it, and thou shall know,
that as thou stands in it, wisdom will never depart thy habitation, and the
deepest counsel, thy secret Chamber, which will establish thee in thy Throne,
as it did Solomon the wise King in his Throne.

But as thou have sinned with thy lips, so thou must come to the mourning of a
broken heart, that God may be honored in the humility of thy soul and spirit,
and thou thereby come in mercy to be exalted in his Kingdom of peace, plenty,
and prosperity; Remember Nebucadnezzar the King, unto whom Daniel the Prophet
prophesied, and showed him the interpretation of hard things, chap 4.

Now I come to question a few things, that the worth of Wisdom may be noted,
which gives always the answer of true things, and such as none other can
stand against, to overturn, or gainsay.

Query 1. God looked upon the earth, and behold, all flesh had corrupted his
way before the Lord upon the earth. Now I do ask, In what can the truth and
true worship of God be rightly holden? and who are the sons of men that are not
in the corrupted ways? and what is that which they have attained unto, which
will lead out of the corrupted ways? and are not all Nations living in lying,
and swearing, and whoredom, and pride, and envy, and murder, and drunkenness,
in the corrupted ways?

Q. 2. By what is it that God tries the ways of men? and what makes the truth
and error, the corruption and incorruption of all ways manifest to man,
whereby man comes to have assurance beyond all the traditions of his
forefathers, that he is in the true way, a faithful servant of the Lord, or
that he is out of the true way of God, a servaut of Satan, through the lust of
corruption in sin and transgression?

Q. 3. What is the equal measure in man, which when the hand of the just
measures, gives unto every man full due, and keeps not back the due from
his Neighbor, neither can oppress any, but gives unto his Enemies just weight
and full measure also, and loves his enemies, and rewards his enemies good
for evil, showing by his good, that his conversation is just, and his Religion
not in vain?

Q. 4. Whether is it love or wrath, patience or rashness, humbleness or pride,
temperence or immoderacy in life and gefture toward acquaintance or stranger,
the good or the evil, that establishes the Prince or the King upon the Throne?
and what is the good that leads unto the good order of the best part? and how
ought a man to follow it to be established in righteousness and in peace to the
end? And whether if a man knows not the good in him to guide him, is not his
foot subject to slip, and he to fall?

Q. 5. Whether would my owning of one Prophet in virtue, before another
Prophets life, avail me any thing if I had not received the spirit of the
Prophets? And how can the confession of any Prophets Name, show thereby that a
people is of the Truth? And what if any man should own God in words, and all
the Prophets in words, and the Messiah in words what would that avail any man
if he were not in the same pure way which the Prophets stood in, and knew
something in him which is of the nature of God?

Q 6. Will not that which tries all people and Nations, try all Elders and
Prophets also in all nations, and give testimony unto all people fearing God,
whether they are of God, yea or nay? And is not this also the testimony of
false Prophets, to say it shall come to pass according to the words of their
Prophecy, and it comes not at all to pass, but they speak presumptuously, as
says the Lord unto Moses concerning the false Prophets? And does not this give
testimony of a true Prophet, when the word of the Prophet comes to pass
according to his Prophecy, that the Prophet shall be known to the people that
the Lord has truly sent him?

Q. 7. The Messiah was the promise of God from the beginning, and he was
manifest in the flesh in spirit; but how does he now bruise the Serpents head?
and what part in man is that which is the Serpent? and who has felt the power
and operation of the other Seed in his heart to bruise the Serpents Head
without which there is no Salvation?

Q. 8. What and how is the world set in man's heart (as says Solomon) whereby a
man cannot find out the beginning or the end of the work of God? And how comes
the mystery of the writings of the Prophets, which speaks of the Kingdom and
glory of the living God tobe known and understood in spirit and life, as they
were given forth.

Q 9. Let me ask of the Prophets in Asia, and enquire of those that prophecy
in Africa, what is the interpretation of my vision; and let the Emperor
enquire of them one by one, lest they dream a Divination of their own heart,
and consent together in falsehood, and so deceive thee, and but mock him that
uprightly enquireth, that the Emperor may have the understanding of the Times.

In my Vision I saw seven Trees planted in seven places, and the ground of six
of them (where they grew) was of one nature, and each Tree had his Fence about
him; and I saw many Workmen laboring to raise the defense higher; they began
to labor when it was a little light, and the night shortly overtook them all
that they could not work any longer; so that they saw not good of the works of
their hands, and therefore they sat down and slept in sorrow.

And it came to pass that there arose a Star, which while the Workmen
slumbered, it showed me, that the first Tree was full of Moss, and withered
without shooting a leaf, and so waxed rotten; and I heard one say, that
notwithstanding it should remain for a season, until a fire be kindled.

The second sprouted out some certain leaves, and it grew into two bodies from
one root, the one was more green and fresh in color then the other; and it
came to pass that a wind blew, and they dashed each other, but the green part
stood longest, although her leaves falled therewith, and the body waxed dry at
the Root.

The third prospered for a little season, but much heat parched the branches
thereof, and that also decayed.

The fourth had a time of prosperity, but the Winter-season blowed cold winds
over her boughs, insomuch that the rind thereof peeled away, so that the body
was left naked, and it with* red standing.

The fifth grew by a pleasant Brook, and the Waters thereof refreshed her Root,
but the ground being not good to retain the moisture although that she buded
and blossomed, yet it came to pass that a wind from the north, gently blew over
it, and many of the blossoms were blasted, and the rest that remained, although
they came to grow toward the goodness of Fruits, yet afterward there came a
rushing wind from the rising of the Sun, and they all fell in an untimely
season.

The sixth grew mightily, more tall and lofty then all the other five, and was
the most of all beautified with the largest leaves, and delightful colored
blossoms, which covered her large quick spouting boughs, but imediately her
root became a nurse of rottenness.

And I saw an Ax*blade in the hand of a certain Shepherd, and Io he looked over
all the six, and said, This is because of their unfruitfulness, and yet a sorer
thing must come to pass; and he turned unto the seventh Tree, which was planted
in a low valley, unploughed, and behold her body bowed, and she stooped unto
him that had the Ax blade in his right hand, and he took a member of that Tree,
without hurt to the body, and he made therewith a Helve for the Ax, and
fastened it thereunto. And he turned again toward the sixth Tree, and smote it
that it fell to the ground, and so he passed to the Fences of all the other
five first, and made breaches upon them, that they may all utterly become a
desolation for ever.

And he again said, Even so must it be unto many Oaks and Cedars, and wild
Apple Trees, in the Woods, and Wilderness of the Forest of the Regions of the
Earth.* And.* ^ he returned to the seventh Tree, and dug about it, and
pruned it, and it bare Fruit to his pleasure. And he again uttered his word,
and said, This is to spread, and I will dig a well by her, and make her field
pleasant, and a refreshing River shall compass her banks, that my flocks which
I have in secret places may openly feed as one Herd within the compass of this
Fence which I have framed, and will build it round about, that no Thief may
reach to taste of her fruit.

And I saw it, and blessed the Lord, and magnified the Name of the Most high
God.

Q. 10. Is there any pure Religion upon the Face of the Earth, but where the
people does do unto all men as they would men should do unto them, which the
light in a man's conscience teaches to do? And is not all profession of pure
Religion and holiness without that pure peaceable practice, any other than
abomination and rottenness in the account of the holy, just God?

Q. 11* God blessed me in the womb, and sanctified me in the day of my birth,
who has separated me from the land of my natural nativity; and now how if my
love is constrained to be more toward the Seed in the Turk then unto the flesh
of Englands Inhabitants? ought I therefore the more to be cursed by my own
Nation, or less blessed by thy Nation? Or am I faulty to stand against
iniquity in the gate, to stop the flood of wrath which is ready to enter in as
through a gap? or may I be blamed in wrestling, that blessing may overspread
the length and breadth of thy Dominion?

Q. 12. I would not offend the just, or trouble the righteous, yet I enquire of
the wise men of thy Court, whether is it against the Law of God, and life of
the holy men, to try all things, and hold fast that which is good? and how
shall any know the good simply as it comes from the Fountain, so as to be
plainly distinguishable from that which is but a show in hypocrisy? is there
any thing that makes manifest, or that can make manifest truth in a man's
spirit, and seal it to his heart, beyond the traditions of men or the
persuasions of women, besides the light in a man's conscience, which convinces
him of his sins?

Now I querie concerning that which will discover such in the Closet of a man's
heart, who are in other Nations, to be a people walking in the pure Religion:
there is a stone to try all metals by.

Q. 13 And what is the Touchstone of trial of all Nations? What is that by
which Abel, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob walked, who
walked by a Rule before Moses was, to whom first the Law in Tables of stone was
given? what was the Rule before the Prophets or the Scriptures, and the Law in
Tables, by which the Holy men of God had the witness and testimony of the truth
and Kingdom of God, which if the Scriptures and the writings of the Law given
in tables of stone, had been always hid from this generation, and the prophets
writings from the people of this age, yet might the seed have the same
testimony by the same thing which Abel and Enoch had of God, and which Gods
servants now have.

Q. 14. Has thy Nation the Faith of living after death? if they have not, I am
then answered before I ask; but if they have that Faith, I then enquire,
whether is it better to die as a stranger among men for conscience sake, and be
received as an everlasting sojourner with the Lord in the endless day of
blessing, then to be the most acquainted and beloved amongst men, and after the
time of man to perish worse then the beasts of the field? And what is honor or
profit of riches in this life, to be for ever miserable in the life to come?

Q. 15 It was the great sin of the Jews in the days of old, in making Idols of
Gold, and Silver, and Stone, and Wood, and Men, and Prophets, and of their own
strength; it was also their sin in having the Law and the Commandments, and yet
walked with loose hearts, worshipping only with their lips and mouth, and in
spirit and mind, were strangers to God, the eternal spirit: And is it an evil
for me to say, Enquire and see, and search in thy own borders to find out if
such a thing, or the resemblance of this thing be not within the compass of
thy Dominion.

Postscript.
FRiend, Thus the Lord God gently tries thee, who is jealous of his glory, and
yet further will he search thy heart, and try thee as gold, if thy countenance
turns unto purity; yet thus far thou may not be jealous of any other thing
to hurt thee; for behold, God has turned my face toward the Jews scattered in
thy borders, and hanging upon thy skirts, that they may be turned in spirit
unto Shiloh, that in peace they may for ever rest in the Dominion, out of all
heart-burnings, or evil surmizes, in the best content, not by constraint only,
but of a willing mind and heart in the sight of God.

And the Lord God of truth knows the uprightness of my heart, that I deceive
thee not with flatteries, whose servant I am in dread and fear, and not my own.

JOHN PERROT.

The end.
Immanuel The Salvation of ISRAEL.

The Word of the Lord came unto me the twelfth day of the sixth Month, in the
year accounted, 1657. concerning the Jews and scattered Tribes of ISRAEL, As I
was waiting upon the Lord in spirit, in Legorne in Italy, which in the Name of
the Lord I give forth to be copied, and sent throughout the World.

Written by a lover of Righteousness, a mourner over the scattered Tribes, a
seeker of the lost, that the Remnant may be saved, J. P.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

The word of the Commandment of the Lord to his Servant concerning the
scattered Jews in Italy, Spain, Portugal, France Holland, and the rest of the
Regions, and every Island throughout the Earth and the Seas, to write these
words following to them all.
WHether you will hear, or forbear, this is the word of the Lord God unto all
you scattered Jews throughout the whole Earth, God of a truth is arisen to
gather unto himself his peculiar Seed, from the four winds of the Earth, that
Jacob may Isa 41. 25. Jer. 23. 6, 7, 8. Jer. 16. 14, 15, 16. Ezekiel. 20. 41. to
the end.
possess and inhabit his inheritance, and the Seed of Israel the Holy Land.

And according to the Prophets, he has began at the North, and is streching,
and has streched forth his Arm over the South, and over the East, and over the
West.

And behold it comes to pass, and is at hand, and not as a day afar off, but
even nigh unto the door, that the Lord will separate of all Nations, both Jew,
and Gentile, the just from the vile, him that fears God, from him that feareh
him not; him that keeps the Law of God which is written in his heart,
(through the sanctification thereof by the power of the Lord ruling in his
conscience, mind, spirit and life, from him that in words which professes God,
and his Law and Statutes, and ordinances, and yet walks in his life and daily
practices, contrary to the Law written in the heart, which God spoke unto Moses
saying, The word is nigh Deuteronomy. 30. 14; 15.
thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou may do it, See, I have set
before thee this day life and good, death and evil.

And unto ye, Oh Jews is the same come, and before you, in the Name of the Lord
coming unto you, do I set life and death, light and darkness, in this the day
of the Lord, which is dawned. unto*a measure of the Remnant, even in this day
which is light and not darkness, wherein the promise of God is fulfilled, and
it came to pass according to the Prophecy, in a day when it ^ch. 14.
was neither night nor day, neither dark nor light, but in the evening it was a
little light.

And not as from the traditions of my forefathers, or the generations of men in
the corrupt and polluted nature, in the degeneration from God, and alienation
from the Covenant of life and promise: (who confessed the Messiah as this
generation does, to be come in words, with their corrupted tongues, and
polluted lips, but in their works, and by their practice and life, make his
coming void, and of non-effect unto them) neither by the reading of the
Scriptures came I to know that he was come as he is come, but by the spirit of
the Lord, *by which I was chosen in the womb, and sanctified in the day of my
birth, by which also I am separated from the Land of my natural nativity, and
brought unto the feeling of sorrows in a strange Land for your sakes) I come to
know, and now to declare unto you, that Immanuel, who is God with us, who is
the light of the world, the Messiah in the power of God, who is a spirit, is
come reigning in spirit in the hearts of his people, over whom, and in whom he
rules as King, treading down, and trampling upon all principalities and powers,
making the Earth new, and the Heavens also, warring against all which is
contrary to his own pure nature, in many, until he has put all his enemies
under his feet, and then will he give up the Kingdom to the Father, that God
may be all in all.

And for this cause also, even for your sakes (who are of most men despised in
heart) I pass as one desolate, and despised, and hated and mocked of many, and
many more of the nation of my natural birth would gladly have my blood; yet am
I not forsaken of him that sent me with his message unto you of salvation, and
everlasting glad tidings of Redemption.

And now he that has an ear, let him hear, and a heart to perceive, let him
understand.

Be it known unto you all, That God has more regard to your souls then that
you should perish in your sins, and your souls is more precious in his eye (for
which he has ordained life everlasting, for as many as come to believe) then
the pleasure and ease of your corrupt careases, which are to rot in Graves and
Sepulchers.

And therefore for the Lord to regain his own Image which is lost in man
through fall in the transgression, and to r store man unto the same
uprightness, where in man was created which was the promise of God unto man in
this wise, the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head.

Behold unto you it is given forth and declared, for the redemption and
restoration of the seed, the Messiah came, and now is coming the second time
without fin unto salvation, even he comes now in spirit and in power, who was
the Rock whom your Fathers in the Wilderness forsook; and the light of the
world whom your Fathers slew at Jerusalem, which brought a grievous curse upon
you of being a people trodden upon by all the world, and not only so, but the
most lamentable thing and curse which is over you, for which cause my soul
mourns for you, that such cruel hard-heartedness, distrust, doubt, jealousies
and unbelief, coveting, fraud, deceit, dissimulation, and Hypocrifie has
veiled your hearts, and grossly darkened your understandings.

Oh that is the worst of all! that is the greatest curse, in how much
throughout ages, the Jews have been given over unto vile affections,
hard-heartedness, sin and unbelief; which is the cause why ye cannot rightly
speak of the things of God, and understand the Prophets writings which were
spoken, and do Ezekiel. 17. 2.
stand as mysteries, yea deep mysteries to your thick hearts, your
understandings being covered as with a thick cloud of darkness, Hos 4 1, to 9.
Jer* 23. 22 Jer 31. 22 Jer. 30. 6*
(which now we the seed Abraham, of the true Jew inwardly, do walk by the light
thereof as a Pillar of fire by night) and therefore said the Lord by his
Prophet, for want of knowledge my people perish.

The Prophets they prophesied of the Messiah to come in spirit, in a mystery to
the whole world Jew and Gentile, so that when he came he was not received but
by the Remnant in them days, as he is received now in these days; but unto
whom the spirit of wisdom and understanding was given, to read and understand
that which the Prophets spoke forth in Parables, ^k. 20.
to the whole world of mankind, which lay in sin and wickedness*

And therefore ye Jews now in these days, ye ought not to speak of God, or to
name his name in perverseness, whilst ye hate to be reformed in your hearts,
minds and spirits, but ye ought to hear the Message of the Lord God, and to
ponder it in your hearts, that you may see how far ye are yet from the
Promise, being not come in truth, in spirit and in life, unto the condition
thereof fulfilled and made up in you, until which ye cannot justly expect the
fulfilling of the promise unto you in the substance.

For whilst you are in your sins, as your Fathers were in their sins in the
day that they slew Jesus at Jerusalem, you cannot but as men in the flesh, look
with any other than an eye of flesh, for a God of flesh to come among you, and
to save you by the Arm of flesh. Oh blind and sottish, of dull ears and dark
understandings! and so could not your Fathers, neither can you now as you
stand, see him that comes to ransom the seed in spirit and in power.

Behold none other but Immanuel the Messiah which is God with us* the light of
the world that is come unto us, and is passing through the whole world, who
will smite the earth with the Rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
he shall slay ^sa. 11. 4.
the wicked.

Now this is wisdom, to know and understand that birth and nature of the
wicked in you, and to feel the power of that breath in you, thereby to taste of
the pangs of that slaughter in you, and then ye will witness the Messiah come
in you in spirit, and in wisdom, and in a deep and quick understanding, Isa.
11. 2. Eccle. 3. 11*
making the Heavens new in you, and the earth new in you, as Solomon says, God
has set the world in man's heart, wherefore man cannot find out the work that
God makes from the beginning to the end thereof; he that has an ear to hear,
and heart to understand, may now come to discern and read (Nations, Kingdoms,
Countries, Armies, Philistines, Egyptians, Aliens, the seed of the Jew, and the
generation of the Gentile) in him, Mountains, heaps of Stons, Sodom Built, and
Gomorrah fenced, Jerusalem trodden down, Zion and her Daughter in bondage, and
her seed in great Captivity, lamenting as in solitary places, left and forsaken
as in a wilderness, and as a Virgin Daughter in a strange land altogether left
comfortless, the poor, the widow and the fatherless, the blind, the halt, and
the maimed, all left without pity; I say, search your hearts in secret, and see
if this be not truth, the light of Immanuel, answering in all your consciences
and hidden parts.

Again, I say wait upon God, with your minds staid upon the light in all your
consciences, and thereby God will show you, even by the coming of his son Jesus
the Messiah the light of the World, the fulfilling of the Law and of the
Prophets in you, (that is to say, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and thy Neighbor as thy
self,) this is the sum and substance of all, which the light in all your
consciences if ye follow it in your minds, will perfectly lead to the
fulfilling of; and then ye will know that Immanuel the light of the World, came
not to destroy the Law but to fulfill the Law; that the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit; which is according to the leadings of the light in all our consciences,
and this is from the Lord both to the Jew and the Gentile.

Furthermore to the scattered Tribes of the house of Israel, this is the word
of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who is the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, who by a mighty hand and outstretched arm, by the hand of Moses his
Prophet and Messenger unto the seed in Bondage in great Captivity, brought the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt: Even unto you Oh ye Jews this is
the word of the dreadful Lo^d God of Hosts, and as a sign unto you, and among
you, and in you, it shall stand unto the end of your days, if you perish in
unbelief and in your sins; that the Messiah is come, Jesus whom your Fathers
slew through unbelief and hard-heartednesse in their days, who slew him for
saying in words, that which they themselves did own concerning themselves in
the substance, according to their profession, that is to say, he declared that
he was the Son of God, and therefore they put him to death as a Blasphemer, and
they said that God was their Father, yet were in their wilfulness so far
blinded that they could not discern that their words in manner of the
declaration, tended to the same thing, and was of the same nature, and this
shall stand the sign thereof unto the end, if ye perish in unbelief to your
perpetual judgment, that he has lightened you all with his true light which
shines in all your conscences, which shows you in secret the deceitfulness
of your hearts, and convinces you in your minds, of lying, cheating, coveting,
envy and of all sin and unrighteousness, (which is not according to the Law of
God, written in your hearts, this sign) the light in your consciences shall
never dye in you, which all your burning Lamps, and washings, and Altars, and
vails, and holiest of holiest, and all the other ceremonies were but signs and
figures and shadows of this everlasting sign and substance, which shall
perpetually stand to justify you if you love it, and follow it, and walk
according to it, or to condemn you for evermore if ye hate it, and walk
contrary to it.

And be it also known unto you, that if you expect another Messiah then him
that is come (which is Immanuel, God with us in spirit and in life and power)
leading out of sin, the land of bondage and darkness, and in virtue, and in
wisdom, and in counsel, and in judgment, not judging according to the seeing
of the eye, or hearing of the ear, but with righteous judgment in spirit, who
searches every spirit, and the bottom of every heart with his light in every
conscience; ye are but Seekers unto this day for flesh to come, yet farther to
be an ease unto your flesh, and to purchase more ease and liberty for your
flesh, in which state ye already stand, even in the ease and lust of the flesh,
which God Almighty by the coming of his Son will destroy, for because of sin
and iniquity, and men living in the ease and lust of the flesh, the Lord God
will hasten judgment upon the earth.

Now consider, search and see, ponder it and lay it to heart, that you may know
what you have waited for; that you may understand whether you have waited and
sought for the true thing to come to pass, that henceforth ye may seek aright,
else you may all wait till your limbs fails you, and your eyes perish in their
holes, end in the end you fail of the expectation and fulfilling of your vain
conceptions, and blind imaginations; wait therefore in spirit in humility of
heart, that Immanuel the light of the World, Jesus the Messiah, by whom ye are
lightened, ye may come to know and feel the power of his light in your
consciences, by it leading you out of all your sins and iniquities, which is
Satan's bond, the Devils chain of darkness, linking you together in
hard-heartednesse, and binding you in the lusts, ceremonies, customs, and
traditions of blindness and ignorance, thereby ruling in your minds and
spirits, that knowing Isa. 28.
him, ye may also know by him the breaking of the bonds of Hell, and the
disanulling of the Covenant, which is made with death, and ye set at liberty in
life and spirit, to serve the Lord God Hab. 1. 13.
of life who is a spirit (and of purer eyes than to behold iniquity or
countenance sinners in their evil ways) in the uprightness of your hearts and
integrity of your souls, that ye may be made unto him the praise of his name
throughout the whole earth, according to his promise, that so ye may descern
and feel the curse removed and taken from you, which for many ages past, has
stood upon the heads of the generations of your forefathers, and remains unto
this time upon you, until the eye of your minds which the God of this world
has blinded, be opened by the Messiah, which is come and coming to open the
eye of the Isa 42. 7.
blind, and to give the simple an understanding to discern the day of
redemption, and to be made partaker of his hour of salvation, Isa. 35. 8.
which is held and hid in a mystery, who is appointed for a way, and to be a
high way for the ransomed of the Lord, such as the wayfaring men, though fools
shall not err therein.

Oh how do I mourn! Oh how do I travel as in pain and great grief and sorrow
for your sakes O ye Jews! reading, seeing and feeling, that darkness which is
over your hearts, even the same which was, and is in Egypt (Spiritual Sodom and
Egypt) even such thick darkness as may be felt.

Oh why do ye yet in your hearts seek murder? Why say and contend ye for more
blood? Seeing the slaughtered Lamb is already come, whom you say is to come,
and not yet come; for if he were to come, whom I declare in the name of the
Lord is already come, behold your generation are to be his slaughterers, and
the shedders of his innocent blood, for the fulfilling of the Prophets, that by
the offering of his blood once for all, he may for ever perfect them whom God
sanctifies, read Isa. 53. Chapter, which is fulfilled, and see how far you put
our selves from salvation, by seeking yet cruelty and murder in your hearts,
which your unbelief and wilfulness is the ground of.

How many signs would ye have? ye have heared how many were showed unto
Pharaoh, yet would not he let Israel go free, and will ye have, or do ye seek
greater then the Sun to be darkened, and the Moon not to give her light, and the
stars of heaven ^oel 2. 31.
to fall? and is not this manifest unto thousands? And cannot you yet read
within? Will you say that you believe all that the Prophets have written? Or
can you say so, and speak truth, whilst you have not that spirit by which the
Prophets writ forth the Scriptures? Or could your Fathers understand the
writings of the Prophets, who wickedly persecuted and slew the Prophets? Nay,
nay.

Behold this is the word of the Lord unto you all, Jesus the Messiah has cast
his Rod before Pharaoh, the Prince of darkness in you, and it is become a
serpent which wounds you in secret (I speak unto you that have any sense or
the least feeling of God) and it devours your rods, yea and will eat your life,
and will bring all the plagues of Pharaoh upon you, (for as much as your
unbelief is but his sin) until destruction unto death as a flood overwhelms
you, except ye repent, that God may be entreated for you.

And know ye that God has been long suffering, and now shows his mercy in
this visitation of his love unto you, showing Isa. 49. 6.
you the Messiah which is come, and has lightened you, and is the light of the
Gentiles also, that he may be the salvation of Isa 60. 1. 3. 19.
God unto the ends of the earth.

Of a truth from this ye cannot be hid, neither can ye in righteousness Isa.
42. 6.
deny but that ye are lightened with the light of the world, which is Immanuel
the light of the Gentilies, which also enlightneth the understanding of the
Jews, else could not the Jews unto this day understand that Moses was a Prophet
of the Lord, for he was and is the same, even the word from the beginning,
which God said unto Moses is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, which
showed him the Law to be nigh, and not to be sought for from a strange Land, by
which the children of Israel were condemned for their sins, so that the guilt
thereof stood upon their heads from year to year, as in like manner the guilt
of your transgressions stands unto this day upon your heads, which your
sacrifices cannot clear you in your consciences from, for it is impossible that
the carnal things can make satisfaction unto infinite justice, which stands
over, and measures all transgression, and therefore says the Prophet,
Wherewith shall I come before the Lard? and bow my self before the Mic* 6. 6.
7. 8.
high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year
old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams? Or with ten thousand
Rivers of oil? Shall I give my first borne for my transgression, the fruits of
my body, for the sin of my soul? He has showed thee O man what is good, and
what does the Lord require of thee? but to do justly, to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God.

In this ye are all concluded with the great idolaters of the earth, and with
the Arminans and heathens also, they have their Images without, that is to say,
beads, crosses, pictures, vessels, and herein the Jews in the nature are also
one with them, who have their synagogues, and vessels, and Offerings, and knows
not him whom you imagine you make offerings unto, and these are offerings of
strange fire unto the Lord, for which cause God has not regard unto your
services; for your Fathers forsook Jer. 2. 3.
the fountain of living mercies in their days, and then he spoke by the mouth
of his Prophet, saying who has required these things at your hands? your
solemn meetings are abomination unto me.

And ye are now in the same footsteps of your forefathers in the corrupted way
of sin, and blind path of hard-heartedness and Isa. 1. 11. 12, 13, 14
unbelief, and yet ye say, ye worship God aright; and furthermore this is your
great sin and dangerous evil, as other professions, have their abominable
Idolatries in the show without, your Idols are set up in your hearts, and ye
put the stumbling block of your iniquity before your face; read diligently with
true understanding, Isa. 8. 14. 15. and mark your stumbling offense Ezekiel. 1^ 4.
and fall.

And with you in the same nature all the Protestants, Presbyterians,
Independants, Baptists, Seekers, Ranters, and the rest called Christians in
general do worship, although you and they are all diverse in the Traditions of
your and their Fathers in the manner of the practicing your services, yet in
the substance, you are but one, that is to say, Cains nature ruling in you all,
who offered a sacrifice and killed the just in him; he killed just Abel without
him, and that nature which murdered Abel without him slew the just within him,
and so your several words, and diversities of opinions, which stands but in
the shadow, is not at all that which makes a difference, in the ground and
substance, being all but in one nature of transgression, and way of the ungodly
in unrighteousness; and you cannot one stain or spot another, or take glory
unto your selves over another, seeing the best of all your sects upon the face
of the earth, are but speckled beasts, and parti-colored birds, and not one of
you all are come into the way of the promise of God, which is come to pass,
wherein the ransomed of the Lord shall only walk, and no unclean thing can
tread therein.

And as for us who are the remnant of God, and his seed gathered to his honor,
praise, infinite, endless, everlasting glory; all ungodliness and worldly
lusts our life abhors, and we are the redeemed of the Lord, through the
purchase of the blood of Immanuel, the light with us, and in us, by which we
are kept in the pure fear of the Lord God eternal, to spread his name among
you, unto whom also the promise is, that the seed shall be gathered.

God has begun in the north Islands to perfect his prais throughout the earth;
and because the Lord has redemeed us from Nations, Kindreds, Countries,
tongues and people, we are despised of all Nations, both Jew and Gentile, and
of the scornful people of our own Nation England, are called Quakers, who are
the Servauts of the Lord in spirit.

This is written by an upright tender lover of all souls, John Perrot.
THE END.

