J. P. The follower of the Lamb, to the Shepherds Flock Salutation, Grace and
Peace is with you in the Spirit of Power and Life, and be Infinitely multiplied
unto you. Amen.
Hear O HEAVENS, and learn O EARTH, For O third Heavens in thy Ancient Records
it was enrolled thy Elevation from the lowest deepes, and Exaltation unto the
glory of the Supernall Dominion, to be made the most Glorious Throne of the
most Glorious of Glorious, which in this the Day of the mighty power of God is
come to pass, according to the predestination of Time, by Eternal Council
from of old; and now manifestly revealed (in the Resplendent year, which is the
one Day without Night, and as a thousand years with God, and more than ten
thousand times ten thousand, and thousand of thousands of years with the Son
of man) through generation of the Word of the Power of Creation, through the
fullfilling of the natural Course of time until the Travel, and through her
Pangs to the Birth, and after it through Temptations and Trials, through
Sorrows, Persecutions, Combats and Battles, through Fire and Water, through
overwhelming floods, and exceeding strong ascending flames, whereby the Ample
advantage has accrued; in all which may be possibly conceived, yea more in the
superabundance of the Immortal virtue, then can be spread upon the longest and
largest Land of the Kingdom of Comprehension; but this is undoubtedly
understood, the man-child hereby (which you know to be the fruit of the womb of
the woman, which the Dragon drove into the Wilderness) is grown unto the
Stature of a man, full of the Power, of Wisdom, Life and Light. And as Deborah
was a famous and Renowned Judge in Israel; even so also is become the
Virgin-Daughter of Sion, excelling all of her Sex that ever were before her;
This is she which was born of the Virgins womb; in which also was conceived
the Man-child, Behold, I speak a Riddle, for these three are the Twins, and the
Twins suck at one Breast, and the Breast is the man's mouth, and the milk is
the Fathers voice, and the man's strength is the Fathers might, and the Man,
the Son and the Father, is one; and the Father has married the Son to the
Virgin, and the Virgin Daughter; And so all souls in the sweetness your maker
is become your husband, for you have given the Virgin your impolluted and
undefiled Souls, to the Spirit your Brother and Husband, and so call him Lord,
and give him the Reverence as Sarah did unto Abraham; and hereby the Kingdom
is known to be In you, and the Lord in the Kingdom, as the Lord, and you in
the Kingdom with the Lord, not as your own, but as the Lords, and so the
whole substance is consecrated unto him who is the Lord of the whole Earth. And
thus whether your body Lives or Dies, whether you in the Body or out of the
Body, the Soul is the same with the Lord in the Kingdom, though the Last you
will find to be Best.

Ah Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou art my Sister, the glorious work manship of thy
Maker; yea, thou art my Life's love, prepared for thy Spouse in the bed of the
Bride-chamber.

Thy Beauty has enamoured me in Virtues lodge of Rest,
A flaming Torch thine eye may see of love burns in my breast;
Thou art the Stone which does my spirit whet,
Like as the Razor which is newly set:
Ah feel my edge that is ground exceeding sharp,
To sing thy Virtues praise to David's Harp.
For as an Host in Sions Coast, Of much more strength than Nations;
Thou do Arise before mine Eyes, In all my Contemplations.
Ah Clear Crystal City of God, come down from above thou blessed womb of
Princes, and renowned habitation of holy Judges, thy SPOUSE has endowed thee
with Infinite Riches, and adorned thee with the rarities of far Countries, and
Costliness of Lands and Kingdoms; thy LINEN is as white as the snow of
Heaven, and is a Lantern of light to a great Nation; thy ROBE is of the Die
of the Blood of Life, as precious as the Ransom of Kings: thy CROWN is an
Innumerable trayn of stars, which shall follow thee to the end of Time;
blessed is the fruit of thy fruitful Womb, for thy Daughters are the fairest
of thousands, their face is as the Crystal glass, which shows every Soul its
shape; they are as the Gold of Ophir in Judah's Land, and as Pearls in the City
streets; they hang as Jewels at thy Breast, and Bracelets upon thy Right-arme;
they are the Beautifullest Princesses in the whole Earth, the glory of God is
their Dowry. I am Over-flowne Overwhelmed and swallowed with the floods of
their Love which pursue me; Thy Virtue O JERUSALEM is as an Impress of ten
Thousands upon my little Cottage-Walls; I am surprised by the Bow of thy
battle, made Captive to love Everlasting; for the hand of thy Husband did break
a Chayn, and truth lincked me to the love of Life, and her. I am full of thy
weight which is augmented in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and weighs the
world as wind; I kiss the cheeks of thy Daughter, I woo her as a Spouse for my
bed, she is mine in the Covenant of Conjunction, as the Coupled Dove to her
Mate; I am Bowels of her true Body and she is Blood of my heart-bloud.

Ah surpassing sweet SHILOH, thou art the Husband of Jerusalem my Mother and my
Brother; Sion is the only Son, JVDAH my Sister is a faithful Daughter;
Treachery is no more lodged in her Land; I am plentifully filled with the
sweetest refreshment in the solace of endless Life. Beholding the order of thy
house, What Gravity? What Modesty? What Chastity? What Wisdom? What fear and
trembling? What Faith-undoubted? What Patience and Content? What Charity and
Unity? Yea, What Bowels of Love and Life? Ah! how plentiful does the glorious
virtue of the Lord God abound in the mantion of thy dwelling among all thy
dearest pure-born seed and Children? And thou O GOD art Rest to the
wearisomness of the Weary, and Bread to the hunger of the Hungry, thou art
Strength to the weakness of the Weak, and a Support of the feeble knees; thou
visitest the Sick with the medicine of mercy, and raisest the languishing with
love; thou droppest thy dews upon the Heaths of the Mountains, as on the green
herbs of the valleys; thou have made Rocks in mountains, and Stones in dry
walls to sweat with moisture, though they changed not from the nature of their
hardness; great has thy Grace been to all Generations, though the Rebellious
have kicked against thee: my soul is a fire of praise, and a sacrifice of
thanksgiving before thee, my spirit says in this behalf, Glory, Glory, Glory
to God my God for ever and ever, Amen.

Speak ye Barren-Mountaines, and Answer ye Dry-hills, Where, Where are the
parched Heaths which say, Or the Rocky places which can Avouch, that always
they were dry without the Distilling drops of the Heavens?

Stand up ye Brooks, and Surmount ye Rivers, and speak to the Barren
Mountains; And declare O ye fruitful valleys unto the dryest hills, though
you be dry, yet we were as you are, when both the Sun shined, and the Heavens
showred upon the just and the unjust, upon the Corn and the weed, upon the
Lilly and the Thorn, the Rose and the Briar; And we knew it not. Wherefore Weep
your part O ye Wildernesses, and Lament your part O ye parched places, and fall
down ye craggy Rocks, and come and drink of our waters in the valleys; and lo
you shall be such streams as are our streams, and you shall be a Vineyard of
sweet grapes, as we are a fruitfullness to the Lord of the whole Earth, and
there shall be no difference betwixt you and us, for we were as you are; and in
all things like unto your unfruitfulness in the parching times when the earth
did Cleave and Chap, and Gape for water, before that we found the Way to the
fountain.

And O ye sweet Waters of the Consolation of Jacobs Well, Speak, speak unto the
Waters of Meribah, which once was a hard Rock, but now are the streams of the
waters of Bitterness, why runs thy streams as a brook of such great
Bitterness? O Waters remove the Rock which is in the bottom of thy Waters, and
then let a drop of our Waters fall into thy Waters, and behold they shall be no
more a bitterness, but as our Waters, like the Milk of the breast to the babe;
and so our Consolation shall be thy Consolation, and thou shall be an
habitation of joy in the Land.

And O ye Branches of the Olive tree,
Your leaves are shades, and fruit is life to me;
God's wisdom which surpasses man's devices,
Has built you as a Bower of fragrant Spices.
Your Walks are Joyfullness and peace, your Seat,
Your Life is Bread and Wine, and Love is meat;
My soul is planted in your holy ground,
And here your flames of love do me surround;
And on your substance which distills as drops
Of heavenly dew, I feed like honey sops.
Partaker with you in Community.
Of good in Gods house in the Unity;
And in the stem my branch with you reposes,
Which bears the bud and all the Damask-roses;
You are the bed composed of heavenly pleasure
Unto my soul, yea, Gods peculiar Treasure.
How purely runs these most refreshing streams,
In daily Visions and Nocturnal dreams;
The fullness verily is in the Father,
Who does our Minds into his bosom gather,
Like tender Chickens by the Clucking-hen,
Whose Name be praised by Life, by Voice and Pen.
Let me descend from Sions glorious Mountain,
To show a Seed the Vale wherein's the Fountain;
For surely I could freely lay down life,
With blood, to buy a stranger for my wife;
For what is so purchased by Joynt-consent,
Is as the Seed of Judah's saved Tent;
What? Forreigner would thou walk in the Way
Of Life and Peace in this God's saving Day?
Thy whole Affection must in substance bend,
To that which brings to Flesh a final end;
And that from Darkness thou the Day may know,
The Proud must bow down to the poor and low;
For lo the Sun which gives the Day her light,
Remains below the Horizon all night;
Such is the Principle and Spark in thee,
Veiled by Sins cloud, whereby thou can not see
To know the Poor, the Oppressed, and his cries,
Within thy Self which in a Dungeon lies.
Wherefore draw near unto the Earth's short end,
To see the Day Star and the Sun ascend;
For know thou whilst that thou do there remain,
Assuredly art bound in Death's black-chaine;
And whilst thou do from Mountain run to Hill,
Seeking a Stream to drink thy lustful fill,
Arive thou can not unto Jacobs Well,
For so thou run'st to ring a broken bell:
Stand still I Will touch a Stone and thou shall know,
That Waters in thee out of it shall flow;
In Conscience there is a secret Light within,
Which does distinguish Truth from every sin;
That is of God which Judges works of Evil,
And thoughts in man moved of the tempting Devil;
The Soul which faithfully it is Judgment keeps,
Shall know Salvation from the Darkness deepes;
Then follows Faith and, Hope which God alone,
The internal knowledge of the virtuous Stone;
Out of which waters pure of life do gush,
And in the same's concealed the Burning bush;
Then will his River run, and Flames ascend
Of Heavenly Virtue, which shall never end:
Remember man, the light within's the Way,
From darkness dwelling to the door of Day;
Which leads to fulness, free from every doubt,
Obeyed Within, possessed, but lost without:
And therefore Wanderer at home retire,
Least that thou sink and perish in the mire.
For that which leads man from the light within,
Spurs on the ear to end the life in sin.
And then of sin in which he Lives and Dies,
Shall have his Wage, for as he Falls he Lies.
Yet still my Heart does in my body burn,
Toward the Doves, to whose door I return
With Corn in hand to spread before their eye,
Upon the Stage whereto they daily fly:
Which is the place whereon they always feed,
Amidst the house wherein their young they breed.
To all the Hungry and the Thirsty Lambs,
I Am Broken-bread, and Wine drawn out in drams.
And of a truth it is my souls sweet care,
That every babe may eat and drink a share;
My life in Sion would be always found
Among the Seed, a Salve to every wound;
And perfect Medicine to every grief,
And to The Oppressed an Arm of good relief.
Let not my Love's heart languish under sorrow,
For lo thy Joy approaches with the Morrow.
The YOKE to self, and CROSS to flesh fly never,
That DEATH may Dye, and LIFE may live for ever,
For, suffering Sword contentedly to slay
The Mortal, thou in battle wins the day;
Then thin's the Standard and the Ensign spread,
And thou in Sion know the Ruling head;
Then peace, then joy, then pleasures pure abound,
And solace sweet as Walls do thee surround:
Then Sobs and Grief God from thy Land does banish,
And Sighs and Sorrows as a shade do vanish;
Yea of thy Trouble whilst thou were forlorn,
Remains not thought, for joy a Son is born.
Wherefore O Plants wait in the Spirit-Meeke,
And in the drouth from God the showers seek;
In which sweet state you shall me witness bear,
God's fulness feeds each low heart full of fear:
Who does Exalt the spirit of the Humble,
But the Exalted from his seat does Tumble.
When as the Woods in Summer time are green,
The Thrustles tune is heard though she not seen
By any Mortal, yet there is an eye,
Which sees how she from Tree to Tree does fly,
And does perceive whence her sweet notes Aspire,
And what is the thing her life does most desire,
Which is the Book wherein I read your Race,
Beyond wide-Lands, Sea's, Time and utmost Space.
And here with you I rest, I live and dwell,
Like Silkworms hid, in one wrought Case and Shell;
Yea lodged in a secret Suckling Breast,
Like as the young ones in the Turtles nest.
Dear Lambs true number of the Shepherds tale,
As one by one I hugg and kiss you all:
Remembering you I drop like molten marrow,
Yea rent like fallow torn with the barrow.
Ah! feel my Bowels which like Rain distills,
And runs like Rivers down the steepest hills:
Yea, touch my panting heart and thereby learn,
My soul most frequent after you does yearn.
I Am Ravished beholding Virtues graces,
Of Heavens glory to over spread your faces;
And cannot utter how my deeps abound,
Of love to you, which in the life are found.
You're at the Fountain pure, I plainly see,
And so am I, yet still remember me:
There in the Spirit of Life, Joy, and Peace,
Pray for your Brother, pray and never cease;
For I am God's, and Yours in every Trial,
The which you know full well without denial:
So read me, You, We One, through life's infusion,
In the first principle and last conclusion.
All dear seed and Plants of the Lord God, from the Crown of the head to the
sole of the foot of the entire perfect body, every member which stands Purely,
Firmly, and Sollidly knit Joint by Joint, Bone to Bone, by the strength of the
Sinews which hold^ all in the soundness, free from maimes, or haltings: My
dear soul sealed in Spirit, greets, salutes, and kisses you as Gods dearest
Children, pitched as Torches, Lanthorns, and shining Lamps of his praise (in
your respective Places and Callings) and everlasting glory which shall never
have end. And so all Saints dwell in the holy City, and there I am with you
all, known to you a brother in the life of the brotherhood. John

The 20th of the 5th Month. 1660.
To the Brethren in the Unity and Fellowship of the Life of the Virginity of
Innocence called Quakers, in ENGLAND, and elsewhere.
YE the Born of God of the Incorruptible and Immortal-Seed of the Covenant,
which is AMEN for ever and ever. In the substance which ministers you
Dayly-Bread, and the fresh and new wine of the kingdom, mine endless Love
reaches you, and with the sweet Arms of the Grace and Peace of my Heavenly
Father I Embrace you; I Greet, Salute, and kiss you, one by one, yea, all as
one (in the one only, in whom is no Variation or Changing) with the undefiled
lips of Sincerity, which never uttered Uncleanness, Lewdness, Deceit, or a Lie;
Feel and know me as near you as the Flesh which cleaves to your Bones, as
purely and perfectly in you as the blood of Life in your hearts.

Ah Sion! if thee I forget, let my Bowels burst in my body, and let my Carcass
quickly become meat for hungry Eagles, and let the Vultures also tear my flesh
from my bones.

I cease not Night nor Day in every Watch to present you as a living Sacrifice
upon the Altar in the Holiest of Holiests: And I full well know that when fire
is kindled in your proper habitations (which is the Seat of God's Rest) I am as
a writ of Remembrance before you.

God Almighty Augment your portion as faithful Stewards, and continually of
his fullness give you all fullness: Though I am as the Least, and as a Door
keeper in the house of God, yet of a truth the Virtue of the Lord God is with
me.

The which I have to say, that you all in my behalf be full of the praise of my
Heavenly Father in your hearts, and that your Thanksgiving in Spirit may abound
before him, Amen.

The God of peace possess your souls to the utmost in his everlasting peace,
And the most Dreadful Lord of Holiness preserve you to pass the time of your
Pilgrimage in Fear and Trembling. Again I say unto you Fear, Dread, and
Tremble ye before the ever living God.

J. P.

LONDON; Printed, for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black Spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins near Aldersgate.

1660.


