AN EPISTLE TO THE GREEKS.

ESPECIALLY To those in and about Corinth and Athens.

WITH Certain Queries propounded to the Priests and Doctors, and all the rest
of the Members and Officers belonging unto the two Churches of Greeks and
Romans, which is of concernment for the view of them all throughout the WORLD.

Written in Egripo in the Island of Negroponte, By a Servant of the Lord: J. P.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, within Aldersgate.
1661.

To the Reader.
Friends
THe Word of the Lord is the Proclamation of War, only with the wicked, and
the messengers thereof holds not the persons of men in contempt, or scorn; it
casts out the root of envy, which Satan planted in the heart, and fixes the
love of God for the souls inheritance, which flows in pity, and abounds in
mercy to others! He that reads and receives, in him also hold (...), and he
shall bear Testimony to the Truth and witness for God, that the zeal of the
Lords House is neither Envy, Emulation, Wrath, or vain Contention. Wherefore I
say, God who has (...) mercy, and (...) bountifully of the riches of his Grace
unto me, has freed me from the nature of evil toward my neighbor, and has
given me of his Love therewith to seek the lost, from which issues the
plainness of my Declarations and Speeches, which without guile, fraud, or
flatteries; Love in simplicity holds forth the Truth in nakedness, and this
will stand a Yoke to the stubborn, and a Dart in the side of the rebellions;
The enmity is (...) the (...); He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.
This is verily a character of the same nature of what follows in the succedent
Pages.

Given forth by a Friend in the Truth, A lover of souls, J. P.

The Day will declare the Dreadful and Mighty Work.
IN the Council of the wonderful Counceller, and All mighty Father, and
Fountain of Wisdom, (who confounds the Councils of the wise, and the wisdom
of the Fathers of this world, in whose sight the prudent and learned amongst
men, are but as fools plotting in their works, the contrivance and invention of
the perpetual evil of their souls.) This is given forth to the only true
intent, that the simple hearted may be rightly informed of the way to
salvation, life and peace everlasting: For of a truth the Lord God of Heaven
and earth is arisen, who for many hundreds of years has been as a stranger
upon the earth: And now in this his mighty day which is broaken, and breaking
forth by the work of his own hand, he will frustrate the tokens of liars, and
make the Diviners mad, and turn wise men backward, and make their knowledge
foolishness, who will open a door to the simple, and lead the Wayfaring men,
and fools, in the unerring path of Righteousness, and the deceit in the earth,
shall no longer stand (without a heavy work) as it did in the days of the
ancient Fathers, Doctors, and Lawyers of the world, who took from the people
the key of knowledge, who entered not in themselves, but stood in the gap, and
set Briars and Thorns in the way, and hindered such as was entering. The flame of
the fire of the Lord will finish the course of the former times; for, shall it
not burn in a dry Country? And if the Nations post unto Euphrates for water to
quench the fire, shall not that River be also dried up before they come there?
And if from thence they fly unto Jordan, shall not the utter Consumption be,
ere they can have help from thence? Behold the Lord will make a quick work in
the earth. Let the Nations therefore repent; and now not in any upbraiding, or
rash judging manner, but in the Council of God, as a servant by Commandment,
in the work of the Lord, in love unspeakable to all souls, I show unto the
people their states, and unto the sons of men how they stand in the sight of
God, my testimony reaching that of God in men's consciences, to the measure of
the Light in all, desiring only to be made manifest, which, when the sinner is
convinced of his sins, and the wicked man converted in his mind, and turned
from the evil of his ways, then shall they confess of a truth, the blessed
day of the Lord; and say, Surely it was well for us, that the Prophet spared
not, to show unto Judah her sins, and unto Jerusalem her transgressions; Yea
well sprang forth that day, and that hour, was the certain timely season of the
appearance of mercy, and manifestation of loving kindness, wherein Nathan was
sent to show unto David the treachery and rebellion of his heart. And now what
am I that God should remember me, also with the mercies of David to show me my
transgression, that by his word I may be converted and healed?

Verily of none other do I make mention, but only of the name of the Holy One,
and that which proceeds from his presence, declaring this Dread, showing unto
all people the Door of mercy, the Fountain of life, the Gate of knowledge, and
everlasting treasure of undefiled pure wisdom. For as much as the Lord holds
forth a day of visitation unto all, that the whole world may be left without
excuse in the day of Gods dreadful judgments, when the complete fulfilling and
finishing of the time comes to pass, of the full gathering of the scattered
Seed, in the Fields of the Earth, and full calling of his Remnant from the four
winds of the Heavens, throughout all Nations, Kindreds, Countries, Tongues and
Peoples; and the Lord hastes the Reaping of the Harvest. A warning to the
World to repent, and this to the Debtors, and Captives of the house of Israel
is sounded, and sounding. The year of Jubilee begins in the morning season,
yet a little while, and your slumber will be over, and the clouds of the night
will pass from the sphere of your low degree, which arises, and will quickly
pass over the Sun of another exalted Nation: Oh how does the day change the
times, the Children are become Dogs, and the Dogs which were, are become the
glory of the earth; and who has an eye to see, or a heart to believe, that
this is come, it comes, and is at hand, that the Dogs shall eat the Childrens
bread, and no more shall their name be a reproach among the Gentiles, but their
day of Sonship shall be the Dread of the Heathen.

Who is he now that will set Briars in the way, or Thorns in the breach of the
Gap which the Lord has made, and who is he that contendeth against his maker,
saying, why comes this thing to pass, mine hand is turned against it? Ye
despisers, and wonder, and perish, behold I work a work in your days, which if
a man shall tell it unto you, ye shall in no wise believe it. And you that
resist, are but for the consumption of the fire of Gods jealousy, in the day
of his wrath.

A warning, a warning to the whole world is come, it comes, it has sounded,
and is sounding. The mighty day of God is at hand; therefore whilst you have
time, repent.

And allthough the Gentiles resist, and all the Heathen every where gainsay,
yet the Lord will be glorified over all the world, unto whom the Light is the
sure message of the Most High, whether they will hear or forbear.

AN EPISTLE TO THE GREEKS.
I Have heard a rumor in mine ears of a hard cry among the people; Alas, alas!
Our glory is defaced, and our ancient praise and renown is utterly defamed; Our
wives are made the Vassals of other women, and we are become slaves to a
strange Nation; We are no more under the Government of the Scepter, which
swayed our Fathers, but the wills of another people works violence over us; Our
houses are but as habitations lent unto us, and our substance and portion, at
pleasure may be spoiled by the hand of the Devourer; Our children unto us are
not as were the children of our forefathers in their Generations our wives and
children, treasure and substance, is but a burden unto us, when the eyes of our
Lords looks over us. Alas, alas! our misery is great, and none regards it,
the sound of our cry has reached far, yet few have pondered it. And the Lord
said unto me, Cry also among the Professors of Christian Religion, even thus it
is come to pass in many Regions of the earth, the bondage it great, and the
captivity is doubled with violence, and with cruelty; The chains and yoaks are
twice laid on, and the people are under the indignation of the Lord: The
judgments of their adversaries lies heavy upon their heads, and their Loins
are banded with the oppressions of their Rulers, as with Iron and with Brass,
and they cannot break the Cords to cast off their burdens; and this, and much
more, is the misery of the Greeks, which their fathers iniquities first brought
upon their heads in their days, and the children of their Generations drinking
of the Cup of their abominations, unto this present Seed of evil doers;
Wherefore the hand of vengeance still touches their shoulders, and in this
manner God has seen it equal, to lay the burden upon that man, which with his
transgressions has laden and pressed down the righteous soul of the Lord, as a
Cart is laden, and pressed down with sheaves.

This is the end of their labors, they ploughed the fields of the pleasure of
their own hearts, they sowed the seed of unrighteousness in the depth of the
ground of iniquity, who notwithstanding the Lord watered them with the water of
adversity, yet returned they not in the day of affliction, wherefore of
corruption they have reaped this abundance of misery.

YE Greeks unto whom I write, for the seeds sake, as a husband unto a wife, not
covering the diseased parts, or falsely solving up the forest, and most
dangerous wounds, not seeking to seal up your states in hidden sentences from
your understandings, or your conditions in parables, nor to shut the door of
the Kingdom against the seed of the Kingdom. It has pleased the Lord,
(contrary to every part of the natural, and desire of the carnal) to lead me
through some of the Countries, wherein as Sojourners you are Inhabitants, among
whom I did earnestly seek, but could not find, and then I returned to the Lord,
and sought with tears, yet truly could not find one in a City that was worthy;
Ye ought to bear with me for the Truths sake, nevertheless, whether you will
hear or forbear; for the Lords sake, and his seeds sake, I am obliged by that
which stretches forth love unto souls, in this manner to stretch forth mine
hand, to draw back the Curtain, that you may look to the Light which breaks
through the Lattice, and to remove the skirt which it folded over your
nakedness, that your eye may see your filthiness.

O misery, misery, the seed is in bondage, that is your greatest misery within,
the burdens of which is the ground of your misery without; Consider, consider,
and lay it to heart, use diligence in the search of your hearts, for the Lord
God comes quickly, to try and to search every heart, and to reward and give
unto all according to their deeds done in the body, whether they be good, or
whether they be evil.

Consider your Life, which is the ground, and cause of the mourning of the
Land. Jer. 23.10.
I have passed through you, and have seen the life of your people; Behold
abominable swearing, lying, cheating, coveting, drunkenness, whoredom,
adultery, murder; Romans 1.23.24, etc.
Changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into Images, made like unto
corruptible man. Wherefore God also has given you up to uncleanness, through
the lusts of your corrupt hearts. Who have changed the truth of God into a lie,
and to worship and serve the Image of the creature, more than the Creator.
Whose own Image only praises him, who is blessed over all for ever, and
evermore, Amen.

And this is truth in the presence of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, and
unto the Light of Christ which shines in all your Consciences, which shows you
all your sins, even unto that true Witness in your own hearts I speak. I have
been an eye witness of the bowing of the bodies of many of your people, unto
the works of your Fathers idolatrous hands, unto which your corrupt hearts and
deceitful affections are joined, whilst not one of you in a Nation, which
mine eye ever beheld, came to bow his heart in Righteousness, and his life in
Spirit and Truth before the Lord God who is a Spirit, John 4.23.
Whose day comes, and now is, that the true Worshippers do worship him in
Spirit and in Truth.

And for as much as Ye, with other Idolaters, do make these few following dark
words, the seeming ground of your standing places, saying, Viz. That you are
the Roman Catholic Church, and that you believe in Christ, and do believe the
Words and Doctrine of Christ, the Scriptures of the Prophets, and writings of
the Apostles, and that you hold the Precepts, and do follow the instructions of
the ancient Fathers, etc.

Come forth ye careless minds, stretch forth your feet, ye regardlesse hearts,
out of the Bed of the miserable slumber of your starved souls.

Awake, awake to the mourning, and arise and come forth to the lamentation, for
your loss. O weep, weep for the woe is your own, for your own wickedness.
Consider and lay it to heart, should not the hour of distress bring sorrows
and mourning upon your hearts? Oh wherefore then has the Lord looked, and
behold your Land has been filled with lightness, and ye have not forgotten
the vain words of the former Generation, but with a foolish confidence have
believed and trusted in their lies, as if the credit of the deceitful words of
their wicked inventions, should stand the salvation of your miserable sinful
souls.

Seeing therefore unto this day ye have been grossly deluded and deceived,
under the profession of the name of the Roman Catholic Church, I shall answer
the vanity of your Faith, with a few words of Truth. God who in the days of
old chose unto himself a peculiar people of the seed of Israel, according to
his promise unto Abraham, also in the fullness of the dispensation of time,
sent his only begotten Son a Light into the world, that the world through him
(who is the Light) might believe, and have everlasting life, by whom the
Apostles and Saints in them days were gathered unto God, and were made Members
of the Heb. 12.23. Acts 20.28. Matthew. 16.18.
Church of the first born which are written in Heaven, who is the Resurrection
of the dead, and of this Church of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, of which
Christ is now the Head, as he was in the days of the Apostles, who wrote of
this Church, who therefore was, and is the Head; Ephesians. 5.13. Coloss. 1.18.
That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish,
and that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. And of this, and none
other Church, did the Lord speak, and the Apostles write; but as for the Roman
Catholic Church, neither have I by any testimony heard, or by any writing of
the true Prophets, the Declaration of Christ, or in the writings of the
Apostles, read of any such Church should be, as of the Truth, or stand as in
the Truth, or that unto the Members thereof, the Truth should be only
committed; Allthough this I say, that the Scriptures do make mention, that once
there was an assembly of Saints which lived in Rome, as there did also in other
places and parts of the earth, among whom the truth was in power received, in
the day of the prosperity thereof, until the time of the apostasy came in, and
the working of the mystery of iniquity waxed great and spread over the face of
the earth, even among all people who received the sound of the Declaration of
the birth of a Son in the City of David, Jesus the Christ, whom the Prophets
prophesied of, should come; and of this apostasy and falling away, Christ
himself, (who is the sum and substance of the Law and the Prophets) spoke of,
saying; Math. 24.24.
There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, in so much that if it were possible, they should deceive
the very Elect. And this iniquity began to work in the days of the Apostles,
of which John in this manner did write, They went out from us, but they were
not of us; 1 John 2.18, 19.
by which he knew that it was the last time as they had heard that Antichrist
should come, and says he, 1 John 4.1.
even now there are many Antichrists; Wherefore he also exhorted the Brethren,
that they should not believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they
are of God, because many false Prophets were then gone into the world. And
Paul, he testifies his knowledge, saying, Acts 20.29.30, 31.
After my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
flock, and also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to
draw many Disciples after them; therefore watch and remember, that by the space
of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. And
this in measure came to pass whilst John was; Paul also, John 1.9, 10. 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.8, 9
he bore further witness that this thing must be, even the falling away, else
this day, which is now come, and coming could not come: and he said then in his
day also, That the Mystery of iniquity does already work, only he who lets,
will let, until he be taken out of the way, and then shall that wicked one be
revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming, even him whose coming (mark his
coming) is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders, and with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, in them that perish,
and for this cause seeing they received not the love of the Truth, God shall
send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might
be damned, who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness; In
which state and condition of vanity and unrighteousness, I find the Roman
Catholic Churches, as a people miserably spoiled, Coloss. 2.8.
through the deceit of vain Philosophy, Walking after the Traditions of men,
after the Rudiments of the world, in the unrighteousness and uncleanness
thereof, in fornication and covetousness, in drunkenness, pride, malice and
murder, lying and swearing, vain jesting, and foolish talking, As a people
through the abominable lusts of uncleanness in your lives, void of the
knowledge, or at least wise not considering, and laying it to heart, how Ephesians.
5.5.
That no unclean person, nor Idolater has any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God; being as it were stupefied and benumbed in your senses, so
far degenerated from the power of Truth, and mystery of Godliness, that ye have
lost the general form, and do retain but the least part thereof; wherefore
among you, and upon you, the words and prophecy of the Apostle is fulfilled, 2 Timothy 3.13.
Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived. And yet a little while, and it shall also be shown unto you that
desire to understand, wherein you are fallen below the form of the profession
of Godliness, as in diverse particulars I shall query for the opening of your
understandings, that by your diligent search in the Scripture with the Light
you may see, which will effectually make for the manifestation of the ground of
your customs and practices, in your idolatrous and superstitious worships. And
this unto you all is held forth, for the trial of your ways, seeing the Lords
mighty day is at hand, which will rip open and make manifest all hearts, and
declare and preach that which has been hid in secret upon the house tops. Many
of your Fathers were the worshippers of the works of the Philosophers, until
the sound of the fame of Christ came among them, whose Miracles and
Resurrection confounded the depth of the working of their wisdom, by which the
wise men came to confess a greater than themselves, which suddenly rang
through the Nation, and so from Nation to Nation, from the report and credit of
the confession of the Philosophers and learned Doctors, the ignorant also in
all your Nations joined with the humane learned, and so with one consent they
cried up the name (to wit) of Christ, whereof they had received the report, who
sometime before that had slaughtered the Apostles, who finished their
testimonies in the Life and Spirit of Jesus, holding forth his name in power,
whose name in words, as the Apostasy came and grew as the deceivers, and false
Prophets, and false Brethren, and false Apostles went forth, your Fathers the
Philosophers, and wise men came to confess; mark the time of the coming in of
this, which at this time ye stand in, which had not an entrance, by the
Doctrine or Example of Peter, or life and preaching of Paul, but by such as was
spoken of, should destroy the little flock of Christ, and make havoc of the
Heritage of God, concerning whom, I have shown you John's witness, and Paul's
testimony, and yet furthermore do write Judes and Peter's prophesies; Jude 4.
For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before ordained to this
condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness,
filthy dreamers, that defile the flesh, murmerers, complainers, walking after
their own lusts, and their mouth speaking great and swelling words, having men's
persons in admiration, because of advantage; Such as the Apostles of our Lord
spoke of should come; Mockers, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts,
who are sensual, having not the Spirit of Truth.

To the Church says Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1.
There shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, and many shall follow their pernicious ways, of whom the way of Truth
shall be evil spoken of, having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease
from sin, beguiling unstable souls, and hearts they have exercised with
covetous practices, cursed children which have forsaken the right way, who are
the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitations,
God has reserved in the everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment
of the great day. Seeing therefore that the Scriptures are true, as is manifest
by the coming of these things to pass, according to the words of the Apostles
prophesies, and finding you in the cursed ground, and nature of uncleanness,
bringing forth fruits of iniquity.

Hereby I know, even by your fruits, Matthew. 12.33.
into what stock you are grafted, mine instrument has reached your root. And
again, I say all men upon the face of the earth, who have the least discerning,
may truly understand that ye are in the Apostasy, working the unrighteous works
of your Fathers, who were the first Apostates from the true Faith, in whom
iniquity wrought in a mystery, who when Satan had his end in destroying to the
uttermost, in the slaughter of all the holy Apostles, in like manner as the
Jews, after they had slaughtered the true Prophets, garnished their Tombs, in
honor of their persons, even so also did the Deceiver set your Fathers a work
to build Idols Temples, and to draw out the Saints Pictures, and to do hommage
to the Pictures of Christ, Mary, and the Apostles, in honor of their Persons,
and those things which your Fathers built, ye garnished, wherein ye witness
that ye are their children, and are filling up the measure of their iniquity;
and thus the Devil gained his dominion in you, and among you, by transforming
himself (in a nearer shape) like an Angel of Light, in diverse other things and
Ceremonies, and wrought in, and among your Fathers, as he did in the days of
old among the sons of men, who sought out many Inventions, insomuch that the
righteous soul of God was grieved with them, so that God repented that he had
made man; for straightway after the spirit of Antichrist had so greatly wrought
through the earth, as that Nations came under, and in subjection to the wills
of the Philosophers, even to the confessing of the name of Christ outward; Your
Fathers they entered into diverse consultations, and what they sought out by
their Inventions, were set up as Laws and Ordinances, and Statutes in the forms
of your worships, and thus came in as I have said, the buildings of Idols
Temples, the carving of Images, the painting of pictures, the making of Beads
and Crosses of Wood, Bone, Stone, Gold, Silver, and other dead created things,
and the Invention of Candles, and Lamps, and Altars, for your sacrifices, and
all manner of Surplesses, and deceitful coverings, and hoodwinking garments,
the observations of times and seasons, and weeks, and days, and diverse other
heresies, and damnable doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.3.
Forbidding to marry, and to abstain from meats, which God had created to be
received with thanksgiving. All these and many more of your customs, and
Idolatrous worships, are neither according to the command of God, or of Christ,
or the president or example of the Holy Apostles, through the Witness of the
Scripture; In few words, the root of these things was the invention and working
of iniquity, in the hearts of your Fathers, through the deceitful motions of
Satan; and so whereas you say, That you have the doctrine of the ancient
Fathers. I answer, It is true, you stand in the error of their ways, I see and
savor you in the footsteps of their ungodly lusts, as the Scriptures
declares, and not only those in the days of old, but also unto this time you
have many Fathers upon earth, whereby your own confession bears witness
against you that you have not learned of Christ, who is the way to the Father,
which all that believe in him, have but one Father which is in Heaven. Math.
23.9.


Furthermore in your prayers to Mary, and supplication to the Saints, to
mediate and make intercession for you; O miserable blindness and lamentable
darkness, how strongly has Satan chained your hearts, that you lie under so
great a cloud of ignorance? Oh what is your loss, through the vented
conceptions of the inventions of your Fathers, how in vain have they professed
the Scriptures, and in their words and smooth language owned Christ, and the
doctrine of the Apostles, and how desperately wicked, and unspeakably
deceitful, did the Devil work in his day? to bind you under the belief and
credit of their unrighteousness and falsehood, to hide knowledge from your eyes,
by training you up only under the vail of their Traditions, not giving you
liberty to read the Scriptures, under the pretense that heresies thereby might
not creep into their Church, as if the knowledge of the Scriptures were the
ground or cause of heresies; but judge ye whether their doctrine is according
to the Apostles instruction. 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator, between God and men. Paul does not say,
that it was the woman Mary, which was espoused to Joseph, or that it was an
Apostle, which before him was offered up in the witness of the holy Faith;
neither does he say, that he should be the Interceder, when after he should
have finished his testimony, and be offered up also, but he truly testifies of
one Interceder, and Mediator, the man Christ Jesus. And likewise also the
Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought, Romans 8.26, 27.
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which
cannot be uttered. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind
of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the
will of God.

Greater Testimony cannot be declared unto you, then the putting you in
remembrance of your fruits, which gives the certain savor and sight of your
estate; notwithstanding, I know Romes learning will not fall so quickly, but
her Fathers by Sophistry, will hold out, and strive to stretch forth a leaf to
cover your misery in iniquity; have not I already heard the Disputer put forth
his treacherous, deceitful, critical enquiry, if peradventure his arm might
help to make a Fence about the Wall, which the hand of the Lord is digging
down, has it not been already said by some of your Fathers, Viz.

If the Apostasy in that time came in, and since the time of the s^aughter of
the Apostles, has stood unto this day, where then in all the time since them
days was the Church, which is the Body of which Christ is the Head? If since
there has not been a Church, how then is Christ the Head of the Church? but if
since there has been a Church, we then affirm that we are that Church (who
have kept this our Faith of the Church) of which Christ is the Head.

Rev. 12.14, 15.
and there she has been nourished for A time, and times, and half a time,
from the face of the Serpent, and from the floods which the Dragon cast out of
his mouth after her; Your Fortresses and fenced Cities, and strong inhabited
places, the buildings of your Idolatrous Temples, is not that wilderness
wherein God prepared the woman's place of preservation; In your City Rome, are
the streets which spiritually are called Sodom, where our Lord was, and is
daily crucified. Idleness and fullness of bread, has increased your sin in lust
and wantonness; Your Land is Egypt, where the Onions, and the Garlic, and the
Leeks, and the Milleons grow, and the fleshpots are, unto which your hearts
are bound with unreasonable cords of Appetite; It is a mighty hand that must
draw you, ere you be delivered out of the Land of bondage, of captivity, and
slavery, to come to the knowledge, and to be joined in your understandings and
life, to the sore travels of the seed, and Remnant of the Lord in the
wilderness; and by how much you are short of this, you are short of the
knowledge of Moses, and of his faithfulness in all Gods house, Numb. 12.7.
and by how much you are short of the life of Moses, you are short of the
knowledge of Christ the Head, and of the Church the body; for Moses he was a
follower of Christ, who was raised up for the Redemption of the seed, with
which your Fathers made war in their days, even with the Remnant, which was
spared in the days of the coming in, and spreading of the Apostasy, which now
the Lord has returned, and is returning the captivity of, and has delivered,
and is delivering the woman out of the solitariness of her flight, in a secret
place in the wilderness, whose trials and travels, and refuge, and
restoration, and redemption, ye are ignorant of; And your darkness through
your corruption, and unrighteousness is the cause of your vain contentions
against, and stumbling at the highway of truth and peace.

And yet if you further enquire, in what estate and condition your Fathers and
Predecessors stood in their day, which ye their successors are entered into, and
do stand in these days.

who cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.
in the filthy unclean lusts of the world, and in the deceit of Satan, and
ignorance of the world, under the pronunciation of the word of John's prophecy.
Rev. 12.12.
Woe to the Inhabiters of the earth, for the Devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time, and this
in brief is your estate, and time in which you stand.

Wherefore I am assured in the truth, that as ye remain in the ground and
nature of your cursed life, ye have not in the least measure or appearance any
good confidence to affirm that you are the true Church of Christ, but rather
your arguments assertions, and all manner of disputations do arise from the
foundation of impudence, which has a face to bear out your deceit and
falacies. I know the figure of your Kingdom, (you who are called Jesuits, also
mark this your figure) the Chamelian which lives by the Air, which according
to the Law is an unclean Beast, which can change himself into all colors,
perfect white only excepted; Read your similitude, and see how you who live in
your lusts, can without a mock of the Truth, be titled with the name of the
Church of Christ Jesus, in which is neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor blemish, nor
any such thing as uncleanness or unrighteousness; 1 Cor. 6.11.
Although such were some of them, but they came to be washed, and were
cleansed, and sanctified, and justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God; Which Spirit of truth the light, is this day the Leader
of the Saints and servants of God into all truth.

Now therefore do ye Read, What is the Chafe to the Wheat? And what relation
has the Spirit of truth unto your life, which is squared and fashioned in the
frame of Error? Deceit has been the Master Builder of the fabric of your
habitation, the spirit of Iniquity working in a mystery the foundation of your
walls, and the strength of lies, and lying wonders, the pillars of your house,
which by the gilded appearance of the beauty of the wisdom of the ancient and
learned in Philosophy, Rhetoric, and Sophistry, is covered with many painted
tiles of vanity, under the shadow whereof you bow to the Images and pictures,
which the unrighteous hearts of your fathers Invented, whose Gods are before
your eyes, unto which the affections of your natural senses are joined,
whereby with the carnal and natural, according to the motion of the Spirit of
Error and Deceit in you, you are led to worship the works of their hands, as
is manifest by your bowings and bendings to the Image and likeness of the
natural, which the natural invented, and the carnal made; And this also came
in in the Apostasy, when that was forsaken which the Eternal Spirit did
command. And now through the custom of your forefathers, and you in the daily
practice of their invented Ceremonies, being settled on the leese of their
abominable Idolatries, are come in your generation Matthew. 15.9.
to teach for doctrine the traditions of men. And therefore in vain is your
worship, as says the Lord: But yet ye have also to speak in the commendation
of your fathers seniority and wisdom, who gave commandment for such
resemblances, by Images and pictures, not as if they were the gods of your
worship, but the resemblances of the Lord Christ, etc. whom by these
resemblances you teach the ignorant for to worship.

Colleges; in mine Answer to their plea for their sinful Idolatries, and over
all your Nations do cry out and lift up my voice as one in mourning, lamenting
for the lost seed among you, (which they that should rather in righteousness
handle the plow to break up the clods, to uncover the seed, have used the spade
and shovel, and have heaped up dirt and stones thereon, to the miserable burden
thereof) Oh horrible Ignorance, a people bound with the chains of darkness;
can any thing be the resemblance of the Lord, or the likeness of his Image,
(who is the Infinite, Eterternall, a pure, holy, glorious, endless, living
Spirit) but that which he makes in his likeness, and forms in his own Image,
by the power of his own Almighty hand; And does he who is a pure Everlasting
Spirit of life, make or fashion any whom he fashioneth, but in the likeness of
that, which all the world by wisdom, by Philosophy, or by arguments can never
attain to reach unto the sight or understanding thereof? Can any make the
resemblance of God, who is Immortal, which the mortal never saw? Can the
corruptible, and mortal, which never did, nor never shall see incorruption and
immortality, make with their corruptible hands, and changeable unrighteous
Idolatrous hearts, the resemblance or likeness of the Incorruptible Spirit.

From the Lord God I say and declare unto you all, your bowings to your Crosses
and Images and Pictures, praying upon Beads, to Mary, and Saints, is
abomination to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth; and in these things you are
but a stink to the rest of the Heathen, who with you do stand Enemies to the
Doctrine, Gospel, and Cross of our Lord Jesus; for as they in words do hold
the name of our Lord in contempt, you with your deceitful shadows do make a
mock of truth, and his sufferings: in loathsomenesse you are seated, as an
abomination in the sight of God who created you, and in the eye and sight of
the servants of the Lord, who by the price of blood are redeemed, and with pure
water are washed from the polutions of the iniquity, and the blood and envy
which is among you, and the rest of the Nations, kinreds, tongues, and peoples
of the Earth, and now are the followers of the Lamb whethersoever he goes.
Abundantly do the Scripture bear testimony against your practices (mark) from
the precepts and commandments of God, Exodus: 20.4.
unto Moses through the house of the Prophets, and the life of the Saints,
search and then see; Isa: 44.3.
might not you with as much confidence make a calfe, and say to the ignorant,
this is the resemblance of God, worship ye it; and draw the picture of a
Monster, and say, this is the resemblance of the wonderful Spirit which was in
Paul or Peter, bow ye before it. Read Jer: the 23.11, 12, 13, 14, 15 verses.
Oh miserable blindness, and the greatest darkness is the Priests ignorance,
who teach the people lies, and cause them to err in their ways. With the
light search and see how far you are from being under the power of the word of
the Lord, who contrary to the letter of the Scriptures, Do worship in the form
of the traditions of your forefathers. Christ said to his Disciples in those
days; Joh: 4.23.
The hour comes, and now is, that the true worshippers shall worship the
father, in spirit and in truth; for the father seeks such to worship him;
(mark) such as are in the Spirit, Math: 23.29.
having one father, which is in Heaven, but ye being yet in your sins, and in
the flesh, are the false worshippers, who have many instructions, and
traditions, and observations given to you according to the wills, as the
product of the inventions and conceptions of your many fathers; and now as ye
shall turn your minds to the light of the Lord Jesus, which will rip open your
hearts, you will find that rule to be the equal measure of your ways, which
will give you a true fight, that you are not in the truth as it is in Jesus,
who is the truth, in whom, and by whom, and through whom, the Prophets writ
their prophesies, and the Apostles had their utterance, whose words do stand to
the bearing testimony against your Idolatrous ways.

And verily the same words which once Paul declared upon Mars hill unto your
fathers, Acts. 17.22.
now turns upon the heads of you their children.

Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious; for
as I passed through your City, I found an Idols Temple, which was abundantly
painted with pictures on every side within, which was the Inscription, which I
John did read, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD; Which with the bowings of your bodies unto
those superstitions Idolatrous Images, ye ignorantly worship, Him declare I
unto you; God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is
Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is
he worshipped with men's hands, by Temples of Pictures, or the customary and
traditionall bowings of your bodies unto pictures, as though he needed any
thing, seeing he gives unto all life and breath, and all things; and has made
of his blood all Nations of men, for to dwell upon all the face of the earth;
And has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us.

For as much then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think,
which if we were come to the life of the seed, ye could not then in the least
measure imagine or think, that the Godhead is like unto gold or silver, or
stone graven, or pictures made or drawn by art or man's device: and the times
of this Ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to
Repent, because his mighty DREADFUL DAY, is at hand, which he has appointed,
wherein he will Judge in righteousness, the whole world of mankind.

Carlo Dessio, Gumene Stephaci, called Greek Doctors of your people in the City
of Athens, among whom I was conversant in the power of the Spirit of the Lord,
and preached unto you the Everlasting Gospel, in cross to your wisdoms,
wherefore ye resisted my testimony, and called me fool, and said, all young men
are fools; Acts 13.41.
In like manner as your fathers the Philosophers, Epicurians, and Stoics,
called Paul babbler; do not you show your selves herein to be the despisers
spoken of; What would you have said to Timothy, 1 Timothy: 4.12.
if he had come unto you even as I came, in doctrine, and Example? And what
would you have said to Jeremiah, Jere: 1.6, 17, 18.
would you have said otherwise unto him then you did unto me, if he had come
unto you, as in his day he visited your nature in the Jews that sought to slay
him? Jere: 26.8.
And will you say also that all the young Prophets in the days of old were
fools? And when John did write unto young men, 1 John: 2.13, 14.
did he then write unto fools? Will you call such fools, who knew the Father,
who were strong, and had overcome the wicked one? And are you so ignorant, as
not to consider these to be the latter days, in which God will fulfill the
Prophesies of old, Joel 2.28.
Your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions; for
God has said, that he will power out his Spirit upon them; and are ye not
wicked in your words, to call such fools? Consider this also, did not you
manifest your selves to be most ignorant, to seek for a sign and a miracle
then from me whom you called fool? Did not that as much manifest your perverse
ignorance, as it did your unbelief? Wherein you also showed your selves to be
in the same nature of that generation, which sought for a sign in the days of
Christ, whom the Lord answered and said unto them, Math: 12.38.
that they were an evil and an adulterous generation; yea your sin is worse
then theirs was, who say that you see with a better eye then they did, and by
so much the more it remains. Are not you the hypocrites, Math: 16.3.
that can discern the face of the skies, but cannot discern the signs of the
times? Like as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, and
came forth a Preacher of Repentance, Even so are the times at hand. Math: 24.32.
Learn ye therefore the parable of the Fig tree, when his branch is yet
tender, and puts forth leaves, know ye that the Summer is nigh; for as the
days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Lord be.

In short words, your faith is fathomed, and your hope is comprehended, your
fruits gives the testimony of you, one cluster of your grapes were enough to
show the nature of your Vine planted in the Mountains of Sodom; the proverb
follows your age, The fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the Childrens teeth
are set on edge; yet I shall also further show you, how that as the Jews stood
in the days of Jeremiah, so you do stand in the same nature, perverseness,
pride and obstinacy, ruling your hearts now, unto whom God sent Jeremiah, to
cry against, saying, Trust ye not in lying words, speaking to your selves, Jer:
7.4.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are
these; and Paul said to your fathers the Athenians, God dwells not in Temples
made with hands; Yet you contrary to the Scriptures, do assemble your selves as
the Jews did, to worship the works of men's hands, and of your own hands, in
the Temples which are made with hands, and so you walk contrary to the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles; and touching this matter whereof ye
say, that ye follow the Council of the Ancient fathers, you who are called the
wisest fathers in these days, show by the best testimony that ye are able, in
what manner you esteem the Council of your Ancient fathers, and how that it
is greater, and ought more to be esteemed, and followed, then the counsel of
our only father, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who gave the utterance of
his counsel, through Jeremiah, Paul, Jer: 26.12.
and others, crying against the Temples and against your customs, the
traditions of your forefathers; and Christ said, Behold your house is left
unto you desolate; and Paul cried against the Temples made with hands.

Where had you or your fathers ever a command from God or, from Christ, to
build such houses, and to paint them full of pictures? Consider and lay it
truly to heart ye men throughout the earth, is not your building of these
houses one, and of the very same nature, and the fruits of the very same Spirit
in those which made the Calfe whilst Moses was with God and not in the Camp
amongst them? Exodus: 32.
In the days of old upon a much more seeming account of assured confidence,
was the opposition of the Jews of Jeremiah's testimony then yours possibly can
be in these latter days; for as much as their fathers had a commandment
concerning the Temple, and they might say unto Jeremiah, who was as a
stripling, and as it were a child, Art thou greater then Solomon, whom God
appointed to build us this Temple? Nevertheless, and although Jeremiah was as
one alone in that work, yet this was his testimony, he knew that he was of God,
Jer: 26.15.
Whether they would hear or forbear; and they having corrupted themselves in
a commandment, he was therefore sent to cry against them, and if they were
cried against, as being a people corrupted in a commandment, how much more
think ye, ought ye to be born witness and testimony against, who have
contrary to the Word, or any command, abused your selves, and dishonored God,
in and through the works and inventions of your degenerated forefathers; much
less therefore, could you in your nature receive my testimony in the name and
power of the Lord, if ye were commanded, as the Jews were, or had any example
as they had, so suitable with their time, seeing ye slight my testimony, and
do make a mock of my witness, against your Temples, pictures, bowings, beads,
crosses, and crossings, etc. for which ye have neither precept, president,
example, or the least commandment throughout all the Scriptures of the
Prophets, Christ's words, and the Apostles writings, that ever such things were,
or should in any age in the Truth come to pass.

What benefit therefore do you purchase to your souls, through the exercise of
your tongues in smooth words and flatteries, what advantageth it, if you say
that you believe in Christ, whilst the words of Christ are not a Law unto you?
but the traditions of your Fathers stand the Law of liberty, for your blind
hearts to walk in the crookedness of their subversion; What is Christ Jesus
unto you, whilst you forsake his way, life and council, and in enmity
thereunto are acting, worshipping and walking in the way, life, and councils of
men of corrupt, and degenerated minds? which you call the faith of the Roman
Catholic Church? what is the Catholic Church, to the Church of Christ?
seeing they have not the word, nor council of Christ; And therefore much
farther from the work, life, and faithful order of the doctrine of Christ.

You may blind the simple, and deceive the ignorant, and destroy the souls of
thousands that know not the right hand from the left; Unto you Doctors I speak,
unto whom also my words in the Light and Life of the Lord Jesus is a Riddle and
a Parable; Ye know not the right hand from the left, and therefore I write
little things unto you, and do speak plain words concerning you, that in all
your Countries and Colleges, ye may be no longer the deceived, and deceivers;
The deluded, and deluders; The destroyed, and destroyers; And therefore I
further say, That it is not a shame unto you, whose long hairs declares
seniority without, in the Antiquity of your days, to stoop and bow your necks,
for your backs to bear the chastisement of the Rod of your younger in years;
and know ye that it was prudence in as many of the aged, whose faces wore a
fair show of gray hairs, not to despise the youth of tender Timothy. And
remember that little David smote and slew the great Philistine, and the glory
was the Lords, and in this also I give the praise and honor unto God, who is
arisen to smite the earth, who also has smitten many Islands thereof, and his
word reaches unto the utmost end of the many continents, wherein the Beasts of
the field have an habitation, and the Lord God will hunt the Foxes, and destroy
the Wolves, and slay the Lions of the Forests, which have scattered the sheep
of the Fold, and preyed upon the Heritage of God. Oh earth where are they
devourers hid? they have made merry, but they shall be vexed; they have
sported, but they shall be tormented. Ye men of learning, what is your
learning? Ye men of strength, what is your strength? Bring forth your Books,
and let us put them in the Balance.

Rome, Rome, Hide not thy Daughters, but let the whole earth see the Daughters
of thy pleasure, and let us come and reason with you a little, to see if thy
daughters of delight and ease, which have been born without pain, are meet to
make marriage with the Sons of God, for whose birth Zion has traveled: Yea
her children, yea all the daughters of your mother Rome, plead with your
mother, and say unto your mother, if thou who have born us without travel be
not an Harlot, in thy profane pleasure, then let us know of a truth, also,
whether it is not meet that we may be given unto a holy Nation, that a Seed may
be preserved to the praise of the name of the Leader of Israel out of Egypt.
Oh Italy thou have a remnant within thee which plague shall not touch, although
Pestilence as a Besom shall sweep thy Land; Repent, if peradventure ye may be
spared.

Ye Doctors, I have not yet left you, having also publicly to proclaim Gods
controversy with you; take to you the Officers of your two Churches, number
your Armies, arm your Hosts, whet your swords, yet behold in the day of
battle, God will wound you, when you shall not smite the Lord. I have seen your
strength, and have passed by your trust, and at that time the wind of the Lord
God did shake the earth wherein I walked. What is your Spear to the Arrows of
the Lord? Let Romes University answer my enquiry. What is your weavers beam
unto David's smooth stones? What are your Silogisms to truth? What is your
Philosophy to the Light? What are all your critical Inventions and cunning
contrivances, to the word which cannot be changed? You called Jesuits, what are
your many colors to white? You Priests, what are your changeable Coats, unto
that one without a seam?

Oh Athens, Thy Members are in my remembrance, and ye the Pastors of the People
(mark) your sheep, yea, your sheep do bear your own mark. The Lord moved me on
the 27. day of the 7. Month, in the year accounted 1657. being the first day of
the week, the day of Greeks solemn worship. Hear this ye Doctors of Athens, and
Priests thereof, who minister in the Idols Temples, and House of Rimmon; The
Lord moved me to read in the place of your solemnity, and a witness went with
me, to the sealing of my testimony, and at which time, Behold your worshippers
did bow to their pictures, giving forth contempt and laughter in our faces, and
I said Gods hand is against you, and he that fits in Heaven laughs you to
scorn. O horrible abomination! Hear this ye Priests, mark the fruits of your
ministry ye Doctors; Behold they declared you in the street, and spread your
name in the open places, your Temples could not contain their lightness and
wickedness, for afterward in a mock of the Cross of Christ Jesus, even in
the streets of your City, the people would meet us, and stand openly against
us, and cross themselves, with many bowings, and much scorn and laughter
before us; I saw the envy of their hearts, and the murder of their minds, who
would have dragged us out of your Temple, whilst the second time in that house
we bore our testimonies against your Idolatries, do not these in the nakedness
of their practices plainly preach the doctrine of your spirit and life? are not
these the testimony of the root of your Ministry? are not these the fruits of
your labors? Oh blush! blush and be ashamed of your profession of the name
Gospel, and Cross of Christ Jesus, and of your own name and authority among
the people, and learn first of the lowest in you, if happily you may come to
see the abasing of that which exalts it self above all that is called God
among you; Ponder it, ponder it in your Closets, and shut it not out of your
secret meditations, and answer before the Lord in righteousness; With what
confidence can you present your selves, or any one of these the fruits of your
labors in the sight of God? Can you offer them as an unspotted sacrifice in
the presence of the Lord? Will you call these Lambs of the Flock? what then are
the monsters of the earth begotten by an unnatural seed in the womb of a
strange Beast? Are not these your people? and are not you their Doctors,
Priests, and Prophets? The prophecy is fulfilled, Hosea 4.8, 9.
They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their iniquity,
and there shall be like people, like Priest; Mark this you the Heads of the two
Catholic Churches, even unto the tails of your Tribes, you that have received
the councils of your ancient Fathers, The ancient and the honorable he is the
Head, and the Prophet that teaches lies he is the Tail; Isa. 9.15, 16.
For the Leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are lead of
them are destroyed. How long will ye stand in the subversion, and not
understand the word of the Lord? Have ye not an ear to hear, nor a heart to
understand, how that if you had stood in the council of the Lord, and caused
the people to hear his words, and not to have hearkened to the councils of men,
who stood not in the council of the Lord, then you should have turned them from
their evil way, and from the evil of their doings, but because you have
hearkened to that council which the Lord did not send, Jer: 23.32.
and have taught the people the councils of your Fathers, in the profession of
the name of the council of the Lord, which the Lord did not send, nor command,
therefore do you not profit the people at all; Behold the people may weigh your
lightness, and measure your vanity, have you brought forth any other thing
then wind? Have not the people heard your preachings and prayings, and partaked
of your sacrifices and offerings, some ten, some twenty, thirty, forty, fifty,
sixty years, some a longer, and others a less time, and yet unto this time,
are as much laden with sin, yea much more pressed down with iniquity, than in
the first day that they partaked of your offerings. Is it ignorance that is the
ground of your impudence in the practice of your idolatries, or perverseness
that binds the people under your wills, in subjection to the affections of your
crooked hearts? Are ye void of the understanding of the end of the Ministry of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus? Or do ye cover it with iniquity, from the sight of
the eyes of the people? Paul the Apostle has written, Ephesians: 4.11, 12, 13.
Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of his body, until all come in the unity of the
Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; And to this end also says
Paul, the Scriptures were given forth (which ye hide from the eyes of the
people) 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction. In righteousness, that the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, to which end
also he preached the mystery of the Faith, Col. 1.27, 28.
and of the hope of salvation, which was Christ in them the hope of Glory,
which he that has this hope in him purifieth himself even as he is pure,
warning every man, and teaching every man, in all wisdom, that he might
present them perfect in Christ Jesus. 1 John 3.3.
And John also bare the same testimony concerning the Brethren, 1 John 4.17.
wherein, said he, we have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is,
so are we in this present world. Have not you blinded the eyes of the people,
and hid these things from their understandings? not walking in the order of the
life of the Saints. Paul who renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, 2 Cor.
4.2.
did not hide the Scriptures from the ignorant, but charged by the Lord that
his Epistle should be read unto all the holy brethren, 2 Thessalonians. 5.27.
who walked not in craftiness, nor handled the word of God deceitfully, but by
open manifestation of the truth, commended himself to every man's conscience in
the sight of God, 2 Cor. 1.23.
and he called God to record, that he had not dominion over the faith of the
brethren. Although you keep your people under your wills as slaves, with their
faith bound upon your sleeves, and thus you starve souls in ignorance, and
destroy them in darkness, teaching them to say for their Traditions, that it
is the faith of the Church, and the Church cannot err, although you are not
the Church of Christ, but a mass of confusion, and not one unerring Member
throughout all your Regions; In this manner you make ignorance the staff of
your trust, in the dominions of your unrighteousness, and thus you rule in
unreasonablenesse, this is the complaint of the Lord against you; Hosea 4.6.
The people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because you have hid
knowledge, I will therefore reject you, and you shall be no Priests unto me,
seeing you have forgotten the Law of God, I will also forget your children.

Give ear, give ear Oh people, and hear the complaint of the Lord against
Italy, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and France; as a Cage is full of
Birds, so are their houses full of deceit, therefore they are become great,
Jer. 25.28, 29, 30, 31.
and waxen rich, they are waxen fat, they shine, they overpasse the deeds of
the wicked. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? shall not my
soul be avenged on such Nations as these? A wonderful horrible thing is
committed in their Land, their Prophets prophecy falsely, and their Priests
bear rule by their means, (Even them which do lead them, and cause them to
err, Isa. 3.12.
and destroys the way of their path) and the people love to have it so, but
what will ye do in the end thereof? Mark this ye people, Hosea 4.9.
Behold I will punish them for their ways, and reward them their doings. You
that have already tasted of Gods vengeance, show ye the Cup to your brethren,
that if peradventure they may repent, and not taste of that indignation which
has passed over your heads, as a stream of fury, reaching unto your present
woe and misery.

As concerning the reading of the Scriptures, by the people of several of your
Nations, although it be such unto whom the Priests give license, yet are they
not without the limit of the black chain of your Fathers Annotations, whose
imaginations drew Inferences and conclusions, and have alleged constructions
and meanings to hold forth their opinions, and the draught of their Traditions,
through their abuse and perverting of the Scriptures, that as they have brought
themselves under that promise, so they tie you with themselves, under the
condition thereof, which John writes; Rev. 22.18.
For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this
Book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this Book. Under this promise and condition without
controversy you are holden, who are bound under the frame and fashion of your
fathers constructions, whose inventions have the dominion over your faith, and
that of God in you hid, under the covert of the product of the iniquity of
their life.

Wherefore all ye simple souls be awakened, and feel that in you, which with
all that ever you have yet heard, your breathing souls are not satisfied; in
secret feel the languishing desire, which no man's meanings concerning the
Scriptures, could fill or preach life unto; Feel your hunger, that you may come
to witness the blessing unto that state and condition; understand also that if
you or your Fathers were in the life of that, by which the Scriptures were
spoken forth, they could not have written meanings upon them, neither could
your eye be turned to read them, or your hearts inclined to receive them, for
the Prophets and all the Holy men, they did mean the same thing which they
spoke, they were far from corruptions in their declarations, and spoke not
words, but such as were punctually according to their intentions, without any
Equivocations; and therefore if ye were but in the Life, ye would understand
the doctrine, and so your fathers have erred in the order of their Instruction,
they have begun at the wrong end, and therefore they cannot perfect, or bring
you to a good end.

This principal matter concerning your salvation they have neglected, they
never touched the feeling part of your heart, whereby the vail thereof should
be rent, that you might see with your own eye, and hear with your own ear, and
understand with your own heart, but always they bound your senses in the womb
of conception of death, and never brought you forth unto life; and the choycest
of your Members are but as dead stocks and Images, and how could they lead you
unto that, where they themselves never entered? They are not passed through the
vail which is the flesh of Christ (as Paul writing to the Brethren, who after
the manner of men knew not Christ according to the flesh, says, 2 Cor. 5.16.
Yea although we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we
him no more) I say your Priests and Pastors, they never passed through his
flesh to the witnessing of the true entrance into his body as Members, joined
unto the one Head, which is the new and living way, which Jesus by the power of
his coming, Heb. 10.20.
has consecrated for us, who are Redeemed by the purchase of his blood (which
sprinkleth our consciences from every evil and dead word and work) from the
world, and the unrighteousness of their way, then how far short think you, are
ye in the life and practice? if your Doctors, Priests, Pastors and Teachers,
are ignorant of the Scriptures, and of the Gospel of Christ Jesus and his
Cross, which unto as many as have received is in the true life of the
understanding of the truth (that is to say) the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1.16. 1
Cor. 1.18.
and the Cross of the Lord Christ Jesus) is the power of God unto salvation,
which if they were Ministers of the true Church, and you Members also thereof,
then would you be all in one Life (to wit) in Christ, John 14.6.
who is the Life, which if you were in Christ who is the Life, then need you
not another thing besides the Life to confirm your understandings in the
reading of the Scriptures, which by the Life were given forth.

Can your nations therefore look a little way before you? that you may consider
it in your hearts, and ponder it soberly in your secret meditations; however, I
know the Heathen will kick against, and the high obstinate-hearted will
desperately resist, even such in whole sight, the souls of the simple are not
of any account, neither the glory of the Lord their delight, whose praise
through critical Arguments, and Sophistry, is in gaining dominion, and
obtaining such mastery, thereby to make a boast of their vain victory; yet
there is a seed, which can receive my testimony, which is the Remnant of the
Lord, which under the iniquities of your Leaders, has been held in Egypt,
under miserable bondage, and cruel captivity; I say, look a little way before
you, with diligence into that which I write concerning you.

You are not come unto the life of the first principle, which leads to the
understanding, and knowledge of the oracles and mysteries of God, and of his
kingdom of salvation, and so are far short of receiving, partaking, and
enjoying of the pure life and power of the Spirit of life, in the power and the
life in your hearts, which in the particular unto every true member of the
Church of Christ Jesus gives the infallible witness and testimony, that they
are born of the undefiled womb, and incorruptible seed of promise, unto life
everlasting; By which also the Gospel of Christ Jesus was preached to the
Spirits in prison, and the Scriptures and Prophesies of old, 1 Pet: 3.19.
were given forth and spoken, 2 Pet: 1.21.
which came not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost; Which no mind nor heart of man, or understanding of
mankind, without the same Spirit can read aright; No liar, swearer, proud,
envious, thief, covetous, nor Idolater, ungodly or profane person can read
them, except their own portions from them Mal: 4.1. Psalm: 9.17.
(viz.) The lake is the portion of the liar, the proud shall be as stubble in
the day of the Lord, and the wicked shall be turned into hell; But every member
according to the diversities of their measures of the Spirit of life, who are
of the true Church, can witness, and read the Scriptures, with the life, in
their life, which is hid with Christ in God; Col: 3.3.
but you standing only in that which has written Annotations, and which
draws Inferences, Conclusions, and meanings from the Scriptures, that
witnesses sufficiently concerning you, that you are not in the life of the
first Principle of pure Religion, which gives the understanding of the
Scriptures; Ignorance therefore is the cause of your error, Math: 22.29. Math:
13.34.
as says Christ, You err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God;
Wherefore unto you they are parables and hidden sentences from the darkness of
your clouded understandings; who is he that sees your misery, and does not
lament you? who have consented to the blinding of your selves, through the
yielding of your minds captives to the perverse wills of your Instructers, they
have trodden out paths in unrighteousness, and you have walked in their
crookedness: Verily, I am as one wounded for your sakes, and heavily pressed
with the clods which the ploughers have ploughed upon your backs. Oh where is
the hand which has helped you? Have not your watchers forgiven you your sins
in vanity, and strengthened your hands, with the strength of their own hearts
in iniquity? In what manner have they brought you unto confession, and what
will that avail you, if after your confessions, the same and worse sins and
iniquities are wrought and committed by you? Are you so ignorant, as to think
that their words of absolution, is the covenant of pardon and salvation? Or do
you think that bare confession of your sins only, will bring you under the
Condition of mercy? Mark the order of the declaration of Solomon's wise
sentence, which makes frustrate the expectation of your vain confidence; Pro:
28.13.
He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so confesses and
forsakes them shall find mercy.

Oh people, why therefore will ye thus rest, and remain in the night of
slumber? when will ye be awakened, to come to see the works of your teachers?
how that they have double-girded your loins with the cords of ignorance, and
have made that the strength of their renown and praise in the Nations, and
your clothing with the clouds of darkness is your Priests garment of glory
over you, by this their power governes in Dominion and Majesty, and you remain
as Subjects, chained under the yoke of their iniquity; Oh who can declare your
misery? It is my sorrow for the Seeds sake to behold it, and I know that it
suits not with the delight of your hearts, to read the explanation of it; But
has the Lord a Remnant, and shall he not visit for the sake thereof? yea
verily, and this therefore in love to the souls of the simple, that they may
come to the light of the day, each one in the sensiblenesse of his own heart
and life, to read with understanding the mystery of godliness, and Scriptures
of truth, which do speak one and the same thing, in the word and intention, and
not of many things, as by more then one, but of all things in and by one,
through whom the worlds were made, and the Covenant of God stands sure, through
whom also grace, mercy and peace is come to as many as are joined to that one,
in the clearness of the naked truth, through the relinquishing of the hidden
things of deceit, and all the former ways, vanities, customs, traditions,
superstitions, and ungodly words and works, and renouncing the counsels of the
many fathers and men of the world, (through the spreading of whose spirit, and
the fruits of their life, delusion has a long time reigned in the world,)
cleaving to the only sound counsel of the living God, and father of truth,
which deceives nor deludeth any man, but establishes all men that come unto
it in a holy way, exceeding the errors of man's ways, even in that new and
living way, which he has prepared, wherein the unclean cannot walk, Isa:
55.8.
but it is unto those, the wayfaring men, though foales, shall not err
therein. Wherefore all people be not any longer blinded under the perverse
crooked wills of your Instructers and Pastors, but examine and try truly,
whether they have lead you in the way of God, wherein the wicked cannot walk.
And now in all this will you count me your enemy, in putting you upon diligent
inquiry, and also in telling you the truth? Lay it to heart oh people, and you
Doctors and Teachers of the Nations, Come forth and consider, assemble,
assemble the principal members of your bodies together, and call a full
Council of the Magicians of your Lands, and suffer us then to prove you before
all men; provide your rods, that you may cast them in the presence of the
Nations, and behold ours is ready to be cast also, that it may be known,
whether God is the God of Egypt, or of Israel, and that all the Inhabitants of
the Earth may have an understanding, who are the people that have stolen the
name of Israel, that were never borne of his Seed; and if it shall be seen
that the Serpent of our rod, shall eat up the Serpents of your rods, then of a
truth it shall be known that God works with us, and not with you, but
against you; But if the Serpent of our rod shall be swallowed up, and by the
Serpents of your rods utterly devoured, then let not the Nations spare to
publish, and cry in their streets, that the God whom we worship has utterly
forsaken us.

Again, I say assemble your Prophets, and let the work of the Lord, and his
word answering by fire give testimony to the Prophets, whether the Prophets of
your Lands, are the true Prophets, that the Inhabitants thereof may truly know
and understand, that if the Lord be God, then let them follow him, but if Baal
whom ye worship he God, then do you continue following of him, no hurt will
come unto your Nations through the trial of the Prophets; so that if the Lord
answers our Prophet by fire, and kindles the sacrifice of the oblation in your
sight, then shall ye know that our Prophet is the true Prophet of the Lord; but
if your Prophets shall cut themselves, even to the drawing of blood of their
bodies, and no word of answer to their supplications, as the answer of the Lord
by fire from Heaven; but afterward, if in their madness and wilfulness they
shall kindle a fire in their wrath, and charge you to kindle fires in your
houses to burn this testimony, among whomsoever it comes, then behold that
shall be a sign unto you, that God is not among them; for if the Lord be their
God, then would he plead for them, or if they be Jealous for the Name of the
Lord God of Hosts, then will they stand forth, to plead the word of the Lord,
upon the Mount of the Lord, in the face of all the Nations of the earth; Oh
people, let this be a testimony unto you, either for you, or against you, that
either your Priests and Prophets have deceived you, in prophesying and
declaring smooth things unto you, or that they have always taught you
Righteousness, and instructed you in the Everlasting Precepts of the
undefiled, and un-erring path of truth and holiness.

Hear therefore this ye Priests, and give ear ye Teachers of the people, hide
not, hide not your faces, but come forth, come forth, that we may try the
feeding of your Pastures, that the blind may feel with what they are laden;
Have not they given a price for wheat? and have not you laden them with the
stubble of the reaped and gleaned fields, and the chafe of the wheat? Was not
the price of their money for the clear running water of the Rock; and have not
ye filled their vessels with the settled lees of your own Cisterns? Behold, I
have seen the deep works of your hands, even the deep wells which ye have
dug with your own hands, and the breadth, length, height, and depth thereof
I have measured, and the foundations thereof I have discovered; You Doctors of
Athens, Remember my rod, which touched your bottom, wherewith your dreggs were
stirred up, which cast a stink in my nostrills, at which time ye could scarce
cover your loathsomeness, in the presence of your Disciples; I have not
forgotten the strength on which you took hold, which appeared and proved as a
ravelled String of a broken Bow, which could not carry forth so as to send home
the shaft; You aimed at my birth, to have trodden upon the simplicity and
tenderness of my youth, yet could not your broken spears reach to the hurt of
my life. Now therefore search ye further, even unto the uttermost end of the
Records of your Books, to find out the first day of my life, which although I
am (after the account of the manner of men) but as a seed of the second or
third generation of this age brought forth, yet never the lesser is mine age
(in a just account more ancient and honorable, then the days of your birth;
your age must yet be borne unto Infancy, if ever you come to the possession of
the promise of Gods Everlasting kingdom, and the glory of your Antiquity must
come unto great contempt; and your eyes and your hearts which have boasted in
vanity, must pass through the flames of the consuming fire of Gods Jealousy,
before ye shall enter the Paradise which you made a mock of in ignorance, and
so bare witness unto the curse of your kingdom, as a people remaining in the
ground, where blessing has not raised the increase of the earth. Furthermore,
hear this ye Priests, Teachers, and Instructers of the people; The cry of the
earth is grievous in the ear of the Lord against you, blood has touched blood
in your Lands, the souls of the simple have uttered their groans through the
crevisses of the graves, the slaughters in your Cities, and the murders in your
streets, the blood which plague has devoured, and which famine and drought
has consumed, even for these, and more then these, the earth lifts up her
voice against you; Have not you cast away the bread, and given stones to the
children? Have not you eaten the unclean fish, and spued out Serpents in the
faces of the daughters? Oh how many are the thousands of thousands, whom you
have caused to err, and which have perished through your lies and lightness;
and will not God avenge himself on the heads of his enemies? As ye have
gloried in the days of your pleasure, and made your selves fat with the joy of
your laughter and wantonness, even so shall Gods time of visitation be as a
snare unto your life in unrighteousness, even as a snare unto the Priest, and
a ginne unto the Prophets, and as a trap, and clean Instrument, to take hold
of the heads of the Churches of your Nations, yet shall it end as the hour of
Everlasting mercies, if ye Repent; which if ye resist, behold time shall not
bring end to your torment, when God shall stretch your bodies upon the bed of
endless trouble and misery.

A warning therefore, and a word of Awakening, even the utterance of life
sounding through your black doors of the darkness of death; to you Priests,
Pope, and Patriarch, of the Lands, who say that you sit in Peter's seat, to
pardon the iniquities of the people, and to forgive them their sins, and to
bind and to loose things answerable to your pleasures on earth, saying, that
this is your Authority, in the place and room of the Disciples, according to
the Scriptures, Joh: 20.23. Math: 16.19.

It is not the seed, nor the offspring of your root, but the children of
another generation, which in the nature of the life of the holy Apostles are
their true successors; you are deceitful hearts, and wicked sinners; you are
men in the flesh, and your bodies are lumps of sinful flesh; your generation
is of the womb and seed of corruption, and your life in the changable nature;
hear ye therefore, God never gave his Everlasting Authority of Righteousness
for the Remission of sins, Joh: 20.22.
unto deceitful hearts, and sinners: Christ breathed on his Disciples, and
gave them the Holy Ghost; by which breath, even by the virtue thereof, and the
power of the gift of the Holy Ghost their Authority stood in the work and will
of the Lord; But Christ on you, nor on your Pope, or Patriarch, has not in
this manner breathed, nor in like manner filled either you or them with the
Holy Ghost; and therefore being without the true virtue, and effectual
authority, you sit but as deceitful shadows and Images, in your wicked, wilful,
presumptuous resemblances, making a real mock of the true power and substance;
Oh how presumptuous are you in your abominable works of iniquity, and as a
people settled in the hardness of the ground of your forefathers Apostasy? I
have already showed your root, Dan 9.9.
how in the degeneration you are departed from the Rock, which in all ages was
the ground of the forgiveness of sins, which unto the Lord only belongs, Acts
5.31.
and Christ only is this day the Prince and Savior, granting unto his people,
repentance, salvation, and forgiveness of sins, Ephesians: 1.7.
and this was Paul's testimony to the Ephesians, In whom we have redemption
through his blood, (Mark the order of Paul's witness, the redemption through
the washing of his blood, goes before) the forgiveness of sins according to
the riches of his grace, (Read this ye people) according to the riches of his
grace, how then is it of works, or by the words of your sinful Pope,
Patriarch, and Priests, and Teachers?

Seeing therefore ye have turned the riches of the grace of Christ Jesus into
an abominable habit of blind shows of unrighteousness, deluding the people,
and deceiving the hearts of the simple. Awake, awake to the judgment, Behold
the breath of the holy Apostles life, is ready to utter voices in the earth, as
thunders against you, destruction to your dwellings, desolation to your
habitations. I have seen a dart within your doors which will wound you, and
when the day of God as a Thief in the night overtakes you, Remember ye were
warned unto repentance, that you might escape the floods which shall overwhelm
your Lands, unto the determination of the consummation, and decree of
everlasting indignation and vengeance.

And furthermore ye Priests, who say that you officiate as Peter's Successors,
in the degree and order of your places, I have both seen you, your fruits, and
your labors, and that has plainly declared in the substance unto me, that you
have not the least relation unto the life of Peter, being but the dirt and dust
which the upright and undefiled spirit of Peter shakes from off his feet, as a
witness against your Cities and habitations, even in this day, as a witness
against the wickedness and Idolatries of your Generation; and whilst you are
professing Peter's power and authority, of binding and loosing on earth, your
manifold deceits has blinded your hearts, whereby you are so much ignorant of
the word and work of Gods power, that your corrupt wisdoms exercised in
studies to the end of your evil days, shall never find out the earth, wherein
the just life of Peter is this day entered, binding the unrighteousness of your
life and spirits, under him as his Footstool, everlastingly to tread and
trample upon the glory of your heads, and crown of your deceits.

Oh ye Greek Pastors, Priests and people, what can you plead for your
Patriarch? Can you not read the deceitfulness of his succession, through the
manner of his Election? Dare you say that it is according to the election of
the grace of Christ Jesus, in the order of the truth, or power of the true
Faith? who contrary to the word of Life, and doctrine of the true faith, does
purchase unto himself that Title and Degree, with the price of a sum of moneys,
from the Emperor of the Turks, whom you your selves do say is Antichrist, and
Reprobate concerning the faith of Christ, an enemy to the life of the Saints
and spirit of Peter, of whom you say that your Patriarch is his successor: Oh
confess, confess your blindness, and blush, blush and be ashamed of your
impudence, and obstinacy in ignorance; for behold if your foundation and root
concerning the remission of your sins be rotten, what farther prop or post to
your selves can you hew out in your imaginations and inventions, for the
support of the deceived walls of your Fathers buildings.

And again, After one has paid the price, for the purchase of his Office, if
another of your Nation goes with his sum of moneys and gives to the Emperor,
he disposses the first, and gives the Degree and Title to the latter; Oh
horrible abomination, who has a voice and has withheld, and not cried in
the streets, and published it in the open places, even the iniquity and the
abomination, and not cried against the loathsomeness thereof, by such desperate
mockings of God, through the wickedness of their purchases? Read diligently
the Scripture, Acts. 8.19, 20, 21. But Peter said unto him, thy money perish
with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with
money. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not
right in the sight of the Lord. Now compare the practices and see, if the
unrighteousness of Simon the Sorcerer who was in the gall of bitterness, does
parralel the strength of the sealed bonds of iniquity of your Patriarchs
Successors; and finally touching this matter, take this as the sum to your
selves, the original and ground of his deceivable granting, and your receiving
the remission of sin according to the truth of the reckoning of your own
account, is the Reprobate spirit of Antichrist.

Read also, O Italy, France, Ireland, Spain and Portugal, the seat of your
Father the Pope, John 18.36.
he sits exalted in the Kingdom of this world, contrary to Christ's example, as
King upon the highest mountain, over many waters, Rev. 17.15. Matthew. 4.8, 9.
in the possession of the inheritance of the promise of Satan, All these will I
give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. The abundance of his corrupt
honor and vain glory, with the abominable fruits of the worships of his
children, and the Priests actions in iniquity gives testimony of the oath of
the witness, that he stands principal in the ground of Apostasy; Hester 3.8,
etc.
Hamans decree which he got granted for the slaughter of the Jews, and his
Gallows of fifty cubits high, which was prepared for Mordecai, is the figure of
your Fathers Inquisitions, for the taking away the liberty, Hos. 5.13, 14.
and the destruction of the life of such as God sends to declare against your
Traditional worships in Superstition and Idolatry. Math. 11.29.
How far is his life from Christ's doctrine and example of humility? who in the
pride of his heart, sitting on high in the seat and Throne of arrogance, makes
the comers to see his face, to fall down before him upon their knees to kiss
his foot? The abomination and loathsomeness of the nature of these few fruits
are sufficient unto all that have the true senses of seeing and savouring, that
his succession is not in the Covenant of grace, according to the election of
God, whom men in the flesh have elected and chosen unto the glory of the
kingdoms of men in this present evil world. And finally touching the vanity of
your conceptions, and the deceitfulness of the Popes practices, this is the
sum of the account of the true record, concerning the absolutions and
forgiveness of sins, which ye receive from his authorized sons, Your Fathers
the Priests, Lucifer which sought a seat above the meek Prince of salvation, is
the root and ground of the issues of their grant and warrant of Remission,
Zach: 9.9. Math. 21.5. Isa: 14.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
whose figure and resemblance is the revelation of damnation; He that has an
ear to hear let him hear, and a heart to fear, let him fear.

I have not in every particular remonstrated your Traditions and customs,
wherein you walk contrary to the truth, but having the testimony, shall in
short show you how that you are short of the substance, in which the promise is
yea and amen of eternal life.

Your hearts and minds are not singly and simply joined to the Light of the
Lord Christ Jesus, which shines in all your consciences, and that's the cause of
the footsteps of your ways, and the birth of your words and works, to proceed
and flow forth as the fruits of the womb of darkness.

And in how much in all your ways, words and works, you are short of the Life,
of the Light wherewith you are lightened, even by so much you are short of the
true way of the Kingdom of God; John 14.6. John 8.12. John 1.9.
For be it known unto you of a truth, That the way is but one, the truth is but
one, and that one is Christ the Light of the world, which lights every man
that comes into the world.

Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. 1 John 1.5. James 1.17.
Wherefore be ye not ignorant, that there is only one true body, one spirit, one
hope of the true calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and one communion
of the Lords body, one God who is Light, the eternal Father of all who are
children born of the Light, wherewith they are lighted (which comes from God
the Father of Light) unto life everlasting. This then is the witness to the
whole world, and the message to the whole world, and the trial of the whole
world, their ways, their words, their works, and their worships; all whose
deeds are wrought in the Light, they in the Light have peace, and their hearts
does not condemn them, but such who profess God and the Truth in Christianity,
and yet are Swearers, and Liars, Thieves, Whores, Whoremongers, Cheaters,
Covetous, Proud, Envious, Hard-hearted, Mockers, Scorners, Drunkards, Gluttons,
Abusers of themselves with mankind, who in worse nature than the beasts nature,
change the natural use of the creature into that which is against nature,
these walking, working and acting contrary to the Light in all their
consciences, with the Light are judged and condemned, and this is the
condemnation of all the wicked world, John 3.19.
That Light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than Light
because their deeds are evil; And such are not an honor unto God, nor a
praise unto Christ, whose life savours not of the Truth, nor of the nature of
Christianity; their profession shall in no wise be unto their Justification;
But in how much they have professed the name of Christ who is the Light, and
made the profession of his name the Cloak of their unrighteousness; even by so
much the more, will the Light in all their consciences be the aggravation of
their misery, through judgment unto condemnation.

Unto this one therefore must all come to be made partakers of the everlasting
inheritance of salvation, even unto the Light which comes from Christ, by it
to be led unto Christ, who is the Life and Light of men, John 1.4. Isa: 42.6.
Isa: 49.6. Luke 2.32.
who is the salvation of the Prophets, whom they prophesied of, saying, I will
also give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a Light of the Gentiles, to
open the eyes of the blind, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and
them that sit in darkness out of the Prison house, that thou may be my
salvation to the ends of the earth; On whom also the Apostles believed, who
through Faith in the Light, and obedience to the Light, wherewith they were
lightened, were made partakers of the purchase of the blood, and promise of the
Covenant (to wit) the salvation of their souls: And behold this is the Ensign
and Standard of the Lord, which was set up for the fall and is now setting and
set up for the rising again of many in Luke 32.34, 35.
Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against, by whom shall come the
revelation and ripping open of all thoughts and hearts.

Ye people all upon the face of the whole earth, unto that in all your
consciences, which reveals unto you all unrighteousness, and the
profaneness, and rottenness of your own hearts, and the wickedness of your
own thoughts, words, and works, which also is the revelation of the terrible
indignation, and of the wrath of God against all the ungodly, and workers of
iniquity, even unto that light in all your consciences, must ye all be joined,
your hearts must be given unto it, to be led and to be ordered, and guided by
it, that you may come to witness a new Life, begotten by the Light in you,
John 3.3.
for except a man be born again, he cannot see, nor enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

As your minds come therefore to be joined to the Light, wherewith you are
lightened, you by the witness of perfect subjection and obedience to the pure
motions of it, will come to know the true and everlasting testimony of the
Lord, and be made partakers of the hope of the heavenly calling, and your
confidence (not as in the days of vanity, sin, and death) will be gathered
into the one substance of the spirit of Life, in which you will come to see
what is the glory of the living body, which lives by the faith of the Son of
God; Your baptism will not be as in the days under the power of the Elements;
For as much as the Testimony of the life of Jesus is the fulfilling of
Scriptures. John he said that Christ who was the substance should increase, but
he who baptized with the Elements (as the figure) should decrease, Math. 3.11.
signifying also the baptism of Christ, that it should be with fire and the
Holy Ghost, which he testified concerning him, John 1.26, 27.
of whom he said, There stands one among you of whom ye know not, he it is
who comes after me is preferred before me; the same also is he which has been
in the world, John 1.11.
as a stranger upon the earth, who came unto his own, but his own received him
not, whose life is manifest through the Revelation of the light, wherewith the
whole world is lightened, which leads unto the knowledge, and witness of his
Baptism, Ephesians: 4.5.
Cross, Death, Resurrection, Life, and Communion of his eternal body; and this
is the baptism which the Apostle testified, is only One, even the baptism of
the Holy Ghost, and with fire, which John said should increase through the
decrease of the water; Flesh and blood reveals none of these things
concerning the Kingdom of God, which is a mystery unto all the world; how
great therefore is the ignorance of the world, to administer those things which
they call Ordinances unto Infants, which things are Parables, and altogether
hidden things in the substance, from the wisdom of the world? which if the
Revelation and Life of the substance be not unto the elder, what profits then
the Traditional washings or sprinklings, which neither is by commandment or
manifest example in the Scriptures, unto the infancy of the younger? and what
can their Infancy through the figures reach, fathom, or feel concerning the
substance, let the worlds Fathers answer this for them.

Unto the cross therefore of the Lord Christ Jesus ye ought to come, which
neither is gold, nor silver, nor brass, nor iron, nor any other metal, nor
wood, nor stone, nor Image of bone, or any other dead creature; but this is the
everlasting testimony of the Cross of Christ Jesus, Luke 22.42.
Father not my will, but thy will be done; he that has an ear to hear, let him
hear, and he that understands not, nor knows this, is yet under his own
hour and power of darkness; Understand therefore that the manifestation of the
will of God is in and through the Light, wherewith you are lightened which
comes from Christ the true light of the world, which lightneth every man that
comes into the world, unto which Light in all your consciences your minds must
be subject, you must wait upon God with your minds in the Light, your hearts
turned to it, that you may witness the power of it ruling and reigning in you,
and working through every Member of your mortal bodies, bringing your wills
under it, and subduing and subjecting your affections to it; this is the true
Cross of Christ Jesus, to take up the Cross, and to walk in Cross unto your
wills and affections, which take up Images, and take delight and pleasure in
Pictures, and imaginary likenesses of the Cross of Christ Jesus, and to walk
as quickened Members in cross to your whole life, as it now stands in the
nature and lust of uncleanness, sin and death, in the enmity to the Life and
power of God, and mystery of Godliness, in cross to your foolish, airy,
childish, vanities, of Beads, Bracelets, and other Traditional Superstitions
and Idolatries, which things are but the signification of folly and
childishness in the first nature, which receives not the knowledge nor things
of God; the Light also wherewith you are lightened, Ephesians: 5.4.
must guide your minds, and stay your hearts and thoughts upon God, and lead
you also in cross unto the Lightness and wickedness of your lives, which stand
in the pleasure of vain jesting and idle foolish talking, Romans 13 13.
in surfeiting and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, strife and
envying, in the ground of all manner of sin, iniquity and mischief, which
produces and yields the fruits of lying, swearing, pride, covetousness,
cheating and defrauding, adulteries, and whoredoms, dissimulation, robberies,
and desperate murders, even in that evil and cursed ground where man is droven
from the presence of God, under the power of the agreement of Hell and death,
alienated and estranged from the Covenant of Life, yoaked under blindness, and
chayned with the blackness of darkness, shut out of the Garden of pleasure, and
Paradise of God, where nothing can restore the loss which came by
transgression, but the power of the Cross of Christ Jesus, which works death
to the disobedient and carnal; There is none other entrance now unto the tree
of Life (which he that eats not thereof dies in, and perishes unto
everlasting death) but through the flaming sword, which is set at Edens gates,
Gen: 3.24.
to keep the way of the Tree life; Can your eye read, or your ear hear, for
your hearts to receive this ye vain scoffers at the Saints entrance into the
holy City, and Paradise of God? You are witnesses to your selves that your
Inheritance is not in the Kingdom of Heaven, which is like unto a grain of
Mustard Seed, Math: 13.31.
which also is likened unto an Onion seed, whose perfect fruit being taken out
of the natural earth, yet quickly perishes not, but prospers, yielding
growth from the body of the root more than all roots of the earth; This is the
work of Life, the Cross, which neither is likeness, imitation nor Image of the
things, or nature of death, but the mighty power of God, which brings death
unto death, which has passed over all men, Rom: 5.10, 12.
and reigns over all men from Adam unto Moses, even over all that have
sinned, who have not known Moses, although their sin has not been after the
similitude of Adams transgression, from lost Adam therefore unto Moses you must
come, to witness an entrance into Moses his house, in whom was revealed the
hope of the promise, that should come to pass, which also is come in power,
Rom: 8.4.
in the substance to them, In whom the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, who have seen the Prophets
day, and are come through the work of John's cry in the wilderness, Math: 3.3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
who are no more of the flesh, as in the flesh working the works of the flesh,
but through the death of the Cross, are buried in the separation from the
worships, words and works of the first nature, risen and born unto Life, unto
the inheritance of Redemption and Justification, into the unchangeable Kingdom
of the word of the Covenant, where he that is least, is greater then John the
Baptist, Math: 11.11.
who was the greatest Prophet borne of women; and thus being passed and
translated from death to life, (not as any longer under the power of sin, are
partakers of the Elements, or subject unto the carnal Ordinances) are
altogether under, and one with the power of the ministration of life, in the
communion of the Eternal body of the Lord, and from your superstitions and
Images, and nature of iniquity, and transgression, by the power of the Cross
of Christ Jesus, ye must be changed through obedience to the motions of the
Light in all your consciences into the Image of the glory of the second Adam,
who is the Lord from Heaven, if ever ye shall come to witness a hope which
will not wither, to be Joined unto the heireship of the promise of the
Inheritance of the kingdom, which Covenant was made only with Abraham, and
with the seed of Abraham, born of the Freewoman, Gen: 22.16.
which by the one Everlasting Oath of God is confirmed unto all that by the
blood of sprinkling are entered into the City, Heb: 12.22. Rev: 22.15.
where not any thing that is defiled can come, for without is the curse, even
over as many as stand in the ground without the compass of the fence of the
Paradise of God, where are dogs, and sorcerers, and whore-mongers, and
murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

Repent, Repent therefore, the mighty day of the Lord God is at hand, wherein
he will sift the Nations as with the five of equity, and fan the Inhabitants
of the earth with the wind of his wrath, and through all Nations will make an
equal separation in Righteousness, the Chafe from the Wheat, the Dross and
Reprobate from the refined Silver, the just from the vile, him that fears God
from him that fears him not; A day of woe to the wicked, and of vengeance to
the workers of iniquity; in which comes to pass the Revelation of the Wrath
and Indignation of God, which is even ready to be revealed in flames of burning
fire against all the ungodly; A day of howling to the sons of Sodom, and of
everlasting lamentation to the daughters of Gomorrha; Strength shall not defend
you, nor Art deliver you, where then will you run for a refuge, ye want the
wings of the Sun of the Morning, to fly unto the ends of the earth, the
rocks will not rend to cover you, nor the mountains move to hide you, so
terrible is the day of the dreadful Lord God of Hosts, and none like it, that
even his breath shall shake terribly the foundations of the earth, and the
Isles of the Sea shall role as ships in a tempest, the Jealousy of the heavens
shall send forth their winds, which shall stir up the depth of the Sea, and
she shall spue out of her womb, the dead bodies which her rage devoured upon
the earth, also the grave shall give up her dead, that all both great and small
may arise, and stand before the great Judgment of the Lord; The trumpet of the
Lord has sounded, and is sounding; Blessed is he that hears the proclamation
of the voice of the Angel unto the witness, and have a right, and a part in
the first Resurrection, Rev: 20.6.
on him the second death shall have no power, but such shall reign with Christ
a thousand years, whose day is begun in the earth; he that has an ear let
him hear what the Spirit says; and when the thousand years are finished,
Rev: 20.9.
the whole number of the deceivers of the earth shall be utterly devoured with
the fire of God out of Heaven: A dreadful found to the wicked I have heard,
the proclamation of the voice of the Archangel of God, and the noise of a
Joyful shout from Heaven, of which I John bear witness, and do hold the
testimony as unto the witness of the Eternal Decree of God, concerning that
which was, and is, and of the Judgment which shall come and overtake the
wicked, throughout the mountains, and the hills, and the caves, and the dens
of the earth; woe shall compass their dwellings, and Indignation and Wrath
shall be placed as the bounds of their habitations; who can count the sands
which are set for the bounds of the Seas, he also can comprehend the misery of
the workers of iniquity; prepare prepare therefore to meet the Lord, by true
and unfeigned repentance; for of a truth, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is
arisen, and rising in dread to touch the whole earth; 2 Pet: 3.4, 5, 6, 7.
say not therefore in your hearts, Where is the promise of his coming? for
since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the Creation, as a people willing to yield unto ignorance, and
void of the knowledge, How that by the Word of God, the Heavens were of old,
and the Earth, standing out of the water, and in the water, whereby the world
that then was, being overflowed with water perished; But the Heavens and the
Earth which are now by the same Word are kept in store, reserved unto fire
against the day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men.

To your own therefore return, departing from your forefathers traditions,
examine your selves, try your selves, prove your hearts, and see what you have,
which will be able to stand in the day of trial, and not consume in the
burning fire of the Lord God, whereby the Heavens shall be set as in flames, 2
Pet: 3.10.
and the Earth and Elements shall melt with the fervent hear thereof, and all
the works that are in the earth shall be burnt up; and seeing then that all
these things shall be quickly dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be,
in all holy conversation and godliness.

Fear, fear, dread, and tremble, tremble before the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, all ye hard and cruel, high and lofty, bow down ye Cedars of the hills,
and come down ye strong Oaks of the mountains, unto the lowliness of the
valeys, the Lord God will stop the ways of the Savages of the Forests, and
place Strength in the path of the Lions of the Wilderness, and their
fierceness shall no longer devour the prey; the strong shall starve with
hunger, woe to the Deserts, the Lion for her whelps, and the Bear for her
young as being robbed, as being spoiled and destroyed, they shall roar
together, they shall run and not have remedy, they shall seek and not have
rest, for behold the word of the Lord shall be accomplished in the Earth upon
the Herds, and concerning the flocks upon the Shepherds, and upon the Pastors,
and the end shall be the consumption of all flesh, which has corrupted its way
upon the face of the earth before the Lord; and with this comes the
determination of time, which shall never bring end to the torment of the
wicked, and whosoever works and loves a lie.

O Earth, Earth, hear therefore thy warning, and all the Inhabitants thereof,
give ear to the sound of the voice in the day of your visitation; the
commandment stands not far from you, neither is the Word separate in another
Nation, so as that you should say, Our arm reaches not over the Sea to bring
it from thence, and who can touch Heaven to bring it down from thence, but the
Word is very nigh unto you, Deuteronomy: 30.14,
in your mouth, and in your heart, that ye may also hear it, and do it; 2 Pet:
1.19.
Therefore unto the more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well if ye
take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne,
and the day star arise in your hearts.

The Light which through Judgment and condemnation, in the secret parts of
your minds and hearts, preaches and prophesies wrath, woe, and the just
indignation of God against all unrighteousness; this sure word is nigh you,
and with you in your beds, in the fields and streets, and market places, the
Light which convinces you of lying and swearing, and double-dealing, and all
manner of wickedness, if you love it and lissen unto the checks of it in your
hearts and minds, and so come to follow the Light, which convinces you in
secret of lying and swearing, and vain jesting, and foolish and wanton
gestures and communication; the Light in all your consciences, wherewith you
are lightened, which convinces you of your sins, will lead you out of your
sins, and so will come to witness sanctified hearts unto God, and you will
come to feel your hearts given up unto sanctification, and your minds unto the
things of Gods kingdom; and by the Light also, you will come to discern the
two seeds, and the two natures, and you will grow unto the witness of the
Judgment of the one, from the promise of Sion, unto the habitation of the
heritage of Esau, whose mountains are places for Dragons; And the other unto
the Justification of life to be made partaker of the treasure of life, and
filled with the virtue of the Lord, in wisdom and a good understanding, which
the world cannot receive, unto the true knowledge of the Scriptures, unto the
witness of them fulfilled in you, which through faith in Christ Jesus, the
true Light, which lights every man that comes into the world, Ephesians: 5.13.
are able to make one wise unto salvation; for as all things and deeds which
are done and wrought out of the Light, are reproved by the Light, even so also
that which makes manifest is light, and the Light wherewith you are lightened,
is the measure of the gift of God, which he has given unto all men, and the
grace of God which has appeared unto all men, which taught the Saints to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, through which (that is to say) by the Light,
being Judged as men in the flesh, they became Justified with God in the Spirit;
the Light will lead you unto life, if you love it and obey it, according to the
voice of it; Isa. 8.20.
therefore to the Law and the Testimony take heed, speaking always according
to this word.

Ye Greeks in all quarters and parts of the earth, read this commandment, as
the quick sharp and short message of the Lord unto you, even of the Righteous
God, whom your fathers provoked unto wrath, through their Idolatrous
superstitions and all manner of abomination, for which cause he brought their
necks under the miserable yoke of bondage, to draw under the cords and chain
of the same Instrument of cruelty of the Jews captivity; and this came to
pass, if peradventure in the time of trouble, they might early seek, and cry
unto the Lord with unfeigned hearts, but from generation to generation, even to
the evil days of this present generation, he has not found Repentance in
your Land, and therefore could not your Land find nor feel the day of
deliverance, and breach of the bows of your yoaks, by his hand of Redemption;
Repent therefore, lest ye be made an utter spoil, even unto the determination
of time, and there come no end of your misery and desolation: Remember the
declaration of the days of old, and the sayings concerning the times which are
already past; there were a people unto whom the sure testimonies of God were
given, but they forsook the mercy, and through hard-heartednesse, and
self-conceitednesse departed from the fountain, to ask council of their own
wills, in the house of Rimmon, Isa. 49.6.
they expected the Covenant in their way; wherefore when Christ the Light came
contrary to their conceptions, they rather resisted unto death, then chose to
be gathered unto life; they once had the Law and the Prophets, and the
testimony of the Law, and the Arc of the Covenant, and the Temple which God
gave them, and yet because of their unbelief, God spared not the Jews, which
were the natural branches, according to the promise; Hear this all ye
Gentiles throughout the earth, Romans 11.22.
If God spared not the natural branches, because of their unbelief, why boast
ye your selves against the natural branches, who are your selves fallen from
the Root? If God spared not the Jews who received not the Light, which
testified for Christ, which was, and is the Light, which shined in all their
Consciences? Shall he spare you who despise the Light, and in Enmity to
Christ, who is the Light, walk contrary to the Light in all your Consciences?
Behold the goodness and the severitie of God on them which fell, severitie,
but toward the Gentiles which stood, goodness, and unto as many as now
continue in the good which comes from God, mercy and peace; but as for such as
forsake the Light which comes from Christ, even they (...) fruitful branches
shall also be cut off, and with God there is no respect of persons; And if the
casting away of the Jews were the reconciling of the world, what shall the
receiving of them be, but your torment, Rom: 11.13.
and the resurrection of the life of the seed from the dead, and the redemption
thereof from the bondage of the grave, to the glory of God, Amen?

Trust ye not therefore in lying words, even as once the Jews did, saying, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these; say not in your hearts,
the wisdom of God is the council of our fathers, such words shall not save
you; or if you farther say, that you have Abraham to your father, that shall
not profit you, but rather read your birth of the bondwoman, that you may come
to the casting out of her seed and generation of her womb; for be it known
unto you, God can out of rocks raise a remnant, and out of stones a seed unto
Abraham; for not every one that says Lord, Math: 7.22.
shall enter, for many shall say, we have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy
Name have cast out Devils; and yet it shall be said ^^to them, depart ye
cursed workers of iniquity; and Virgins also loosed the Inheritance, even such
as were to seek oil when the Lord came; Math: 25.12.
and these are States beyond the conditions of all your Roman members
throughout the earth; and the Scriptures are true in the declaration as Christ
spoke, although you are false in your words, and ways, and interpretations;
and if the door of the kingdom be shut against careless Virgins, how think
you that wicked liars, drunkards, swearers, whore-mongers, or harlots shall
have an entrance therein? therefore, whilst you have time Repent; This is the
sum unto the pertaking of the purchase, that you follow the Lamb of God,
Christ the Light of the world, which takes away the sin of the world, He is
the highest Priest, Prophet, and King, of whom this is the sign and testimony
unto Jew and Gentile, He has lightened every man that comes into the world;
and this is the message unto the whole world, God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all.

Look therefore to your lives, for behold this day is set before you, death and
darkness, life and light, choose you whether, if you perish in your sins, your
blood be upon your own heads; henceforth and for ever, prize your time, Heb:
12.17.
Remembering that Esau had a time, but Esau neglected his time, so that when he
carefully sought a place of Repentance with tears, he could not find it.

This is the testimony which we (that do walk in the light, as God is in the
light) do hold; we know that whosoever is borne of God, unto the Inheritance of
the kingdom of God, he sins not, but he that is begotten of God 1 John 3.
6, 9.
keeps himself, that wicked one touches him not, and we know that we are of
God, and we also know, that the whole world, who are enemies to God, lies in
wickedness; And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, whereby we know him that is true, and we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God, and Eternal life; Oh
all ye Nations abstain from Idols.

The Saints by the seed of the Apostated Jews first in contempt were called
Christians, and we who have received the same testimony of Jesus, by the seed
of the Apostated Christians in the Northern Islands, are scornfully called
Quakers: J: P:

SOme Queries propounded to the Greeks Patriarch, and Pope of Rome, and to
their Doctors, Priests and Pastors, Universities, Schools and Colleges
throughout the compass of the Regions, of the rule of their two Catholic
Churches in all the earth, by them or any of them to be answered, for the sake
of truth, and of souls, in how much they are willing to appear lovers of
truth or of souls, and are ready to render a reason of the hope that is in
them according to the Scriptures.

Concerning the Word of Faith.


Jacob, and which word is nigh unto all men upon the face of the earth, and yet
is that which the sinner cannot receive unto life, but resists unto death?









Concerning the Patriarch and Popes Power.
Patriarch or Pope that key to open the prison door, and to loose on earth?
And what is the matter and subject to be loosed on earth? And in what manner
will that also be loosed in heaven, which is loosed on earth?

David, and who has the keeping thereof? and is there any other key which
opens Heaven or shuts the door of death, or gates of Hell, besides the key
of David? Whether either your Patriarch or Pope, whom ye call Peter's Successor,
has the keeping of that key? seeing that the Scriptures say, That the first
and the last, he that opens and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man
opens, has the key of David, Rev. 3.7. Rev. 1.17, 18.

Patriarch or Pope, Doctors, Priests or Lawyers, know what it is now? Are you
in any other knowledge or wisdom then those Lawyers were, who entered not, and
hindered others, yea or nay? And wherein you may say that you differ, do you
show it forth how you differ in the ground and nature? Luke 11.52.

Peter then? whether was he in Heaven or in Earth? or was he neither in Heaven,
nor on Earth? and the Scriptures not saying, that Peter was found worthy at
that time, how then can any of your Catholic Churches with confidence now
say, that those whom you call Peter's Successors, the Foundations and Pillars of
your Churches, are at this time worthy to do that? or whether can your Pope or
Patriarch do that in these days, which John saw in his day no man in Heaven
nor in Earth could do, Rev. 5.1, 2, 3.

Peter is the Rock and Foundation of your Catholic Churches; I Query whether
that was not the Peter who is the foundation of your Churches, unto whom Christ
(the Rock and Foundation of our Church which is in God) said, Get thee behind
me Satan, and whether is the Patriarch at Constantinople, or Pope at Rome his
successor, in his place, yea or nay? Math. 16.23.



Whosoever commits sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. What then is the ground
of the election of your Patriarch and Pope by sinners, and empowered to forgive
sins? And in what stands their power to forgive sins, who are themselves
wicked sinners? Whether is the manner of this practice any other in the
substance, then Satan seating Lucifer in the Kingdom of sin, falsely to salve up
the wound of sin, yea or nay?

Concerning Ordinances and diverse corrupt Traditions and Idolatries.


Coloss: 1, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.



Idols Temples, altogether by the light of wax Candles, or burning Lamps of
Oil, and to keep your wax Candles burning night and day in your Idols Temples?

Seeing God dwells not in Temples made with hands? And whether do you not
understand that those Temples which are not Gods habitation, are the real
Synagogues of Satan, yea or nay? Acts 17.24.









Mary, and to cross your selves with your hands in your prayers, or
thanksgivings, or to make bowings before walls, crossing your selves with your
hands, babbling a few words before you go into your Beds?







etc. And to call such days Fast-dayes, seeing you eat no flesh, but do eat
and drink your fill of other creatures, and some with strong drink or Wine, do
make themselves drunk upon such days?



in chambering and wantonness, Coloss. 2.17.

John 4.23. Romans 8.10. John 4.23, 24. In these Traditions, deceitful shaddows,
and Idolatries, professing the name of Christ, enemies to the power of the
Cross, and order of the doctrine and mystery of the life of Christ, ye are a
just occasion of stumbling to the Turk, and an offense to the seed in the Jew;
and this the Lord God will require at the hands of your two Catholic Churches.

Concerning the Mystery of the Holy Faith.








does the Serpent feed upon the dust of the ground? and what is that ground
which is not at all substantial, but dusty, and that ground whose substance is
mountains, stony and rocky, and altogether barren and unfruitful?

Moab also has been at ease from his youth, and has not bin emptied from
vessel to vessel; what is Moabs seed now, which in the nature stands in the
same state that Moab was then? and whether are ye in any other condition or
life then as ye were from the beginning? and as ye have grown in years, so you
have grown in wickedness; whether therefore do ye believe that it is possible
for you to be saved, except the ground be changed, and Moab emptied, and ye
become begotten and born of God unto another life? and whether does he that is
born of God commit sin, yea or nay? Jer. 48.11. John 3.3. 1 John 3.9.



Sodom, which is daily crucified upon the Crosses of your Catholic Churches?

Almond Tree, of which Jeremiah saw a rod? and what is that seething pot, which
Jeremiah also did see? and what is the flesh which for one day must boil
therein? and whether a root and fruit ought to be boiled with the flesh? and
whether will the Broth of these things be clean food according to the Law, yea
or nay?

Jacob to thresh withal? how shall he thresh the hills to Chafe, and
mountains to dust? and with what shall be fan them? and what is the wind that
shall carry them away? and where shall the chafe be carried? and in what
quarters shall the whirlwind scatter the dust of the mountains?

Abraham, and worm Jacob, are they in the substance one, two, three or four,
yea or nay? and show plainly without deceit, how that two three or all are one
in the substance, or otherwise make manifest how in the declaration, so also
they differ in the substance?

Adam, whom God made a living soul? do any of you believe that the second is
made a quickening spirit? and which of these two is the greater, and most full
of glory? are any of ye passed from death unto life, from the dishonor of sin
and transgression, to see the beauty of the first Creation, and to behold the
honor of the Lord from Heaven? do ye believe the Revelation of the Son of
God, yea or nay? Show how Christ has revealed himself unto any one of you, 2
Cor. 5.17.



Acts 20.28. Heb. 9.12. Rev. 1.5. 1 John 1.7. Rev. 5.9. Romans 5.9. and what
advantageth the peoples penance, and the Popes and Priests remission of sins,
if after penance, repentance, and remission, they must go into the torment of
Purgatory to be cleansed from their sins, to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven?

John had to measure the Temple of God, and the Altar thereof? and what is that
Court which he was not to measure, which the Gentiles tread under foot?

Concerning the studies in Universities, of Tongues, Ministry, Astrology,
Physic, Law and Philosophy.
Tongues, Rhetoric, Philosophy, to be precedent steps leading unto Theology,
to the completing of a Ministry, and as the principle leaders unto the expert
practice of Physic, Law, Astrology? and whether are not these Arts and
Sciences, the sum, substance, and end of your studies, yea or nay?



Patriarchs, Popes, Doctors, Priests or Pastors, let him stand forth and answer
by name, which has received the word as from the mouth of God, to minister it
faithfully, as the everlasting Gospel and message of God?

Astronomer or Astrologer, let him stand forth and answer by name, which has
received the word, and dwells in the word, by which the earth and the Sea, and
all that in them are, and the heavens the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the habitations
of the heavens, and the hosts of the Heavens were made, which made all, and
governs all, even unto this day, to building and destroying, to planting and
plucking up, which shows the natural causes of all overtures and changes? And
let him answer me with the strength of his understanding, whether his
predictions are not subject to alter and change, or are they altogether
unalterable and infallible? And this will manifest the original to be either
the word of the Lord, or the spirit of the Devil; let him tell me whether worm
Jacob has a habitation in his house, or show me how the seed of worm Jacob is
governed in his house, which if he knows not that, how knows he in what manner
the Plannets are governed, and Signs are ordered in and about the house of
Heaven, Isa. 44.25. Dan. 4.7, 8.

Docters do know the infallible Symptoms of the nature of the diseases? and
have you the figure of that root in your Herbal, which is the substantial and
effectual cure of such diseases, and how and in what manner ought than root to
be applied as a Remedy for the cure of the malady, and saving of the sick,
which if ye knew the virtue, and were faithful unto all persons, considering
their conditions, in administering an equal portion of that root, would not your
practices preach a testimony to the discovering of the iniquities of all, that
makes a prey upon the people for the love of their moneys, yea or nay?

Moses, or are any of them in that ground wherein Moses received the Law?
Whether are they grafted into the root of righteousness, wherein the good
Stewardship of the Laws is testified to be the preservation of peace in the
Nations, which if they answer affirmatively: I further Query; What is the
little measure of equity which measures all causes, and deals just
Judgment unto all without respect of persons, in all manner of differences,
suits and controversies between man and man, as in one Law and way of equity
and truth, which if the Judges and Justices did Judge by that Law, and the
Lawyers plead from the ground of that Law, the Innocent would no longer suffer,
nor the oppressed groan under cruelties, through the execution of corruption
under the name of a Just Law?

Isa. 50.4.





Paul said the Saints shall meet the Lord? whether is it one of the four
Elements of which the Philosophers said man's natural body is composed of?
Whether is it a natural Element that shall for ever comprehend Christ, and the
Saints spiritual life? seeing Paul said, and so shall we be ever with the
Lord. But if ye say that that air is not one of the Elements which the
Philosophers wrote of, answer then according to the Scripture, and show by the
witness of God, what that air is, if not an Element? 1 These: 4.17.

Athens, or other Officers of the two Catholic Churches throughout the earth
need not have gone to Rome, or other Colleges or Schools to have learned,
seeing most of the mean and vulgar in your accounts could so far inform
you, in your own places and streets; But without controversy, to the ends of
the earth you must first go, ere you come in truth to answer this my Query:
Paul said that he knew a man which was caught up into the third heaven; what
was the first heaven, wherein Paul made his first entrance, coming out of the
Jaws and prison of death? And what was the second heaven, and the third
heaven, in which he saw the Revelation of things unlawful to be uttered? And
whether the first, second, or third heaven is beneath, but equal, or above the
air which Paul spoke of? And finally speak plainly, whether can a man in his
will, by his wit or wisdom political, his knowledge historical, the exercise
of his arts and parts sylogisticall or philosophical, or by any of your
studyes Theological throughout your Universities and Colleges, Answer these
Queries concerning the things of God, according to truth in the wisdom of God,
to speak as the Oracles of God, yea or nay? 2 Cor: 12.2.

All ye Officers of the two Catholic Churches, if truth be with you, you will
be glad of an occasion to Answer, and lay open the deceits and Errors of
heretics, for the confirmation of every honest heart, and establishing all
simple souls in the doctrine of truth. Be wise in your generation, for your
own actions will testify in the hearts of the people, either for you, or
against you. Fury may proclaim a fire in your bosoms, and you may order this
writing to be burnt with fire, but that will publish your envy, and preach
your spirits to be of the author of murder; I tell you in time, such an action
will work your own confusion, and afterward God of a truth will plead with you
by fire: Truth is above deceit, and can stop the mouth of the deceiver, and
gaine-sayer; but the worker of iniquity seeks to hide his head with a cover.
For the truth sake simply this is given forth, by one who has counted all
things loss, that he might gain the truth.

Your answers will savor of the best Zeal, which ye may send directed, to be
delivered unto Gerrard Roberts, dwelling at the sign of the Flowerdeluce in
Thomas Apostles in London, in England, for him whom men call John Perrott.

THough they say the Lord lives, surely they swear falsely, Jere: 5.2.
says Jeremiah; All Doctors, Priests, and Pastors, that do preach and declare
with their tongues Christ to be the way, the truth, and the life, and yet walk
contrary to the light, which lights every man that comes into the world,
such are liars and false swearers, for Christ unto them is not the way, neither
in them is he the truth, or the life, who walk contrary to the light, wherewith
they are lightened; Joh: 8.12. Joh: 1.4.
I am the light of the world, says Christ, which lights every man that
comes into the world, says John, who was a witness of the way, and of the
truth, and of the life, who himself not his words, was neither the way, the
truth, nor the life; for his testimony was true concerning Christ, who is the
way, the truth, Joh: 14.6.
and the life. Paul, Peter, Mark, Luke, Matthew, John and Jude, they also were
witnesses of the true light, which lights every man that comes into the
world, whose testimony was of Jesus the Christ, they were not that Christ,
neither were their words, or writings, or Epistles that Christ, which they by
their words and writings before all men bare witness of, who is the light
which lights every man that comes into the world, which is the way, the
truth, and the life, which is the word of God, Joh: 1.1. Isa: 42.6.
of whom and by whom, the worlds were made; and the Prophets prophesied of
things to come to pass, which are come to pass, and coming to pass, which
testified of the light, which is come into the world, and lights every one
that comes into the world, Isa: 49.6.
according to the word of prophecy.

The Scriptures do not say that they are the word, but they say that by the
word which was in the beginning, which was with God, and was God, the heavens
and the earth was made, which was before the Scriptures was, by which word, the
Scriptures came to be written, which says that the name of Christ, Rev: 19.13.
who is the light of the world, is called the word of God.

Now all that say that the words of the Prophets and Apostles is the way to
life, they are out of the way, speaking in the darkness of this world, their
testimony is false, and they are Antichrist, for the way is but one, and Christ
is that way to the father, who is the light of the world, which lights every
man that comes into the world, for the Scriptures and writings of the Apostles
they were not before the world was, neither do they say they were written (...)
Moses was, but the way, and the word, was unto Abel, and Seth, and Enoch and
Noah, Joh. 14.6.
and Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, which was before the Scriptures was; and
the Scriptures testifies these things, saying Christ is the way, in witness
against those which say the Scriptures is the way; and the Scriptures (...)
Christ is the word, in witness against those that say the Scriptures is the
word; and the Scriptures say that Christ is the life, in witness against those
that say the Scriptures is the Rule of life and truth; and the Scriptures say,
Christ is the light, in witness against those that say the Scriptures is the
light; and the Scriptures say, Joh. 12.46.
that Christ is the truth, in testimony and witness against all those that say
the Scriptures of truth (which witnesses against all their deceits and lies,
which is the sure declaration of truth) is the truth. These things are written
in the Scriptures, which declare the way to be one, the truth one, the life
one, the word one, all one, Christ who is the one true light which lights
every man that comes into the world; A measure of which testifies in every
man's conscience, against lying, and swearing, and flattering, and cheating, and
double-dealing, and adultery, and drunkenness, and pride, and covetousness, and
stealing, and oppression, and envy, and murder, and all sin; the light has
shined in every man's conscience, and this is the Law of God which was nigh unto
Moses, which is among the Heathen which have not the Scriptures, the Scriptures
is not written in their consciences, but the light has shined in all their
consciences, and the same which judges the hearts which has not the
Scriptures, also judges those who profess the Scriptures, and yet in their
lives walk contrary to the Scriptures. The light which lighteneth Jew and
Gentile, is the condemnation both of Jew and Gentile, of as many as walk
contrary to the light, wherewith they are lighteneth and this is the
condemnation, Joh. 3.19.
light is come into the world, but men love darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil.

Joh. 1.4.
But now the light is life to all that love it and follow it, and such as obey
the light, the light makes alive; the Scripture is not the Spirit which
quickens; you that can but read the letter, do you read the letter, and the
letter will tell you, That the letter kills, but the spirit makes alive; if
you believe that the letter is the life, then that which you believe is the
life, tells you that the letter kills, 2 Cor. 3.6.
which is, destruction of the life, and what profit have you (...) by the
letter? Therefore to the light keep your minds, waiting in it, that you may be
governed by the Light which comes from Christ, by it to be led unto Christ,
that you may come to know him to be the Captain and leader of Israel unto
salvation; Heb. 2.10.
let the light rule your hearts, and the affections of your hearts and minds,
that you may have feeling of the rule of God, the light is the measure and rule
of truth in all your hearts, which will lead you into all truth unto life, Joh.
16.13.
if you love it and follow it, but will stand your condemnation even unto the
end unto death, if you hate it, and walk contrary to it. Look to Abels rock, to
Enoch his path, to Moses his way, to David throne of Judgment, to the Prophets
hope, to the Saints salvation, wait to receive this as the foundation of your
age, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 13.
for other foundation can no more lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, the true light of the world, which lighteneth every man that comes
into the world; and the day shall declare every man's work, whether it be gold,
silver, or precious stone, wood, hay, dross, chafe, or stubble, it shall all
be revealed by the fire of the Lord God, which is already kindled in the earth.
Therefore whilst you have time, Repent


