depiction of three women on stage. depiction of stage

ARIADNE, OR, The MARRIAGE of BACCHUS, AN OPERA, OR, A VOCAL REPRESENTATION;
First Composed by Monsieur P. P.

Now put into MUSIC by Monsieur Grabut, Master of His Majesty's MUSIC.

And ACTED by the Royal Academy OF MUSIC, At the THEATER ROYAL in
Covent Garden.

In the SAVOY. Printed by Tho. Newcombe, 1673-74.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
SIR,
WHilst all Europe besides, lies now groaning under the Weight of a Crual
War, and sees on every side her Cities sacked and spoilled; her Fields laid
desolate, and her Provinces exhausted both of Blood and Treasure; England;
alone, by Your Royal Care, does now enjoy a happy Tranquillity and sees Peace
and Justice reign in all her Borders. One would think, this Fortunate Isle were
by heaven set apart to prove a New Ark; amost safe Harbor still ready to
receive and shelter all the shattered remains of the VVreck't Universe: that it
were a perfect Epitome of the whole Earth, in which lies concenterd all it
produces of rich and most precious; a Rock fixed and unmovable in the midst of
the roughest Waves, and highest Tempests: An Earthly Paradise, environed round
about with Sandy Deserts; and, in fine, that England were, as indeed she is,
above all others in the World, Heaven's-Darling, the Earths Delight, the Seas
Sovereign Queen; the Eye, the Heart, the Pearl of the whole World.

But, SIR, all these high Prerogatives; all these choice Blisses She does
enjoy, seemed little in Your Royal Eyes: Your Vast Mind was not yet fully
satisfied, in having by Your Invincible Force made her Triumph over her Fierce
and Audacious Enemies, bringing them (in spite of their Obstinacy) to Beg
Peace at Your Royal Hands, and by that happy Peace, filled the hearts of Your
People with Joy and Satisfaction: You would complete the Splendour and
Magnificence of Your Imperial Seat, by establishing within her stately VValls
Your Academy of Opera's, the fairest and most charming of all Public Shows;
You have made this Queen of Cities to become also the Center, the Source of
Love, Pleasures, and Gallantry; raising her present Glory and Pomp to Pitch,
capable rather of creating Envy and Emulation in the Proudest of her
Neighbors, than being any more jealous of them for their Greatness and
Magnificence.

Your Majesty will doubtless find these First Representations of Your Opera
very defective: But SIR, it dares flatter it self with hopes that You will
pardon its faults, and consider that the Academy that executes the same is yet
an Infant, a newborn Beauty, whose Features and Lineaments are scarce come to
their shape and proportion; but, cannot fail growing to Perfection in her due
time and age, provided You daign own her for Your Creature, and afford her Your
Royal Care and Protection? These Gracious Favors, SIR, She humbly, and with a
most profound Respect and Veneration, begs at Your Royal Hands; with a sincere
Protestation, that her chiefest Application and Study shall ever be to strive
to the uttermost of her Power, to contribute to Your Diversion, and that she
will gather together Your Palms, Your Laurels, and Your Royal Mirtles, into
VVreaths and Garlands of Triumph to Crown Your Sacred Head with, as being,

SIR, YOUR MAJESTY'S Most Humble, most Obedient, and most faithful Servant and
Subject Your Royal Academy of Music.

To the Reader.
THe Reader is desired in Perusing this Book, to consider two things; First,
That it is a mere Translation, and nothing else; and that the Original it self
being neither a Strain of Wit, nor yet the Style of it Puffed up; but only a
bare Collection of Phrases, and Expressions made fit for Sound and Harmony: The
Author, who is well enough fixed in his Reputation, would have thought himself
wronged, had the Translator turned the Sense of his Work out of its right
Channel. Secondly, That this Traduction was thought absolutely necessary for
the satisfaction of those, who b(...) ^^quainted with the French Tongue, and
who being Sp^^tators, would find themselves necessitated to see the most
pressing of their Senses go away from the Theater ungratified, by their not
understanding the Subject that brought them thither. For the English, it will
doubtless seem Flat, and too much a Stranger, to please the Critics of the
Time, whose nice Palates can scarce relish the Finest and most Natural Things
their own Country can produce. But, let it run what fortune it will, it can
fare no worse than a Thousand far better things have done: and, were both the
Original and the Version much worse than they are, the Pomp and Magnificence of
its Representations will alone prove sufficient to plead their excuse.

Persons Acting.
BACCHUS. BARIADNE -- The Daughter of Minos King of Crete, forsaken by Theseus.
VENUS. EUPHROSINE -- A Grace. SILENE -- An old Satyr, Bacchus's Foster-Father.
Coribants attending Bacchus. MARS. BELLONA. APOLLO. DIANA. THETIS, HERCULES.
MEGERA -- A Fury. Shepherdesses. CLORIS, PHILLIS,
DAMON -- A Sheperd in Love with Cloris. Saliens and Satyrs Dancing.
Salien-Priests of Bacchus. INDIAN-Kings, slaves to Bacchus. Sea-Gods.
Bacchantes, Satyrs and Clownes. Hoboyes and Symphonies of Bacchus, Mars and
Venus.
MVTE-ACTORS.
Alecton, and Thisphone, Furies. Pasithae and Thae, Graces. Zephirs, Winds.
Cupids. Soldiers.
The SCENE NAXOS, in one of the Isles of the Archippelagian-Sea, Consecrated to
Bacchus, and his oadinary abode.

The several Decorations and Changes of Theater seen in this Opera.
I. A Prospect of London and the Thamiis. II. Bacchus's Palace and Court. III.
The Sea with several Shoars. IV. A Desert or Wilderness. V. A Garden with
Venus's Grotto. VI. A stately Room in Bacchus's Palace.
First Opening of the Theater by a Symphony, showing a Prospect of Thamise
opposite to London, on the waves of which is seen floating, a Great Shel as it
were of Mother of Pearl, bearing 3. Nimphs, representing 3. Rivers, Thamis,
Tyber and Seine; which Nimphs sing the PROLOGUE thus, the first representing
the Thamis, inviting the other two to approach, Sings this, The Prologue.
Thamis. APproach, approach fair Sisters, cross the Main,
To come and taste my Sweets, ye Tyber, and Sein.
Every thing here does seem to smile!
Cupid himself reigns in this Isle:
Ever since, Venus resolved to quit
Her Native Throne, to come and dwell in it.
Fair Albiou now will new Cytber a prove,
And must be called, The sweet Island of Love.

Tyber. Fairest Thamis, thou Famous Flood,
Whose Monarch ever Great and Good,
By Wholesome, Just, and gentle Laws,
In calm his Restored Empire awes;
Whilst his Dreadful Navies, control
And rule both Seas, from Pole to Pole;
Making Commerce and Arts flourish at home,
As in my Caesar's times they did in Rome.
To Him, and thee I come this day,
My Homages and Tribute pay.

Seine the 3d. Nimp. Fairest of Floods, How glorious is thy Fate!
The World and I, have seen thy Sons of late,
As invincible as thy Victorious Fleet,
The very Ocean with thy Foes submit,
Whilst on the Land, a Warlike Duke of thine,
Whose Lofty Mien speaks him of Royal Line,
In Lewis's sight, his valliant hand imbrues
In Belgian-blood, and Maestrickt- Walls subdues.

Thamis. If from my Shoars, such valliant Heroes spring
As could New-Worlds under my Power bring:
Thousands of Beauties on the same are found,
Far greater than you will find, search the World round.

Tyber. Such Prudent-SPEAKERs thy happy Albion bears,
As its great State secures from storms and fears.

Seine. The god of Valor sure governs thy Soil!

Tyber. If Valor rules, Themis does share the Toil.

Thamice. Valor and Justice both may act their parts,
But Love. makes Charles to Rule his Peoples hearts.

Tyber. To Him therefore and Thee, I come this day,
My Tributes and my Homages to pay.

Seine. I, from my smiling Shoars new Pastimes bring,
New Airs, new Dances, to please thy great King.

All three together. O let our Voices and our Concerts move,
These Royal Ears to mind our tender Love.
May heaven-kind ever and ever smile,
And Blessings pour upon this happy Isle.

The same over again by all. These three Nimphs having near done singing, a
fourth appears born as the former, representing the River Po. Po to Tham. Hail
Queen of Floods! Thou Silver Thamis!
Who in that Pitch of highest Bliss,
Thy Glorious King thy state has raised,
Above all other Floods art praised:
Suffer this happy Day, that I
May through thy Crystal Waves draw nigh,
And my Princess divine,
To thy great Hero join.
I Through the fierce Billows have past,
Of two Seas deep and vast,
By Rocks and Mountains ran,
To Mortal-men unknown:
Leaving my fertile Plains, and Shoars, to bring
A Royal Sister to thy Greatest King.

Thamis. Sweet Nymph, thy friendly care and pain,
Of this Great King, their just reward obtain:
And thou may see his People now,
To thy Princess, both love and honor show:
This Bliss, thou ow'st to her alone, whose Charm,
In 'spight of Fate, all resistance disarm:
And makes Envy it self to adore
Her now, whom it opposed before:

All these Four join and sing as before. O Let our Voices and our Concerts move
These Royal Ears to mind our tender love;
May heaven-kind, etc.

ARIADNE, OR The MARRIAGE of BACCHVS, AN OPERA.
ACT I.
A Symphony preceded by a Flourish opens the Scene. The Theater is changed, and
discovers a stately Portico before Bacchus's Palace. SCENE I.
Several Hoboyes belonging to Bacchus, coming out of the Portico, followed by
Clyton, and a Band of Corybants, some singing, others dancing, join Concert
with the Instruments: After which Clitton sings alone. Cliton. He Is now
returned! the World's
Great Conqueror,
Valliant Bacchus, who filled the
Earth with terror!
The god of Wine; and tired with Warlick-toil,
Seeks Peace and Ease in this most happy Soil.
With Wreaths of Ivy then, your Foreheads Crown,
And pay your Vows to him whose Pow'r's known:
Sing, Dance and Leap his Alters round;
And worship him as you are bound.

Clyton to the Bacc. Leave, leave your smoaky Cells, ye Bacchants all!
In careless-dress let your hairs fall;
And with your dreadful voices make
These Rocks, these Woods and hollow Valeys shake!

They all with Hoboyes, Flutes, and Violins Sing and Dance with Clytton. Sing,
Dance and Leap his Altars round.
And pay to him your Vows as ye are bound.

SCENE II
Enter Silen and mixes with them, upon which they sing the same, and dance it
over again. All together. Sing, Dance, and Leap his Altars, etc.

Silene alone. How prudent was that mighty god of Wine,
Who first planted the blessed Vine,
When he, Heaven forsook to dwell on Earth!
Here, the sweet clash of pots and cups rise mirth.
Above, loud storms of winds and tempests crack,
And Olimpus's lofty-head shake and wrack,
While we Mortals below drink Wine in Bowl,
And let great Jove above his thunder roll!

Silene 2. All the Indian Gold he got, who dare
To that Liquor divine compare!
Lets therefore neither faint nor shrink:
But thousand thousand brimmers drink.

Clytton and the Corybants. Let Us thousand thousand brimmers drink.

Silen. Let Us drink his health in that Liquor divine.

The same again. Who first planted the precious Vine.

SCENE III.
Whilst these remain, enter Bacchus, Venus and Euphrosine. Bacchus. Come down,
come down long wisht-for Peace,
Come dwell on Earth! let War for ever cease.
And ye Mortals, unto Our Altars bow:
For such a Bliss, each ought to offer a vow:

Coribants. Bacchus ye see, resolves to Court no more
The god of Arms, as he has done before.

Venus and Euphrosine. In Love he will find far sweeter charms,
Than in the toil of War, and noise of Arms.

Coribants. He leaves War, that with delight
He may drink both day and night.

Venus and Euphrosine. His greatest glory is to love.

Corybants. Wine will his highest triumph prove.

Venus. In serving us his chiefest honor lays.

Coribants. True honor stands in drinking nights and days.

Bacchus Sings. Bacchus. How highly blessed must that Conqueror be,
Whose valor crowned with Palms of Victory,
And satisfied with his acquired Fame,
His Mind at last to calm and Peace can frame.
Who resting from all Warlike trouble and toil,
In love and quiet governs his Native Soil.

Bacchus 2. And yet how happier far is he,
Who from Love's Passion being free,
Can a less-cruel Object find,
To fix his thoughts and please his mind.
My Liberty I count the highest Bliss,
I Will flee from love, and all his charms I Will miss;
Thus over my self, as ore the World I Will reign,
And of my heart prove the true Sovereign.

Exit Hoboyes; Bacchus and Clytton following them, with the Cory bants leaping
and dancing about Bacchus. SCENE IV.
Enter Silene and Coribbants dancing. Enter Venus and Euphrosine. Venus. Shall
haughty Bacchus now,
To Love's Altars refuse to bow?
And he alone, persist
Our Sovereign Power to resist!
No no, the god must yield,
And to my son resign the Field.
I Will make a mortal-beauty wound him so,
That Cupid's power and mine he will quickly know

Euphrosine. He Will find all resistance proves vain,
When once Love dooms a heart to bear his chain.
And if that heart will not submit
To Obey his Law, he can compel him to it.

Venus and Euphrosine. No no, the Conqueror must yield,
And to the god of Love resign the Field.

SCENE V.
Enter Silene and Coribantes again, laughing and singing. Silene and Coryb. Ho!
ho! it is true, he will resign,
But to the sweet Juice of the Vine.
Fond Love at best proves but a Toy,
It Is Wine he will make his chiefest Joy.

Coryb. Why! should India's Great Conqu'ror now
To childish- Cupid's Empire bow!

Silene. Should Bacchus burn with any other Flame
Than that of Wine he would lose his glorious Fame.

Coryb. The god of Mirth and Liberty,
Cannot yield to Love's captivity.

Silene. Should he that wisdom does inspire
Endure the smart of Cupid's fire!

All together. Follow, follow-we Champions brave,
That Noble Pattern which he gave.
Let Us flee from Love as well's from Arms,
In Wine we will find far sweeter Charms.
The Wounds of Mars, and those of Love
Equally-mortal often prove.
We may seem fierce and gallant: but the way
To live at ease, is to feast night and day,
Until we die, then make our Grave,
IN the bottom of some cool Wine-Cave.
Whilst they are singing, Mars appears in the Clouds riding on a Chariot,
speaking to Bellona who rides on another.
SCENE VI.
Mars. Help Sister help! and let weak Mortals now
Thy dreadful rage and matchless-vallor know!

Bellona. What Mortal! nay, What god is it, that dare
Provoke to wrath the mighty god of war!

Mars. The Scithian-Monarch raises arms amain,
And with his numerous Force does fill the Plain.

Bellona. O Mighty Jove! Why proves thy wrath thus slow?
Why do not thou thy fiery vengeance show!
And by thy Power, these mortal-rebels grind,
As small as dust that is driven by the wind.

Mars. Sister, let us fill the World with thousand harms,
Let nothing escape the fury of our Arms!
Lets gods and men to our assistance call,
And in our quarrel, let them stand or fall.

Bellona. Break loose, break loose, ye grim Furies of Hell!
Come to our aid, leave your Infernal Cel,
And to amaze our most audacious foe,
Bring Envy, Death, and horror from below:

SCENE VII.
Three Furies breaking forth from beneath, flee up into the Air to meet Mars
and Bellona, upon which they all come down. Mars. Victorious Bacchus will no
longer fight,
But's now resolved to taste Peace and Delight
Of his great Soul, let us interrupt the calm
With noise of Arms, and hope of some new palm.

SCENE VIII.
Enter Silene and Corybants laughing and singing. Ha! ha! ha! ha! let Great
Mars know,
Bacchus is far better employed now.
All the War he is resolved to make,
And sweetest pleasures he will take,
Is not to fight your bloody Battles,
But to encounter with Cups and Bottels.

Bellona seeing them, draws her sword. Bellona. It Is you! it is you Infernal
Crew,
That his Great Soul to Vice subdue:
Flee! flee! be gone! approach the god no more,

The Furies with their Whips drive away Silene and the Corybants. First
Interlude.
First Mask-Entrey. Indian-Kings slaves to Bacchus, glad to see themselves
subdued by so charming a god, dance round about his Statue erected upon an
Altar in the middle of the Theater. Second Entrey. Whilst the Indian-Kings are
dancing, Enter Saliens, Priests of Bacchus, who joining dance with them, do
skip and leap both upon the Altar, and round the same. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Cloris and Philis after a Symphony of Flutes and Hoboyes: Cloris holding
a Fishing-Angle. Cloris. COme little Fishes, come to me.
Catch at my bait: it is fair you see,
You Will find it sweet if you will draw near.
Yet if that pleasure costs you dear,
Your Life I mean, O let not me
Be blamed for too much cruelty.
My Shepherd thus I did inthral,
When he into my snares did fall:
And ever since that fatal day,
For what his Love could plead or say,
All the kindness he could ever obtain
Of love and me, has proved torment and pain.

Phillis holding a Cage in her hand. Come ye little Birds of the sky
Into my Cage. Why don't you fly!
Come little fools, you may trust me:
Your loss will be but small,
You Will feel no hurt at all,
But lose your liberty.

Flutes and Hoboyes again; then Philis 2. A kind Mistress I Will prove!
I Am wholly made of Love!
A kind Mistress I Will prove!
My heart is young, and knows no cruelty!
Your loss will be but small!
You Will feel no hurt at all,
But lose your Liberty!

Flutes and Hoboyes again. SCENE II.
Enter Damon. Damon. How kind! how blessed would prove my Fate,
If after all thy cruel hate,
I like these happy Birds, could die
Thy Prisoner to end my misery!

Cloris. Hope Shepherd, hope for better days!
Thy torments sure, will not last always!

Damon. Ha! Cloris, thou may end my grief!

Cloris. My rigor should methinks, prove thy relief.
Thy patience will be tired, and that will cure*
The pain, and smart thou do endure!

Damon. Faithful to thee Cruel, I Will live and die,
In spite of thy severity!

Cloris. Thy own reason sure will one day,
The ardor of thy passion lay.

Damon. No no! be thou never so unkind,
Constant to thee Death shall me find!

Cloris. Prithee Shepherd, be gone!
Thy Presence, and thy moan
Do scare the Fish away!
Pray thee go: do not stay!
Whether thy love be true, or feigned,
My heart by thee's not to be gained!

SCENE III.
Enter Bacchus and Ariadne. Clitton, Silen, Philis, Cloris and Damon aside
Ariadne. He Is gone alas! the Traytor's leaves me here
In this Desert, possessed with grief and fear:
His cruel soul could not in pity be
Moved to resent my pain and misery!
He Is gone he is gone! and would not alas stay
To bid me adieu, before he sailed away!
Here I am left; on a most dreadful shore,
Where horror dwells, and Bears and Lions roar,
Both help and honorless! Where shall I find
Any succors!

Silene afar off showing her a Bottle. Silen. In this Juice sweet and kind,
This precious Balm, which heals the greatest pain,
When all remedies else prove vain.
It Is Wine, it is Wine that cures all grief,
And can alone give thee relief!

Ariana continues not minding him. Ye dull and senseless gods! How could you see
This cruel wrong the Traitor has done me:
And not on him a severe vengeance take!
Ah! you are unjust unless you quickly make
These Rocks, these Sands, and these merciless Waves,
To prove at once, his hangmen and his Graves!
And ye fierce Tigers, far more kind than he,
It Is you that now must end my misery!
Come, rend my heart, and from these purple Veins,
Suck with my Blood, my Soul and all my Pains.

Silene afar off. Fairest of Princesses, thy Blood
Was not made to be Tigers food!
Such dainty flesh deserves to be
From Wolves and Dogs fierce hunger free.

Ariadne continues not seeing them. But why should I, alas! compassion crave
Of Gods and Monsters who no pity have;
No more than Power to give me 'ny relief!
No no! my Rage alone must end my Grief!
But! hold! heaven, methinks, has heard my moan!
'T has so! my spirits fail! one sigh! one groan!
Then Death! welcome! my Soul now steals away.

She falls into a Trance. Silene. Despair and grief prevail. Unhappy day.

Clitton. She swouns! help, help!

Bacchus. Alas!

Silene. She Is dead!

Clitton. She Is gon^

Silene runs and offers her Wine. If thou can drink one drop, the cure is
done.

Ariadne coming to her self. But, I do live alas! my hopes are vain:
I see these Rocks, these Woods, these Hills again!
I see the Sea, and with prosperous Gales,
My Ravisher, o'r the fierce Billow's sails.
My wretched eyes must still with horror see
That dreadful Object, caused my misery!
That Monster of men! O grief! O rage! O pain!

Ariadne growing furious of a sudden, rushes into the Woods. SCENE IV.
(...) remain f^ll where they lay bid. Bacchus, Silene and Clitton come
forward. Bacchus. O! What a Power do sighs and tears obtain
Over a tender Heart! A weeping Eye
Can soon disarm the greatest cruelty.
Poor Ariadne! alas! thy fatal love,
Does in my soul a secret feeling move,
Far above reach of common pity now!
If it be'nt Love, what else, I do not know!

Exit Bacchus very pensive. SCENE V.
Enter Clitton, Cloris, Silene. Clitton. What say thou pretty Shepherdess
To this fine thing called tenderness:

Cloris. To that and all Love does, I say
None but weak souls will by it be led away.

Silene. Love's Power alas! Who can resist!

Cloris. That Mind whom reason does assist.

Clit. and Sil. Tell true, Shepherdess: Is thine so?

Clor. I cannot tell; but this I know,
If mine is not from Passion free,
Yet over tender it 'l never be.

Clit. and Sil. To win thee then, What must be done?

Cloris. That Is a secret needs not be known.
Exit Clit. and Sil. mocking her. That Is a secret.

SCENE VI.
Enter Bellona and Megere. Cloris and Philis frighted at the sight. Cloris. Oh!
Heavens! What a dreadful sight,
Is this godess of War and Fight,
With her Internal Sister Fury!
Oh! dearest Philis, let us flee!

SCENE VII.
Megere. Victorious godess, When will thou
Command, and I shall overthrow
These Hills, these Rocks, these Trees, these Plains!
I Will make the Devils break their Chains!
I Will sow Discord and War among Mortals;
And fill the World with bloody Funerals!

Bellona. No, no! it is neither blood nor slaughter I ask!
My valiant Arm, shall undertake that task!
Conque'ring Bacchus slights our Powers above,
And for Ariadne, burns with profane love!
Of his new flame thou must the progress stop,
If thou can not, destroy his groundless hope
Of gaining hers! Let all that deadly hate
That she for Theseus has, become his Fate!

The Fury with her burning Torch in her hand flies up into the Air, with
Dragons following her. The end of the Second Act.
2. Interlude.
1. Mask-Entrey. The Bacchants abhorring the falsity of Theseus, run,
Furies-like, their burning Torches in their hands, to burn him in his Ship, as
they see him sail on the Sea; but the waves and billows do force them back to
the shore; during the Conflict, Thetis the godess of the Sea, who is of kin to
Bacchus, and sees their bold attempt, surges up out of the Water and strives to
oppose their Rage. The Bacchants persisting in their design, the Sea-gods
enter. Second Entrey. A huge Sea Monster swimming near the Shore where the
Bacchants are still striving against the Waves, enters Combat with them, the
Bacchants leave their Torches, and with Darts wound the Monster, whereupon he
vomits out of his Jaws several Sea-gods, and plunges into the Sea. These fall
a wrestling with the Bacchants, and do form a regular fight, after which they
grasp each other fast in their arms, and precipitate themselves all into the
Sea. ACT III.
The Theater is changed into a Desert.
SCENE I.
Enter Bacchus and Silene. Bacchus to himself. WHat is thy thought, alas! my
Heart?
What do we seek, in this dreadful Desert!
And what reward can our fond load obtain,
From one of sense bereft! ourhopes are vain.
In the same soul, Who is it could ever see
The greatest hate, with greatest love agrree.

SCENE II.
Enter Ariadne followed by Euphrosine one of the Graces, Bacchus and Silene.
Ariadne. Ye cruel thoughts of Anger, and of Love,
(That I may breathe a little) O remove.

Bac. Fairest Princess, it is time to dry those tears!
He that creates your grief minds not your fears.
For a Perfidious man, O sigh no more!

Ariadne. I sigh for him whom my soul does abhor.

Bac. Heaven from thee with justice parts,
One that never knew thy high Deserts.

Ariad. Alas! alas!

Bac. If thou will ease thy Pains,
Change change thy Love.

Ariadne. After I Have broke his chains!
Him for whose love alas! I did betray
My dearest Friends! my Honor! my Country!
Him for whose sake I'ndure such cruel smart!

Bac. Banish, banish that Tyrant from thy heart.

Ariad. O Heaven! where does thy loud thunder lay?

Bac. Love, love the gods! it is far the safer way.

Ariad. Sure! faith and truth are from all mortals flown!

Bac. Seek them on heaven then: there they are gone.

Ariad. If ever I yield to foolish Love again,
May heaven Just.....

Bac. Fairest Princess, refrain.

Ariad. May heaven's severe vengeance on me fall!

Bac. Change, change thy mind.

Ariad. My mind! I never shall!
My Torment's great! yet it does still increase?

Bac. And shall those tears, Ariadne, never cease!

Ariad. No! thus I Will weep and sigh, until I die;
Since death alone can end my misery!

SCENE III.
Enter Venus, Euphrosine, Cupids, Bacchus and Silene. Venus. He sighs at last.
Our great subdu'r of Kings,
And to Loves throne, his vows and homage brings.

Euphrosine. Invincible Bacchus is over-matcht!

Venus. His stubborn heart in fine, by Love is caught.
Let Us load him still with heavier Chains!
He deserves that, and greater pains.
And let the World by his example know,
Both gods and men must to our Empire bow.

Little Cupids fluttering about Bacchus, do charm him with chains of Flowers.
Bacchus. I yield! I yield! Cupid must have the Crown.
He is Conqueror, I do my defeat own.
But, hold! thy Victory's imperfect still,
Until thou have made Ariadne thy strokes feel.

Venus. She will in time help thee to bear the smart.

Bacc. How can that be, if rage possess her heart!

Venus and Euphro. Love over the greatest griefs gets victory;
And she that once did love, love cannot deny.

SCENE IV.
Exeunt Venus and Euphrosyne.
Bacc. Against Love's power, what can all powers do?
Force, Valor, Courage, all must to him bow.
The most Valiant with greatest passion loves!
He that is most free, the greatest Captive proves.
The stoutest hearts alas! in vain persist
Victorious Cupid to resist.

SCENE V.
Enter Mars, Bellona, Furies, Soldiers, Euphrosyne stays afar off, a warlike
Sympheny precedes. Mars, Bellona, and Furies together. Sound ye Trumpets, ye
Drums and Timbals beat,
To War, to Arms, let not our Foes retreat,
But 'stroy them all.

Bellona to the Furies. Raise, raise, infernal Bands,
Charge, charge them through, it is mighty Mars commands.

Mars. Help, Sister, help! Alecton Thesyphone,
Follow the god of War! follow Bellone.

All three. To arms, to arms, let us all to th'Onset go!
This is the day we must confound our Foe!
[Ritornella with Instruments.
Mars to Apollo and Diana. Ye valiant Twins, who from great Jove are sprung!
Who to revenge your thundering Father's wrong,
The daring Giants, with your arrows slew,
Come to our aid and your great valor show.

Bellon. And thou, whose mortal darts once purged the Earth
Of dreadful Monsters, come and show thy wrath.

Apollo and Diana fly down from one side, and Hercules from the other side of
the Theater to meet Mars and Bellona. Here is danced a warlike Dance of several
Ensigns or Foot-Colours. SCENE VI.
Enter Bacchus, Silene, Symphonists of Mars, Bellona, Furies, Soldiers,
Apollo, Diana, Hercules. Mars, Bellon. To war! to arms!

Apollo, Dian. Hercul. To war! to arms all!
[Ritornella as before.
Bellon. Under our strokes let us make our Enemies fall.

Apoll. Dian. Hercul. March valiant God! march, march, we'll all follow.

Mars. To our just wrath let us sacrifice them now.

Bellon. Let Us drench the Earth with streams of tears and blood,
As once Deucalion did by's watery flood.

All them together. To fight! to fight! to battle! to arms!
Let Us fill the World with thousand harms!

SCENE VII.
Enter Bacchus, Silene, Euphrosyne, who had stayed hid till then. Mars to
Bacchus. Invincible Hero! great Bacchus! thou
Whose valiant Sword whole crops of Palms did mow,
Who over the World such mighty Conquests made;
Will thou alone refuse to give us aid?
[Euphrosyne runs to him. O heavens! what d'I hear! help, I Am amazed!
To quench his Love they have his valor raised!
Poor Ariadne! alas! what is thy Fate!

Ariadne passes over the Theater without speaking, only sighs. Aria. Alas!
[Bacchus spying her, offers to run after her.
Bac. She Will die! she will die! help e're it be too late!
She Is gone, she is gone alas!
[He runs after her, but is hindered by Mars.
Mars. Will thou forsake --

Bacchus. My soul alas! which party can thou take!
Shall Valor still, or must the god of Love
Over my heart this day, triumphant prove!
Love, I confess, thou art sweet! but Glory's strong!

Bellon. Follow Glory! Love's Charms will lead thee wrong.

Euphro. Love proves a guide more sweet, more sure by far;

Bellon. Honor and Triumph are the fruits of War.

Euphro. O! follow, follow Love!

Bellon. O follow me!

Bacchus. I Will take thy counsel, I Will to glory flee.
[Euphor. runs to stop him. What do thou mean! shall she perish alone,
Whom Heaven kind designed to be thy own!
It Is done, it is done! Cupid has got the day!
Let Us to her aid! Euphrosyne lead the way.
[Ex. Bacchus and Euphro. [Ritornella by Instruments.
Mars. Well! since Bacchus will love, let'm please his mind.

Diana and Apollo. More noble pleasures we will find.
To war! to war! arm! arm! let us go!
Let Us extermine our daring Foe!
They all march away in order of battle, Mars at the head of them, Colors
flying, and Trumpets sounding.
SCENE VIII.
Enter Silene alone, weeping. Alas! alas! my chiefest joy!
My Foster-child! my dearest Boy!
Must Love prevail then! can thou quit
The sweet juice of the Grape to follow it?
What will become of thee, dear Vine,
Now Bacchus for Love forsakes Wine!
And thou Bottle, my secret friend,
Thy Pomp, thy Glory's at an end!
Bid adieu to all mirth and sport,
What man hereafter will thee court?
Since Bacchus for Cupid leaves Wine,
Thy Doom's now come as well as mine.
Ye Satyrs, Fathers of the Grape,
Weep with me for this fatal Rape,
Bacchus alas! is stolen away!
Come, let us in Earth poor Bottle lay.
Let Us mourn, let us sigh, let us grieve and pine,
Since our god, for Love forsakes Wine.

Satyrs dancing and singing end the third Act.
The third Intermede.
A Mask of Satyrs. These Satyrs covered with Mourning Crepe, in dancing, take
the Bottle out of Sylene's hands, and joining Lamentation with him, do bury the
same in a Tomb covered over with Cypressbranches, and sing at its Funeral a
mournful Ditty. ACT VI.
The Theater is changed again, Venus's Garden and Grotto appears where an Echo
answers.
SCENE I.
Enter Damon a Shepherd. Damon. Farewell perfidious Love, my flame is gone,
Thy cruel power I will for ever shun.
That Soul who lives under thy Tyranny,
Lives not alas! but dies continually.
Too long! too long! I Have proved a slave to thee,
Reason alone methinks should make me free.
But yet alas! who can those wounds e're cure
Thy Arrows make! or liberty procure
To hearts by thee subdued! or loose those chains
Thou fastnest once! No, no! I Will bear thy pains!
And should my Fate always thus cruel prove,
Yet I Am resolved to live and die in Love.

SCENE II.
A Symphony of Flutes and Hoboys is answered by the Echo.
Cloris, Phillis, Damon, Clitton hid among the Trees. Cloris. For one single
pleasure, a thousand pains,
A silly Shepherdess obtains;
When she to Courtship gives her mind:
And then alas! if she proves kind,
The silly Shepherdess obtains
For that single pleasure, a thousand pains.

A second concert of Flutes echoed as before. Clitton at the Echo. For one
short grief a thousand joys
A discreet Shepherdess enjoys.
If she to Amoret does yield;
After she has once resigned the field,
A discreet Shepherdess enjoys
For that one grief, a thousand joys.

Cloris and Clitton at the Echo. Griefs and pleasures, joys and pains
Are the sure portions of Love:
Whatever heart bears its chains,
Will at length certainly prove,
That the sure portions of Love
Are griefs, pleasures, joys, and pains.

SCENE III.
Damon, Cloris, Clitton, Phillis. Damon. Am I designed alas! the only wretch,
Whose Martyrdom eternity must reach!

Clit. Clor. Change, Shepherd, change, thy affections remove.

Dam. Thou wrongest me, cruel, thy Martyr I Will prove.

Clit. Yield Shepherd, yield, there is no revenge
Does taste so sweet as that of a Love-change.

Dam. Shepherd thou wrong'st me much, I Will constant be.

Clor. and Clit. By often change, thou wilt find one may love thee.

SCENE IV.
Enter Ariadne, Phillis, Cloris, and Clitton. Ariad. Weep, weep, my wretched
eyes, weep your selves blind!

Clitton. Love, love a god most charming and most kind.

Aria. 'Twas Love alas! that made my cruel pain,
I Will suffer death, rather than love again.

Phillis. When a Shepherd proves unkind,
He must be served in his kind:
When a Shepherd proves unkind,
I Would do so, if th'case was mine.
I declare I Am one of those,
Who could ten false Lovers lose,
And yet never grieve nor pine.

SCENE V.
Enter Venus and the three Graces, Venus presenting Ariadne a Girdle that has
the virtue to inspire Love. Venus. From the Goddess of Love this gift receive,
It has a power to charm the greatest grief.
It can inspire a heart with mirth and love!

Ariad. That very name, my soul to wrath does move.

Venus. Fear thou nothing Ariadne, this new fire
Shall in thy soul nothing but joy inspire.

Ariad. Who can, who shall alas! my faith secure,
That though a god, his flame will still endure?

Venus. Conjugal vows, he is now ready to give,
As soon as he thy consent shall receive.

Ariadne suffers the Graces to tie Venus's Girdle about her. Cloris. Fairest
Goddess who can inspire
With thine own charms, the hottest fire;
What need have thou t'use other ties,
Than the sweet glances of thine eyes?

Ariad. Good gods! what blessed change is this I find!
What sudden joy d'I feel possesses my mind!
Transports of bliss! you do by far exceed
Those cruel ones of grief ye did preceed!
Thou charming God! the more I think on thee,
The more I love! But Heavens! this is he.
I blush --

SCENE V.
Enter Bacchus, Clitton, and Coribants. Bacc. O cruel Ariadne, who is it you
love!

Aria. My mortal hate for one, I Will never remove.
My heart, my soul shall ever him abhor.

Bacc. And yet, you love!

Aria. That Is little! I do adore!

Bacc. Who then alas! can this blist Lover be!

Aria. The best of gods! the most charming! that is thee.

Bacc. Cruel Princess! you are vexed that you must own
My faithful passion is to your heart known.

Aria. My looks, my words will soon my soul betray.

Bacc. What bliss is mine!

Aria. What honor!

Bacc. Happy day!

Ariad. O blessed change!

Bacc. How cannot possible be --

Aria. So great a god should give himself to me!

Bacchus. Can I believe my bliss is true!

Aria. Dare I hope mine shall continue!

Clit. Euphro. Hail! happy pair of Lovers hail!
May your ardent Love never fail!
Long may you live under this sacred tie,
Till by Hymen you do each other enjoy.

SCENE VI.
Enter Silene, Coribants, Venus, and Graces. Silene weeping. Alas! alas!

Venus. What grief does thee possess?

Silene. Prithee Venus, thou can my grief redress,
If thou would restore my Foster-Son again.

Venus to the Graces. I will do so. Pray Graces ease his pain.

Euphro. He Is shrewdly hurt, can he be kindlier used!

Silene. How can he be by Love amused,
And court his dearest Bottle too!

Euphro. Love well, and drink well both, Bacchus he may do.

Venus. Good Father Silene, let us all agree.

Bacc. So he drinks brimmer still, I Will yield to thee.

All together. His glory thus we will share, in Wine's delights
He Will spend the days, in those of Love, the nights.

Silen. and Corib. repeat. In Wine's delights
He Will spend the days; in those of Love, all nights.

All the same again. Satyrs dancing end the fourth Act.
The fourth Intermede.
A Mask-Entry. A Company of Satyrs having their heads crowned with Ivy, the
Leaves of which are gilded, their Horns twisted about with Chains of Flowers, a
Cup in their hand bring the Bottle which they buried before, triumphantly out
of the Tomb where it lay. They set the same (dancing) on a little Throne made
of green Turff, strow'd with Flowers, whilst other Satyrs are singing. The
Triumph ending, a small Cloud comes down from above that steals away their
Bottle up into Heaven, leaving the Satyrs gazing with admiration. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Hoboys and Coribants drunk, coming to the Feast, the Hob^ys and Flutes
join with the other Instruments. A Corib. COme, come, see the new Bride. Away!
Our god's Minion, this is her day.
Blessed be brave Theseus for his pain,
Who brought her hither. Again! again!

Another Corib. He leaves the Earth, and with his Love
Goes to live with the gods above.
O let us all we, his warlike Band,
Follow him thither glass in hand.

A third Corib. Let 'em drink Nectar and Ambrosie!
Their bliss I never shall envy,
Provided they send me good Wine,
Sweet Malvezy, and Muscadine.
[Ritornella with Instruments.
SCENE II.
Enter Hoboys and other Coribants with Silene drunk. Silene. Hold! is it day!
or is it night!
Every thing's dark! no! e're thing's light!
It is day sure! I hear the Swallows pratle!
It Is night! I see a thousand Candles sparkle.
With over thinking, my thoughts distracted be!
My ears do tingle and buz! what is that I see!
What be these! beasts or men! here we may find
Nymphs of all sorts and sizes, some too kind,
Other too rough, yet I Am afraid
Mong so many, one scarce should find a Maid!

SCENE III.
Enter Bacchus, Ariad. Clitton with Hoboys. Bacchus, Ariad. both. O sweetest
pleasures! blessed change
From sighs and moans of madness and revenge,
To sighs and tears of greatest joy and bliss.

Ariad. My dearest god! what happy change is this!

Bacchus. My fairest goddess, let us now and ever live
Under Love's Law, and bliss on bliss receive.
My faith I pledge thee now! here take my hand.

Ariad. For pledge of mine, both life and soul command.

SCENE IV.
Enter Phillis, Clowns, Hoboys, Silene, Coribants, Clitton, and Cloris.
Phillis. Gather your Roses, fair Nymphs, do
Gather Roses and Lillies too.
Bring whole heaps of Flowers newly born,
And strew the ways, this glittering morn.
Let Us to our divinities pay
Our joyful vows this happy day.

A Corib. Leave, leave your Cells, ye Sylvan gods,
With your shrill voices fill these woods.
With love, with mirth, and joy let us all
Celebrate this high Festival.

Cloris holding a Nosegay in her hand. For an Offering, here I have brought
This fine Nosegay with my hands wrought,
Of Orange-flowers and Jasmies;
All I beg of your deities,
Is to keep me from hurtful fall,
From Wolves, from Thieves, and Love that is worse than all.

She presents her Flowers to Ariadne, who accepts them, and gives the Girdle
that Venus gave her. The Shepherdess not knowing its virtue, accepts and puts
it on. Ariadne. Fair Shepherdess, I do kindly receive
Thy sweetest gift, and in return I give
This curious Gem to thee.

Silene presents his Bottle. And as for me,
I give my Nurse, my chiefest joy,
My kindest Miss, my pretty Toy,
The object of my tenderest love,
Who did always my pain remove.
My Minion, my sweet delight,
Whom I hugged both day and night.

[Ritornella. Whilst the Instruments are playing the Ritornella, Silene goes
and fetches the honest Clowns his Neighbors, whom be presents to the new
married Couple. Silene. Please your godships divine,
These good Neighbors of mine
Are come now
To pay their vow.

SCENE V.
Enter Clowns, who being all drunk, fall a dancing after their manner. These
Rusticks come to dance at Bacchus's Wedding, bringing with them Presents of
such things as their Village affords; some bring in their Baskets Sausages,
others Eggs died in several colors, and other Truffs. Old Silene, while they
are dancing, changes their Baskets and gives them others, where instead of
Sawsages they find live Eels; instead of Eggs, Frogs; and for Truff, live Rats.
SCENE VI.
Enter Damon, Clitton, Cloris, Hoboys, Clowns. Damon. What can alas! a Shepherd
to gods give,
Whose wretched heart does always pine and grieve!
What can a Lover full of trouble and fears,
Offer this day, but only sighs and tears!

Clit. Cease, Shepherd, cease to trouble our joy,
Thou shall e're long thy Love enjoy!
Heaven has heard thy plaint, and thou shall see
This joyful day, thy Cloris kind to thee.
Every thing here both gods and mortals too
Laughs, loves, and strives each other to outdo.

Dam. How! does my Shepherdess
From her levity cease!

Clit. This day, this day of love,
Shall a day of wonders prove.

Dam. Thy cruelty is gone!

Cloris. Sing, sing, thy work is done.

All together. This is the day, this day of Love,
This day of love
Will a day of great wonders prove.

[Ritornella with the Instruments. SCENE VII.
All the Actors are seen in this last Scene. Hoboys and Symphonists of Venus
playing. Shepherds, Sheph rdesses, and Clowns. A glittering Palace comes down
from Heaven, on the middle of which is seen a Royal Throne; over the Throne
hands a Crown made of seven Precious Stones, the Crown suspended by four little
Cupids flying. Venus with the three Graces sits on the Throne with Bands of
Symphonists about her. During the Symphony, the Palace and Throne descend
slowly upon the Theater, where being fixed, Venus and the Graces come down from
the Throne, and taking the new married Pair, lead them by the hand, and place
them on the same; Bacchus in the middle, Ariadne on his right, Venus on his
left hand, and the Graces at their feet. Symphonists play. Venus. Bacchus at
last yields to our Arms!
A Beauty, by her powerful Charms
With my help, makes his heart her own;
Little Cupids therefore, give her the Crown.

Euphro. Fly, fly to this great Festival,
Ye little Loves, fly thither all.
Ye were the Authors of her desires,
Put on her, your richest Attires.
Place on her head that glittering Crown,
She has deserved it! it is her own.

The seven Gems which composed her Crown, are inflamed of a sudden, and changed
into so many bright Stars, known in Heaven by the name of Ariadnes Hair. Venus,
Euphro* Hail, Hail, new goddess, hail.
Silene, Clitton, Coribants, Cloris, Damon.
Damon. Hail for ever, fair Princess, hail!

Cloris. O may we like them, spend our days!
Free from trouble and pain always!

Euphro. In midst of loves, and smiles, and sports.

Silene. In all pleasures the Table affords.
Let Us drink.

Venus. Let Us love.

All together. O let us love, and drink, and sing,
And let the Echo's ring.

Venus, Euphro. For ever hail our new goddess.

Silene, Clit. Corib. Cloris, Damon. For ever live our most lovely Princess!

All together again with the Instruments. Let Us drink, let us love, and sing all
day,
Let Love and Bacchus live always.

The Clowns dance to the sound of voices and Instruments all the while the
Palace is drawing up. FINIS.

