JOHN PERROT's Answer to the POPE'S feigned nameless Helper; or, A REPLY to the
Tract Entitled, PERROTagainst the POPE.
SAtan's assistance of his co-workers (in case of the Lambs attempts against
his Kingdom) most frequently appears in building Lies as a Bulwark for their
Refuge and Defense, as (amidst the smoke of his hideous Furnace) he has
exquisitely forged out diverse Lies to the hand of his Nameless, and (therefore
something the rather) shameless Servant, inserted in his Writing to the Reader.

First, In affirming, that I going to Rome to the Pope, understood nothing but
English; for I then understood besides English, both Latin and Italian, the two
most usual Roman Tongues.

Next, In avouching the Pope's admitting me to his presence, which he never
did, but rather I believe was (in some certain respect) really afraid so to do:
and consequently the asserted particular passages intimated as acted in the
Popes presence, must also altogether, appear deceits and lies; Who sent me not
first to Bedlam, as he says; for I was in two Prisons before that, viz. in one
of the New Prisons, and Inquisition; whence also all the rest may be judged
from what Pit they ascended, as being blown up of the old Liar, the Dragon,
resident as stably in Rome, as in any part else in the whole Earth.

As for the man's intended lascivious terms touching Jane Stokes, it stinks of
some of his Fathers Fryeries, Convents, and Nunneries, and therefore I leave
that dirt in his own dish, which will not wash but rather noysomly besmear his
own face.

Touching his assertion, of one of our Friends FASTING himself to death, that
is another Lie; for the Papists confessed to me, and diverse of my Friends, that
he was Hanged in Rome, being a Night-Work in that Black City of Murders, and
Adulteries: And as for my Zeal, it is still the same (in the true knowledge of
God) as it was from first, to the last in Rome; which if the Popes Inquisitors
were men of Truth, must confess the same to the shame of him their Father, and
the rest of his Children, their Brethren, who from first to last of my
Captivity in that City, never stood to answer either by Word or Writing my
sundry Manuscripts (written in the Inquisition and Bedlam) which of late were
published by me (here in London) in my Book entitled, BATTERING RAMS AGAINST
ROME; for all or any of the Popes Children in England to Answer, in the behalf
of the Pope and his Children in Rome, which they stood not to answer for
themselves.

Here follows a few Words in Answer to the purpose of the fiction, Printed in
the name of the Pope of Rome.

It cannot be understood by me, nor may be properly apprehended by any rational
Reader, but that the precited late published Tract is any other than a fee'd
forgery to propagate the power of the Papists Iniquity, in some sense
critically composed (according to the guile of the old subtle Serpent) that
the neck of the Popes strength might not be quite crakt with one twist.

1. First, considering how Often I propounded for the like Public hearing in
Rome, whilst the Pope's Bondsman, as may be read in my Book, BATTERING RAMS
AGAINST ROME, in Pages 29, 36, 39, 41, 49, 54, 59, 83, 122, but never answered;
which gives me to believe he would not readily answer that abroad, which he
would not appear to answer at home, yea much less by Word abroad, which he
would not by Writing at home; though I know in their boasting parts, they would
say rather in Public than in Private, but the fruits show it not.

2. Considering the Place appointed (viz. Amsterdam) without intimation of the
Hollanders licencing such a Public Assembly as was mentioned in mine to the
Pope, which though he might presume upon the privilege of his Peoples private
adoration in that City; yet that is not an Argument that the States of Holland
must submit to his Will in so public a thing as the other is, in case it were
the Pope's Will, but as a craved kindness must first be granted by them.

3. Considering the manner of my Writing to the Pope, viz. in the Language that
I did Write to him, with a subscribed direction how he should send his Answer
to me, in order to the Meeting: So that were the said Printed Tract the
dictates of his Spirit, in his next he must in honesty confess Oblivion, and
bring himself under the conviction of the sentence (which says) Insipientis
est dicere, non putaram.

And though I esteem the said Letter but as a Fiction which may be taking and
tickling to certain airy Fancies, yet that a foolish Jest may not beguile all,
I answer to the pretended argument of the Pope touching my temptations in
Bedlam, which were first Irons, and many Tortures, and next the offer of all
Pleasures which was no more Civility toward me, than was the Devils temptation
to Christ, saying, all these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me, Mat. 4.9. Nor was I more ungrateful toward them in denying them,
than was Christ to Satan in the said case, who renouncing him and said, get the
hence, etc. Mat. 4.10. So if this were the Popes, he must yet plead ignorance
of a Gospel case; And who is meetest for Bedlam, the POPE or JOHN PERROT? let
the rational Readers judge.

I might also instance the pervertion of the Scripture by him, Acts 26.24.
where it is said of Festus to Paul, Too much learning does make thee mad; but
he like a Roman turning it backward says, too little learning, etc. which is
improper to say, too little in such a case produces the same effect of too
much in the same case.

Finally, I am so favorable and charitable as to think the Pope is not so much
a nonsensical person, as to perclose his discourse with a threat of
Annunciating a young Jesuit with the weapons of Excommunication with Bell,
Book, and Candle, to Excommunicate me that was never in Society, Fellowship, o^
Communion with him or his adherents in their way or Worship.

And therefore with this latter considering the forementioned causes, I find no
inducing Obligation on me to pass to Amsterdam, where comings might from thence
return again as one that sought a pebble stone (but could not find it) in the
deep Sea; seeing the certainty of meeting, nor means of finding the Pope's
Champion is not stated by him: And therefore also neither is any thing of the
said Paper a sufficient ground of my stoping the course of the spreading my
former Propositions. Yet with Solomon may finish my saying, Though thou
should bray a Fool in a Mortar among Wheat with a Pestle, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him, Prove. 27.22.

Signified by a Servant of the Lord, Called, JOHN PERROT.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black Spread-Eagle and Windmil, in
Martins Le Grand. 1662.


