THE SIX SECONDARY CAUSES OF THE Spinning out of this Unnatural War.

By D. P. P.

JEREMIAH 8. 20. The harvest is past, and the summer is ended, and yet we are
not saved.

October. 19. 1644.

Imprimatur, JAMES CRANFORD.



LONDON, Printed by George Miller, 1644.

To the Reader.
IF a small Sparrow cannot fall to the ground, nor Mat. 10. 29, 30, 31.
a hair from our head without the will of our Heavenly Father; we may be the
more confident, that nothing shall nor can be fall to us, in this unnatural
War, except it be by the special providence of God: for it is he only that
disableth or inableth the secondary Causes, according as his will and pleasure
is to humble, or to bless us. And therefore if it does seem to some, that I
impute the spinning of this War, more then I should to the secondary Causes;
I entreat them to be more charitable in their constructions; for my only aim
is, to show, that the first and essential Cause is our sins, impenitency and
ingratitude for mercies heretofore received of our gracious God, that has been
enforced by them, to disable the secondary Causes from executing that as they
might otherwise have done, if he had not intended to humble us for the
aforesaid transgressions. Neither do I as they may suppose, expose these
secondary Causes to the public view; out of any private ends, or Cynick
humor, to bark at, on to consine the actions of these times; (though I may
boldly say; that it is not by our wisdom, policy or experience in War, that
we are in so good a condition but by the mere mercy of our gracious God) but
out of a desire to contribute my mite, to the advancement of the true
Reformation begun, and to lend a weak helping hand to draw this Civil war
(with the help of God) to a blessed and a more speedy end, that is spinned out
by these secondary Causes. And so Pressed,

Thy humble servant in the Lord, D. P. P.

The Contents.
I. THe retarding of the true Reformation. II. The delay of Justice. III. The
neglect of occasions, opportunities, or advantages. IV. The divisions and
contentions that are among us. V. The strange Method of our War. VI. The want
of perseverance.
THE SIX Secondary Causes of the Spinning out of this Unnatural War.
The first Secondary Cause, is, The retarding of a True Reformation.
ALl the faithful Ministers of God that were resident in this famous City, and
that are come to it from all the parts of the Kingdom, as into a Sanctuary, to
preserve themselves from the cruelty of the Cannibals of these days; or that
have been summoned to settle the Doctrine and the Discipline of the Church,
according to the Word of God, and the form observed in the best Reformed
Churches of France, Germany and Scotland; Have not yet been able, by their
infatigable labors, fervent prayers, orthodox Doctrine, profitable
exhortations, and loving admonitions, to mollify our hearts, or work in us a
true and a cordial Reformation; but rather like a stiff necked people, we are
grown more licentious in our lives and conversations, then we were before this
great light of the Gospel did appear to us as a morning Sun; which
impenitency and hardness of heart, should be lamented, if it were possible,
with tears of blood, because it is not to be parrelled; for it does exceed
that of Nineveh, for they converted themselves unto the Lord, and turned from
their Jonah 3. 8.
wicked ways, by the preaching and the the threatenings of the Prophet Jonah;
But alas! the preaching of all these faithful Messengers of God, nor the
Judgments that have been inflicted these three years upon this Nation, cannot
move us to fear and apprehend the last Rev. 15.
viols of the wrath of God, that are ready to fall upon our heads, so
insensible and stupid are our hearts, that they seem like Nabals heart, to be
turned into 1 Samuel 15. 7.
stones: And yet there never was more Fasting; nor more days of Humiliation,
nor prayers addressed to the Throne of Grace, in this Kingdom, then there is
at this present time, and since these wars began; What may then be the
reason, that our prayers are rejected at this time by our gracious God? It must
assuredly be this, That our Fasts, our humiliations and our prayers, are all
formal, and not sincere; and that we applaud the 2 Timothy 3. 5.
form, but deny the power of godliness; and that we serve God with our lips,
and deny him in our hearts; we bow down our heads for a day, like a Isa. 68.
^5.
bulrush, but all the month after, instead of mortifying our lusts, we inflame
them by our carnal cogitations: Instead of examining our selves, and diving
into the secret corners of our deceitful hearts, we censure and reprehend the
carriage and actions of others; instead of being lowly and humble in our own
eyes, we are swollowed up with pride and selfeconceitednesse; Mat. 7. 5.
we can see a straw in our brothers eye, but we cannot see a beam in our own:
We are apt with our father Adam, to transfer our own sins upon others; Genesis 3.
5.
or like the hypocritical Pharisie, bless our selves, when we are worse then
Publicans; we can say, such a one is Luke 18. 10, 11.
this, and such a one is that, or these men's sins are the cause of our present
miseries, but we do not put our hands upon our breasts and confess
ingeniously, Lord my sins have a greater share in these public calamities,
then any other man's sins: O let us then in the Name of God, return unto him;
judge our selves that we may not be judged, let us sweep before our own doors,
and the street will be soon cleansed; I mean, let us every one in particular
mortify our own corruptions, reform our lives, manners and conversations, 1
Cor. 11. 31.
and abhor formality the Rev. 3. 15.
Laodicean temper; and be fervent, sincere and zealous in the ways of
righteousness; and not seem only to be righteous, but strive to be really so;
for by this spiritual dissimulation, we may deceive others and our selves, but
we cannot deceive God, that searches the hearts; and will reward us, not
according to our fair shows, but according to our reality or hypocrisy: And
this personal Reformation, will be a good step to the General; which will
never be attained, if every one of us do not endeavor in particular to
reform our selves. And as concerning the General Reformation of the Doctrine
and the Discipline of the Church; we are all bound to petition to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament; that they would be pleased, to make the same
the first work of their unparrelled labors: And that it may have the
precedence of the Civil, Politic and Military Reformations; because the
blessed issue of these last, depends altogether upon the settling of the first;
as I will endeavor to make it appear by these reasons following.

1. Our gracious God is a jealous God, that abhorres all mixtures of Religions;
and has been pleased to teach us, to prefer his Glory before all other
respects: And that all other ends set apart, we are to give in all our
consultations and reformations, the precedence to the purity of his service, as
he has given us a president for it in the first Table of his Exodus 20.
Commandments; wherein the Spiritual duties, have the precedence before the
Moral, that are contained in the second Table. And this order has been
religiouslly observed by the Prophets, and the good Kings of Judah; and out of
a certain instinct of nature, that teaches men to reverence the Deity, by the
very Heathen; as it may be collected out of the lives of Lycurgus, Solon and
See Plutarch in their lives.
Numa Pompilius, the Legislators of the Lacedaemonians, Athenians and Romans:
Now if we omit, out of carnal ends, to render unto our gracious God, that
reverence that is due to him from us, in regard of his glory and worship, his
jealousy will be so speedily inflamed, and his wrath so kindled against us,
that we shall rather draw his judgments upon our heads, then blessings upon
our Civil, Politic and Military enterprises.

2. As the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, even so the
reestablishing of the purity of his service in the Church, is the first means
to obtain from him, in time of distress and affliction, store of mercies and
deliverances; this point may be proved by may instances out of the Book of
Judges; when the children of Israel were presently delivered, from great
servitude and tribulations, (that were fallen upon them for neglecting the
purity of See the whole Book of Judges.
the service that God had appointed them, to go a whoring after Idols, and
strange Religions) as soon as they set a reforming hand to the Church abuses,
and returned and cried, with sincere hearts to the Lord their God. The
incomparable Mercies and deliverances that God was pleased to give to 2 King.
193 350.
Hezekiah King of Judah, may also be a special Instance for the Proof of this
point; for they proceeded from the zeal he had at the beginning of his reign
to reform the Church of God of all the abuses and Innovations that were crept
in the same, in the time of Ahaz his Father. And the great Love and Mercies
that the Lord showed unto 1 Kin. 22, 30.
Josiah, may be another fit Instance for the proof of this point; for they
sprang from that unparalelled zeal he had to reform the abuses and idolatry
that was crept in the Church, and had defiled the Purity of the Service of God,
in the time of Amon his Father; for in zeal, and diligent love and affection
to purge the Church, and to establish a true and cordial Reformation in Judah,
he exceeded all the other good Kings of Judah; And therefore the Lord did for
his sake delay and retard the judgments that he had long before intended to
send upon Jerusalem, and granted him that mercy, as they happened not in his
days; nor was not afflicted with the sight of the lamentable desolation and
destruction that befell presently after upon the City, the Temple, and the
whole Nation of the Jews. Out of which Instances may be collected, That there
is nothing more acceptable unto God then when Kings and Princes, or Magistrates
do begin their Reformations, and dedicate the Precedencie of it to the
affairs of the Church, in case of reestablishing the true Purity of his
Service and Worship. 3. The retarding of a true Reformation, and reestablishing
of the Purity of Gods worship is dangerous in three manner of ways to a
Kingdom or Commonweal. 1. Because diversity of opinions in Religion breeds
contentions; for alienation of affections are most apt to proceed from the
contrariety of opinions in points of Religion, as there is no greater bond to
link men's affections together, then an unanimous assent of judgment in
matters of doctrine and discipline of the Church, and of that Religion they
openly profess. And therefore it is no wonder if contentions and divisions do
abound among us, since every one is suffered to entertain what opinion he
pleases in points of Religion. Now public contentions breed mutinies,
combustions, and at last factions and an intestine war; for the proof of
which point, we need no other instance then our own miseries; for if the
Popish Religion had been kept under in the Reign of King James, and in the
Reign of his Majesty that now is our Sovereign, this unnatural war of
ours might according to humane reason and probabilities have been prevented;
for by the raising of some of that profession to great honors and preferments,
they have, to subsist and strengthen themselves, withdrawn the Person of his
Majesty, and alienated his Love and his affections from his most faithful
Parliament, and from the rest of his most Loyal Subjects, whereby jealousies
have been fomented, two parties formed, and this intestine war procured. 2. The
retarding of a true Reformation in the Church makes this Reformation more
difficult to be performed; for since this war begun, and this licentious
liberty of opinions in Religion has been connived at, the one party is
increased in Popery, idolatry, superstition, Profaneness, Atheism, Impiety,
and Cruelty; and the other in Separatists, Independents, Brownists,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, Socinians, and Libertines, that like so many Giants
oppose Godliness and a true Reformation; for a Civil war, and a licentious
liberty of erroneous opinions is Satan's harvest, and the time that he sows
his pernicious seed in the field of Matt. 13. 25.
Wheat of the painful husbandman, and makes it increase as the weeds do in a
garden after a soaking shower of rain, or multiply like a swarm of Bees in
the beginning of the Summer. And we see by experience that these Sectaries are
not only multiplied into incredible multitudes, but are become also so
impudent and bold, as to expostulate and make Apologies for to obtain a free
Liberty of Conscience, as they term it, to cover their licentious and impious
projects, that is, to do all manner of evil, and to teach all manner of
heresies, and unheard of opinions; And that they may say and act what seems
good in their own eyes; As if there was neither King, nor a Parliament, nor
any Magistrates in this Kingdom to suppress and keep them in awe; As there
was none in Israel in the time of Judge. 17. 3.
Micah that made a molten image and worshipped the same in stead of the living
God. Even so if their request were granted (which God forbid) we should have
more sects among us then the Egyptians had deities. And such an Olio Podrigo of
Religions as never was in any Nation, which would speedily produce a confusion,
and this confusion would immediately after bring forth a general desolation
upon the land in lien of a true Reformation. 3. The retarding of the
reestablishing of the Purity of the Service of God in our Church, makes many to
stagger, not knowing on which side to stand, when they consider the one side
infected with profanitie and impiety, and the other with Sectaries and
Libertines; whereas if the Doctrine and the Discipline of the Church was
published and settled, the true and faithful Messengers of God that are among
us might then be bold to propound to the people in their Sermons and public
Exhortations as 1 Kin. 18. ^^.
Elijah did to the People of Israel this Quaerie, If the Lord be God, follow
him; If Baal, follow him: for we cannot halt any longer between two opinions.
Moreover this Galimafrey of Sects and Religions, and the licentious, profane,
and impious men, that shelter themselves in our Armies, in the City and
Counties, are the very Josh. 7. 1.
Achans that are the cause of all our disgraces; for they foment the
contentions that arise between our Commanders in Chief, between their
Officers, between the Lievtenants and the Committees of our Counties: Nay, they
dare presume to foment them in our Senate, Assembly, between the Magistrates,
in our Militia, Hals, City, and between the Citizens and Common People, to the
end they may subsist and fish in the muddy waters of these Civil distractions;
And therefore there is no likelihood that a true Reformation may be procured
before these Sectaries and licentious persons be banished into the unknown
Islands, that the venom of their contagious tenants may not infect no more any
of the simple or ignorant souls of these three Kingdoms. I am not ignorant
that the Honorable Houses were very fervent at the beginning of this
Parliament to give the precedencie of this intended General Reformation to the
affairs of the Church, and to the restoring of the Purity of the Service and
Worship of God, and withal to have cleansed the Kingdom of this vermin of
Sectaries, and accursed thing of licentious and impious men, as a most proper
and peculiar work for such wise and pious Senators. But alas, our sins were the
cause that this fervor was quenched, and that holy resolution retarded by the
cunning of Satan, and the deluding insinuations of his agents, I mean, of the
Prelacie and Jesuiticall faction, which under the color of the public good,
infused the venom of these contagious positions into the hearts of men, That
there was neither Wisdom nor Policy to establish so speedily the Presbyterial
Discipline in the Church of England, because it would deprive the Parliament of
the great contributions that might be collected out of the multitudes of these
Sectaries, that would rather go beyond the Seas, or side with the enemy, then
to submit or conform themselves to that Discipline; and that it were safer to
delay till these differences were nearer to an Accommodation. Wise and carnal
men, but blind and ignorant in spiritual things, this Counsel being like to
prove as fatal unto them, as the counsel that 2 Samuel 16. 21.
Ahithophel gave to Absalom (to enter into his Fathers Concubines at noone day;
that he might make him incapable of reconciliation with his father) was to
himself, for it was as pernicious in a twofold manner. 1. That the
Contributions of these Sectaries might prove among the Contributions of the
Children of God, as the mothers that breed or come in a piece of rich cloth,
that consume and spoil the same in a short time. 2. That by the conniving at
these Sectaries against the special Word of God, we might be made
irreconcilable with our gracious and heavenly Father. And for to make this
pernicious Counsel more plausible, they said it was the Policy of the
Hollanders, that do indeed give a free Toleration to all sorts of Religions,
because they are of all the Nations of Christendom the most addicted to the
Laodicean Temper, and will do any thing for gain. But this carnal Policy of
theirs is like to prove fatal unto them; for this Toleration of Religions has
already fomented so many divisions and contentions among them, that will in all
probability be the cause of their ruin, if they prevent it not by a speedy
and a cordial repentance: for a Kingdom or a Commonweal divided within it
self cannot Matthew. 12. 25.
subsist; And it is a wonder and a great mercy of God that we are not already
consumed, for never was a Kingdom more rent with divisions and contentions
then England is. Now it stands not with the Honor, wisdom and pious
inclination of the honorable Houses of Parliament to prefer carnal Counsels
before the good of the Church of God. They may be as prudent as serpents, and
as simple as doves; but to allow of, or connive at a small evil, to avoid a
greater, it is not convenient to the Zerubbabels and the Nehemiahs of our
times; they are rather to say, Should such a Nehem. 6. 11.
man as I slay? or should such men as we displease God, in conniving for a time
at Sectaries for their Contributions? Alas, these contributions are vanished
away like the chafe that is driven away by a whirle wind, such a blow as we
have had of late in the West would swallow three years of their Contributions,
and who can tell if it were not for their Toleration that it was given us; and
that these wars might have been ended two years ago but for them; But I am
sure that Josh 7. 25.
Achan was to be stoned before the Army of Israel could overcome Ai; And that
Jonah 1. 15.
Jonah was to be cast overboard into the sea, before the ship and the
Mariners could obtain a calm. Nay, the erectors of our New Jerusalem are to
be like Moses, that rejected the honors, riches, and the pleasures of Egypt,
to suffer reproach and affliction with his brethren, the Children of God; And
like Zerubbabel and Nehemiah that forsook the great preferments that they had
at the Court of Cyrus and of Artaxerxes the two great Kings of Persia, for to
erect the second Temple, and restore the purity of the ancient Service of the
Jews. Now so much more as the building of this New Jerusalem does exceed in
worth and infatigable labor, the reedifying of the old, and as much as the
restoration of the purity of the Service and of the true Worship of God does
exceed the ancient Service of the Jews. So much should the Zerubbabels and the
Nehemiahs of our days endeavor to exceed in courage, fervor, and zeal in
this great work and acceptable Service of the Lord, I mean, in perfecting
this true Reformation in hand. But because they are but men, and subject to the
like passions and infirmities as we are, we are all bound in general, and
every one in particular, to address our fervent prayers to the Throne of
Grace, That God will be pleased to indue them with all such abilities of
courage, resolution, wisdom, and unity, that they may speedily erect the
foundations of this so long hoped for Jerusalem upon the Rock of the true Word
of God, that it may stand like Mount Sion for ever immovable, notwithstanding
all oppositions whatsoever, of the roaring waves, of the swelling billows, and
of the enraged seas of these Civil distractions, to the great Glory of God, to
the everlasting Consolation of his Children, and to the immortal honor of the
Erectours.

The second Secondary Cause, is, The Delay of Justice.
THe Heathen Poets to induce men to reverence Justice fained her to be a
Goddess descended from Heaven, wearing a skarfe over her eyes, holding a pair
of balances in her left hand, and a naked sword in her right. To intimate by
her skarfe, her impartiality; by the balances, her wisdom; and by the sword,
her activity. By her impartiality she is to make no distinction of persons,
whether they be noble, rich or poor, she is to do Justice to all. By her
wisdom she is to poise a right all actions, occurrences and circumstances
whatsoever, to aggrave or moderate her censure or judgment; by her activity,
she is to be speedy, avoiding delays and reprives; for time is a producer of
accidents that perverts and hinders the execution of Justice, and so far does
natural morality instruct men concerning Justice. But Gods Word and the
Principles of Christianity does inform men, That Justice is ordained of God,
and one of his greatest Attributes; for he is as Just as Merciful; and that he
has entrusted the sword of Justice to Princes and Magistrates to execute
impartially, justly, and speedily Justice and Judgment upon the sons of men,
that are naturally prone to evil and backward to good by the seed of their
original corruption that remains in them, which like Tinder is apt to
receive the sparks of the fire that Satan strikes by the steel of his
tentations, out of those carnal objects that are more suitable to their
natural inclinations. Now this aptness to evil, increased by the allurements
of Satan, does inflame their affections to all manner of licentious desires,
and by degrees draws their will to assent to the execution of them, and this
execution or enjoyment of sin does create an habit in evil, and this habit
produces an allowance of sin, that brings forth a shameless impudency to
uphold all manner of impiety; and so by degrees conduces them to a hardness of
heart, and without a special Grace of God, to a reprobate sense, that would
carry them headlong like wild horses to eternal confusion; if God by his Law
and his restraining Spirit did not bridle their licentiousness. Therefore
knowing the natural disposition of men; he was pleased for to curb their
wicked inclination, to write with his own hand upon two Tables of stone his
ten Exodus 20.
Commandments, for the regulating of his own elected people of Israel, over
whom he committed his servant Moses, and entrusted him with the sword of
Justice, as his special Deputy, to administer Justice and Judgment to his
People; But he finding himself overburdered with so great a charge, by the
Counsel of Jethro appointed diverse other subordinate Magistrates elected out
of the wisest men of all the Tribes of Israel, that judged the people, but only
in some difficult cases, that he reserved to himself. Now these ten
Commandments have been and are the Groundwork of all other divine and humane
Laws, that have been multiplied from time to time, according to the increase
of the malice and the impiety of men. For in the year six hundred of the
Foundation of Rome, the Romans had no Law for See the Antiquities of Romans
Paricides, but at that time an impious son having murdered his Father, a law
was made he should be sown up into a lether sack, and cast alive into the
River of Tyber. But it is not the multiplicity of Laws that makes a Nation
happy, it is rather the speedy and the unpartiall execution of them; for it
falls out too often, That delay of Justice is mere injustice, because many men
are undone by the long and tedious delays of Justice, and diverse are
constrained to suffer wrong, rather then they will consume their estates in
procuring of Justice. Now if this multiplicity of Laws are suffered to have a
nose of wax, that may be turned or construed on the right, or on the left side,
as the Judge pleases; Or like unto the she Spiders webb, that serves only to
ensnare small slyes, that the male Spider may devour them; but permits the
bussing Waspe to break through the same without impediment; they will be like
so many Leaches, to suck the blood of the common people, and in a short time
cast a Kingdom into intestine contentions, as ours is at this time, and all
for want of the execution of the Laws and wholesome Statutes that were
established in Edward the sixth and Queen Elizabeth's time against the
Recusants and Sectaries. The speedy and unpartiall execution of Justice is then
the very Atlas that supports and maintains a Kingdom in prosperity and
Peace; It entertaines foreign confederations; It draws the blessing of God
upon it; It foments love and unity among Subjects; It increases Trade and
commerce between Merchants, and between Citizen Tradesmen and country
people; Nay, it is the very Court of Guard of all his Majesty's Subjects. In a
word, the Omission and delay of Justice is odious to God, destructive to
Kingdoms, and fatal to families and private men, the which I will endeavor
to prove by Instances. But that I may go on in a Methodicall way, I will in
the first place insist upon the danger of the delay and the omitting of it.
Secondly, upon the benefits that accrue upon the speedy and unpartiall
execution of it. And thirdly, how acceptable a thing it is to God if Justice be
uprightly administered, and how odious it is to him if it be delayed, or
neglected. 1. The Omission of Justice by Titus Livius, decad. 1. lib. 1. fol.
89.
Tarquinius the Elder upon Sextus Tarquinius his son for the Rape of Lucretia
was the cause that he and his Posterity were deprived of the Roman Monarchy.
2. The Omission of Justice by the nine Decemviri upon Appius Claudius their
Colleague for his injustice and impiety concerning Virginia was the cause of the
death of that chaste Titus Livius, deca. 2. lib. 3. fol 351.
Virgin, of the abhorred end of Appius, and of the perpetual banishment of his
nine fellow tyrants. 3. The Omission of Justice by See Plutarch in Demetrius
his life.
Demetrius King of Macedonia to his poor Subjects, for they having tendered him
many Petitions to have their grievances redressed, he cast them all into a
river, whereupon they were so incensed, that they refused to assist him against
his foreign enemies, and so was deprived of his Kingdom, and taken prisoner
by Seleucus the great. 4. The Omission of Justice by See Plutar. in Alexanders
life.
Philip the first King of Macedonia upon some of his Favorites, that had
abused a Gentleman in his honor, that petitioned for redress, was the cause
that he was perfidiously murdered by the same Gentleman, contrary to the Laws
of God, that does not allow a Subject to avenge his private wrongs, or to
conceive an ill thought for them against his Sovereign. 5. The Omission of
Justice by the Sea Plut in Pelopodias life.
Ephores of the Lacedaemonians upon two of their Military Officers, for the
committing of a Rape and Murder upon a Country-mans daughter, was the cause
that the Father of that Virgin slew himself out of despair, and that those
two Officers and six thousand Lacedaemonians more were slain in a battle,
fought close to the very same town where that Rape and Murder had been
committed; Plutarch affirming that the Gods were impatient to suffer any longer
their delay of Justice. 6. The Omission of Justice by Cicero and some other
Senators upon Julius Caesar that was of the Conspiracy of See Plut in Cicero's
life.
Catilina, was the cause of the loss of the Romans Liberty, and of the
miserable end of Cicero, and of the greater part of those Roman Senators. 7.
The Omission of Justice by See Pierre Mat. in the History of France
Henry the fourth King of France upon the whole Society of Jesuits,
inhabiting his dominions, for an attempt made upon his sacred Person by a
Student of their Society, was the cause he was three years after perfidiously
murdered by their instigation by that horrid Paricide Ravilliac. 8. The denial
of Justice by the Inhabitants of See Judge. 20. 20, 35.
Gibeah for the Murder committed upon the Levites Concubine, was the cause of
the death of forty thousand Israelites, and of the utter extermination of the
Tribe of Benjamine, six hundred men only excepted. 9. The Indulgence of Eli to
his two 1 Samuel 4. 17.
sons Hophni and Phineas was the cause of his sudden death, of the
miserable end of his sons, and of this heavy curse upon his Posterity, I
have sworn, says the Lord, unto the house of Eli, that the wickedness of
Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever. 10. The
Omission of Justice by King 2 Samuel 13.
David upon Amnon his son for the Rape of Tamar, was the cause of the Murder
of Amnon, of the rebellion and of the miserable end of Absalom. 11. The
Omission of Justice by King 2 Samuel 20. 1.
David upon the house of Saul, because he had contrary to the Oath of the
People of Israel destroyed the greater part of the Gibeonites, was the cause of
three years famine in Israel, that ceased not before Justice had been executed
upon seven men of the house of Saul. 12. The Omission of Justice by 1 Ki. 20.
42.
Ahab upon Benhadad was the cause of his death, and of this fearful
denunciation against him, Thus says the Lord, because thou have let go out of
thy hands a man whom I had appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life,
and thy people for his people. For the second, of the benefits that accrue by
the speedy and unpartiall execution of Justice. 1. A certain King of the
Locresians having made a Law against See Plut. in his Opuscui.
Adultery, That whosoever should be convinced of it, should have both his eyes
put out; His only Son being the first, he immediately caused his sons left
eye, and his own right eye to be put out before all his Subjects; to authorize
his Law, and to execute Justice; for which he was reverenced, beloved, and
honored by all men in his life time; and is in these days admired for his
unpartiall execution of Justice. 2. Lucius, Titus Livius in his first decad.
lib. 2.
Iunius, Brutus first Consul of the Romans having been informed that two of
his sons, diverse of his Nephews, and many young noble men had conspired to
deliver up the City of Rome to Tarquinius, he caused them to be apprehended,
sat with the Judges at their Trial, and being convinced, accompanied them to
the block, persuading the executioner to rid the world speedily of such
Traitors to their Country; and so by this unpartiall Justice of his he
preserved his Commonweal, and was so beloved and honored of his Citizens,
that the Roman Ladies mourned a whole year for his death. 3. Titus Titus
Livius in his first decad. lib. 9.
Manlius General of the Romans having caused to be proclaimed through his Army
that none upon pain of death should fight against any of the Latins their
enemies that were encamped within a mile of the Romans Camp, his son being
appointed the next day to discover with a Troop of horse the posture of the
enemy, was challenged by a Chief Officer of the enemies horse to a single
fight, that came also to discover the Posture of the Romans; but he refused
the Challenge, because of his fathers Command; yet being overcome by the
insolency of his enemy that accused him of cowardice; he advanced before his
Troop, and fought with him, slew him and carried away his Horse and Arms; and
was conducted with a great part of the Army in a Triumphant manner into the
Camp: But coming into his fathers Tent he was apprehended, tried, and executed
in the presence of his father, notwithstanding the great entreaty of the
Officers of the Army, Titus Manltus answering, either. I must by the natural
compassion of a father overthrow for ever the Military Discipline of the
Romans, in pardoning my son so great an offense, or by an unpartiall Justice
prefer the good of my Country to my sons life. This unpartiall Justice of
his upon so valiant a son, although it seemed rigorous to the younger sort, yet
the ancient Senators did greatly commend it, for it fell out to be very
profitable to the Roman Commonweal, because it maintained their Discipline
in force for a long time until Scipio his days, the which was revived again
by this noble action following. 4. Publius Scipio General of a great Army of
the Romans in Spain, having in a manner finished the wars, and reduced that
Kingdom under the Romans yoke, fell sick at new Carthage; upon the report of
his perilous sickness, eight thousand Roman soldiers that lay in an
entrenched Camp, near to the river Succo some twenty miles distance from
Carthage, to preserve the confederate Counties from the incursions of the
enemies, began to mutiny for their pay, and some licentious soldiers among
them fomented the same, and after they had driven away their Colonels and
Captains that opposed their rebellious actions, they made choice of Albinus
Calenus and Atrius Vmber, two licentious common soldiers for their Commanders
in Chief, and entertained correspondencie with Mandonius and Iudibilis the
Generals of the enemy, and so fell a plundering their associated Counties,
hoping to enrich themselves without danger, upon the report of their Generals
death; but Titus Livius, decad 3. lib. 8.
Scipio being somewhat recovered and past danger, he sent presently six
well-affected Colonels to inform them of his recovery, and to persuade them to
submit themselves to his mercy; whereupon they began to consult what they
should do to prevent their ruin, and so resolved to leave their Arms in
their Camp, and to go to Carthage for their pay, and to recover their Generals
favor, disdaining any longer to submit themselves so low as to be at the beck
of two such base and ambitious fellows as Albinus and Atrius, whereupon Scipio
being acquainted of their resolution fained to undertake a design, and caused
his forces and carriages to advance out of town, to free the mutiners of all
suspicion, only commanded some trusty soldiers to welcome the Heads of them,
and under color of complement to go along with them to their lodging, by
which means they were all apprehended and fettered that night, and in the
morning caused all the rest to be summoned to appear before his Tribunal;
where they were no sooner come, but they were environed with those Horse and
Foot that seemed the day before to have gone out upon a design, and hereupon
were extremely amazed for fear they should all be put to the sword; But Scipio
having commanded silence, made an Oration to them, and reprehended their
rashness, indiscretion, and infidelity; and that by the Laws of war, he
might make them all a public example of Justice for the time to come, but
considering that they had been for the greater part seduced by some pernicious
Agents of Albinus and Atrius, he was contented upon Promise of Amendment to
give them their pardon, and would content himself with the death of thirty of
the Chief Authors of this mutiny; And so caused them to be brought forth
fettered as they were, and to be whipped with scourges before all the Army, and
afterward to be beheaded; This speedy and unpartiall Justice was very
profitable to the Romans to uphold their Military Discipline, that began to be
corrupted, and Scipio obtained great honor by it, and the love of all his
Army, having mingled Mercy with Justice. This point deserves to be taken into
consideration by them in Authority, for our Generals are abused, and their
honor and reputation betrayed by the perfidious carriages and counsels of some
of their Officers, which deserve to be made an Example of Justice to others,
otherwise this war is like to be spinned out till there be no more oil in
the Lamp to keep it burning. 5. Herodotus in his life.
Cambyses King of Persia, notwithstanding that he was a Tyrant, yet to win
the love of his Subjects, he did administer speedy and unpartiall Justice, for
hearing of a Judge that took bribes to pervert Justice, he caused him to be
flead alive, and his skin to be nailed upon the Chair where the Judges sat to
give Judgment, for a memorandum to others to administer Justice speedily and
unpartially. 6. Absalom to withdraw the hearts of the people of Isreal from his
Father; and to win their love, complained that Justice was neglected, and used
to utter this insinuating exclamation, 2 Samuel 15. 4.
O that I were made a Judge in the land, that any one that has any suite or
cause might come unto me: And I would do him Justice, etc. 7. Charles the
fifth and See the history of France.
Lewis the twelfth Kings of France were so beloved and honored of their
Subjects for their speedy and unpartiall administration of Justice, that the
first obtained the honorable attribute of a Wise King, and the second of a
Just Prince, and the nursing Father of his People. 8. Speed Chron. the first of
Henry the 8.
Henry the eighth King of England never obtained more honor nor more love of
his Subjects then when he gave way that Sr Richard Empson and Edmund Dudley
Esquire, should be made public Examples of Justice for the incredible
oppressions they had committed upon his Subjects in his Father Henry the
sevenths time. 9. The speedy and unpartiall Justice of the Children of Levi in
going out from gate to gate throughout the Camp, slaying every man his Exodus
32. 27.
brother, and every man his Companion, and every man his neighbor, according
to the Commandment of Moses, was so acceptable to God that it appeased his
wrath. 10. The speedy and unpartiall execution of justice by King David upon
the 2. Sam. 1. 15.
Amalekite, that confessed before him, that he had slain King Saul his mortal
enemy, was very acceptable unto God, and was the cause that the Tribes of
Judah and Benjamine proclaimed him King with great joy. 11. The speedy and
unpartiall execution of Justice by the same King upon Rechab and 2 Samuel 4. 12.
Baanah, that had persidiously murdered Ishbosheth their Lord and Master,
hoping thereby to obtain some great reward of King David, because he was his
Competitor; was acceptable unto God, and the Cause that he won the love of all
Israel, and was suddenly after proclaimed King over all the twelve Tribes of
Israel. 12. It appears in diverse places of the second book of Samuel, how much
King David was discontented, because he had not the power to administer speedy
and unpartiall Justice upon Ioab General of his Army, for his persidious
Carriage toward Abner and Amasa, whom he murdered under color of love and
courtly complements, yet on his death bed he commanded King Solomon his son,
that he should not suffer the 1 King. 1. 6.
hoary head of Ioab to go down in peace to the grave; by which command it
appears how much this good Kings heart was inclined to execute Justice; and
how just and wonderful the judgments of the Lord are upon such murderers as
Ioab was, that could not escape at the end his avenging hand, although it was
deferred for a time. Now I come to the third point to prove how acceptable the
speedy and unpartiall execution of Justice is to God; and how odious it is to
him if it be delaid and omitted. 1. The speedy execution of Justice by Phinehas
upon Zimri and Cozbi was so acceptable unto the Lord that it turned away his
wrath from his people of Israel, and procured to Number. 25. 12, 13.
Phinehas this Promise, Wherefore, behold I give unto him my Covenant of Peace.
And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an
everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God, and made an
atonement for the children of Israel, etc. 2. Moses the servant of God for an
extraordinary blessing to the Deuteronomy. 33. 21.
Tribe of Dan says, And he came with the head of the people, he executed the
Justice of the Lord, etc. meaning that this Tribe above all others should have
Rulers that would administer Justice speedily and impartially, which was in
Moses opinion one of the greatest blessings that could befall men. 3. Job 8. 3.
Bildad the Shuhite one of the three intimate friends of Job, to prove the
incomprehensible Justice of God, said to him, Does God pervert Judgment, or
does the Almighty pervert Justice? etc. Now the more just and unpartiall
Magistrates are in the administration of justice, the nearer they approach in
imitation to that incomprehensible perfection of Justice that is in God. For by
him Prove. 8. 15.
Princes do reign and do decree Justice, etc. for they are indeed his
Deputies to administer Justice. 4. The Lord was so well pleased to see Justice
unpartially administered by the Rulers that returned from the Captivity of
Babylon, that he bestowed this blessing upon Jerusalem for it, The Lord bless
thee, O habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Jer. 31. 23.
holiness, etc. Justice being reputed here for a special degree of holiness.
5. To administer Justice unpartially, it is to obey the Commandment of the
Lord, Keep ye Isai. 56. 1.
Judgment, for my Salvation is at hand, etc. and again, Defend the poor and
fatherless, do Psalm. 82. 3.
Justice to the afflicted and to the needy, etc. 6. The Lords wrath is inflamed
when Justice is delayed or omitted. They ask of me, says he, the Isai. 58. 2.
Ordinances of Justice, etc. meaning to rebuke the people of Israel for their
dissimulation for to delay Justice, because they fained they did not know the
Ordinances of Justice, etc. 7. The Lord is always so prone to do Justice, that
he complains by his Prophet, none Isai. 59. 3.
called for Justice, etc. meaning that he was always ready to do that which
the Rulers of Israel were so unwilling to do; and that he was angry, because
they did not give ear to them that required and called for Justice. 8. The
Lord is excremely displeased when Justice is delaid, or omitted; as may appear
by this passage of the Prophet Isaiah, Judgment is turned backward, and
Justice Isai. 59. 14, 15.
stands afar off: for Truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot
enter, etc. yea, Truth fails, and he that departs from evil makes
himself a prey. By these humane Instances, and passages of the Word of God, we
may see how dangerous it is to omit or delay Justice, and how pleasant and
acceptable it is to God, when Justice is speedily and unpartially administered:
And therefore we are all bound in General, and every one in particular to
address our fervent prayers to God, that he would be pleased to infuse into
the hearts of all the members of the Honorable Houses, an earnest desire to
administer speedy and unpartiall Justice. Now they have drawn the sword out of
her sheath, by the Commissioners of war, they have lately appointed to bring to
a speedy Trial all those Criminal offenders, that they have in their Custody.
Four of which have been the cause of the shedding of more Christian blood then
ever 1 Kin, 20. 42.
Benhadad King of Damascus caused to be split of the people of Israel. And
therefore the delay of their Trial is the more dangerous, for time produces
many accidents that hinder and pervert Justice. If all Christendom were not
acquainted with the unmatchlesse Clemency and indulgent proceedings of the
Honorable Houses toward their prisoners, the Malignant spirits would inpute
the long retention of so many prisoners to Cruelty. For the Emperor Tacitus in
Tiberius life.
Tiberius was used to say, when he was demanded the reason why he kept
criminal prisoners so long in hold, Because, said he, they die daily, and it
would be too great a mercy by a sudden execution to end their miseries. Even
so the Spanish See the Spanish History.
Inquisition when they will favor any of their prisoners, they bring them
speedily to their Trial, and as suddenly to their execution; but such as they
intend to Martyr, they keep them in continual durance, that they may suffer by
their horrid torments a thousand deaths for one. But our Prisoners fare as well
as See Plutarch in Demetrius his life.
Demetrius King of Macedonia, that was detained prisoner three or four years
by Seleucus the great; for he never had less care, nor better fare, or more
ease then he had in his durance; even so our Malignants are more joviall, and
in better liking then they were in the time of their liberty. It were then a
laudable frugality in these days of Pecuniaefames; to bring the criminal
Delinquents to a speedy Trial; that if they be guilty, they may be dealt
withal as Quintus Fulvius dealt with the Senators of Titus Livius decad. 3.
lib. 8.
Capua. And for the prisoners of war to expedite their exchange, to free the
prisoners they have of ours from their miseries; And for such as are in hold
for contempt, to release them upon fines; for fear their long retention
disable them to give any; so should our Prisons be cleared, the state freed
from danger and charges, and the second secondary cause of the spinning out of
this Unnatural War removed.

The third Secondary Cause, is, The neglect of occasions, opportunities, and
advantages.
OCcasion or Opportunity is a certain nick of time unexpected, nor thought
upon, that seems to come accidentally, and yet is guided by the will and the
special Providence of God. Now of all occasions or opportunities the
Spiritual, Civil, and Military are of greatest concernment; for the first
concerns our souls; the second, our private and the public welfare; and the
last, our lives and liberties. And by consequence the embracing of them very
profitable, and the omitting of them very prejudicial to men. But of these
three the Spiritual opportunities are as much more to be carefully embraced as
the Soul is more precious then our means, lives, and liberties; for upon the
careful and diligent observation of them depends our perpetual Bliss, and
upon the neglect of them our eternal woe. Neither can we expect to obtain the
Grace to make a profitable use of the Civil and of the Military Opportunities,
unless we be diligent and faithful to observe all spiritual opportunities,
that may conduce to the advancement of the Glory of God, the good of his
Church, and to the Salvation of our Souls. For by the observation of the
Spiritual, we obtain and preserve our selves in the favor of God; without
which favor all civil and military opportunities vanish away. The ancient
Moralists have figured opportunity under the shape of a Woman, having great
wings at her back, and a lock of hair hanging over her face, but bald behind;
to intimate by her lock and her wings, that if we let her slip when she offers
her self to us, she will fly away, and never be recovered again. And therefore
that we are to be very circumspect and observant to catch her by the fore-lock,
as she presents her self to us; for if she do but turn her back, having no
hold behind, we loose her for ever. And the loss of one Spiritual, Civil,
and Military opportunity may endanger our Salvation, our means, and the
Public welfare, and our lives and liberties; As I will endeavor to prove by
humane Histories, and by Instances out of the Word of God. But before, I desire
(for fear of misprision) to ground my discourse upon this Principle of
Religion, That whenever the free will, the good pleasure, and the eternal
purpose of God, is pleased to bless a Kingdom with Peace and Prosperity; he
will then enable the King, his Counselors, Generals of Armies, Magistrates,
and all other subordinate Officers of that Kingdom to make use of all
opportunities that may conduce to that end. But on the contrary side, If his
will and pleasure be to humble, correct, or destroy a Kingdom, then will he
disable the King, his Counselors, Generals of Armies, Magistrates, and all
other subordinate Officers of that Kingdom, to omit and neglect all favorable
opportunities that may be offered to them, that his will, pleasure, and
eternal purpose concerning the humiliation, correction, or destruction of that
Kingdom, Commonweal, families, or private persons may come to pass and be
accomplished in his time. But some will object and say, If all opportunities,
occasions, or advantages in Spiritual, Civil, and Military actions depend
merely upon the free will, the good pleasure, and the eternal purpose of God,
whether we be careful or careless, wise or imprudent, valiant or timorous, or
omit or embrace all Spiritual, Civil, and Military opportunities it matters
not. Why should we then trouble our selves to be diligent and zealous in
spiritual duties? wise and prudent in Civil actions, and circumspect, valiant
and expert in Military exploits, since the issue of all depends upon the will
of God? I answer, that this secret will, and eternal purpose of God is a
Mystery to men, and that the wisest men upon earth cannot dive into it, and
therefore that we are to obey his revealed will; that is, that we should be
fervent, zealous and diligent in all spiritual duties, to make our calling and
2 Pet. 1. 10.
election sure; and to be wise and prudent in all Civil actions; according to
that degree he has been pleased to indue us withal; and make use of the
experience, valor, and courage in war that we have obtained as a gift from
him; to conduce all such things we undertake to the advancement of his Glory,
to the good of his Church, and to the peace and prosperity of our Country;
and doing so, and in all our ends aiming at that blank, howsoever it pleases
the Lord to give an issue to our unfeigned endeavors, we have discharged a good
Conscience before God and men. But if men, in this glorious light, or
Sunshine of the Gospel, will wilfully neglect the gracious means that God
is pleased to afford them, to procure their Salvation by the merits of Christ
with fear and Phil. 2. 10.
trembling; and fall from the faith, and run a whoring after Popish Idolatry;
or the vain and erroneous opinions of Sectaries, or the licentious and impious
courses of the ungodly and profane men of these days; let them lay the cause
of their condemnation upon themselves, and not upon the secret will of our most
just and gracious God, that does not desire the death of a sinner, but rather
that he would Jer. 36. 7. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
return from his wicked ways. Or if the wise and prudent men of these times
should for some private ends omit to advise or counsel such things as in their
own judgment do conduce to the above blessed end, God notwithstanding will
do his work, and they will remain inexcusable before him. But if they advise
or counsel sincerely such things as they judge to conduce to that blank
abovesaid, according to the wisdom and prudence the Lord has given them,
howsoever the issue of their Counsel fall out, they have discharged a good
Conscience before God and men. Even so if our Commanders in Chief, or their
subordinate Officers do embrace all opportunities that are offered to them, to
end or to conduce this war to a blessed peace, howsoever the issue of it be,
they will be blameless before God and men; but if for any private ends they
omit any opportunities, rules, Maxims, or Stratagemes of Military exploits to
spinne out this Unnatural War, whereby they may endanger the State and
themselves (as oftentimes it comes to pass, that omissions in Military
exploits has overthrown Kingdoms or Commonweals and their Commanders also)
as it shall be proved by Instances; yet shall the issue of this war turn to
Gods Glory and to the good of his Church; for God is not tied to secondary
means; but will in his due time notwithstanding their wilful omissions grant
us a blessed peace; but they shall be inexcusable before him, and loose their
honor and reputation with men. For opportunities, advantages in war, are so
many mercies that the Lord does graciously offer to Commanders. Now if these
mercies be despised, and these advantages omitted wittingly, God is an
all-seeing God, that will find out a time how closely soever it be carried, to
reward them according to the intentions of their hearts. But because there has
been many fair opportunities lost within these three years, that might, if
they had been embraced, have conduced this Unnatural War to a blessed
Period, and that they are imputed by them that are ignorant of the events of
war, to the neglect and omission of some of our Commanders in Chief, I will
endeavor to prove by Ancient and Modern Ensamples; that when God has been
pleased to humble, correct, or destroy a Kingdom, that the wisest Politicians,
and the most experienced Commanders that ever were have omitted greater
opportunities then they have done. 1. In the year 432. of the foundation of
Rome; God being pleased to humble the Romans, and utterly to destroy the
Samnites, did so blind the Judgments of the Generals of these two Nations,
that they let slip two fair opportunities; first the two Consuls of the
Romans Titus Veturius and See Titus 1. vius, decad. 1. lib. 9.
Sempronius Posthumous omitted the opportunity they had to march with their
Army to Luceria, a City they intended to besiege by the seashore, the way
being plain and secure, for to take a way through the mountains, that led them
to a pass called Caudium, environed with steep Rocks and high mountains,
where they were presently enclosed by the Samnites, and enforced for want of
Provisions to require quarter, which they obtained upon these conditions, That
they should leave six hundred Knights for hostages, surrender their Arms, This
may be paralelled with our last blow in the West.
Horses, Carriages, and baggage, and pass under the yoke for their oversight.
Secondly, the Samnites had here a fair opportunity to have concluded a
perpetual peace with the Romans, if they had set at liberty, and provided the
Romans with Provisions for their return, as they were counseled by a wise
Senator of theirs Herenius father of their General; But they unadvisedly for a
little booty were the Cause of their own destruction; for the Romans were so
incensed with this ignominy received, that they never ceased until they had by
force of Arms, reduced all the Samnites and their Country unto Roman
Colonies. 2. In the second Punick war, The Romans by the great victories
obtained in Sycilia and Sardinia against the Carthaginians, being swollen up
with pride, God was pleased to humble them again, and so sent Hannibal with a
great Army into Italy, that defeated them in the three famous battles of the
River Trebie, of the lake Trasymene, and of Cannes; where they lost above one
hundred thousand men; yet because God had decreed that Rome should be the
fourth, and the Dan. 7. 19.
greatest Monarchy in the world; he was pleased to infatuate the Judgment of
See Hannibals life.
Hannibal, the most provident, and the most active General that ever was, to
omit the fairest opportunity that his heart could have wished to have obtained
for his Commonweal a perpetual Peace of the Romans; or by advancing
immediately after his victory at Cannes to the walls of Rome, that was
extraordinarily amazed, and weakly manned; To have over-throwne by the taking
of it, the whole Roman Commonweal; but the Omission of this opportunity was
the cause of his own ruin, and of the destruction of his native Country. 3.
The Omission of the opportunity that See Plutarch in Paulus and Aemilius his
life.
Persus the last King of Macedonia had to proclaim war against the Romans
when Hannibal was in Italy, and Scipio in Africa, was the cause he was shortly
after deprived of his Kingdom, and himself enforced to follow like a slave
the Triumphant Chariot of Paulus Aemilius his Conqueror; And yet it is not to
be doubted but this King had wise Counselors and Politicians about him; but
God had decreed that the Kingdom of Macedonia should be of the number of those
Kingdoms that should exalt the Roman Monarchy. 4. The omission of the
opportunity that See Plutarch in Lucallus his life.
Antiochus the great had to proclaim war against the Romans when their
forces were busied in Macedonia, was the cause that he was defeated in diverse
battles, constrained to make a dishonorable peace with the Romans; and that
Armenia the great was presently after brought under the Roman yoke by Lucullus
and Pompeius; neither did this great Monarch want great Politicians and
experienced Commanders; for Hannibal attended at his Court, but God had decreed
that his large Dominions should increase the Roman Empire. 5. The omission of
the opportunity that Mounsieur the Sea Des Serres Inventary in Francis the
first his life.
Lautrec General of the French in the Kingdom of Naples had to take the City
of Naples, if he had pursued the Prince of Orange, as the rules of war
required, after he had routed his Army, was the cause of this valiant
Commanders death, and the loss of the whole Kingdom of Naples. 6. The
omission of the opportunity of an hours time that Henry the fourth See Des
Serres Inventary in Henry the fourth his life.
King of France had to defeat the Duke of Parme and all his Army at a strait
passage leading to the ford of a small River three small Leagues from Paris,
where he had purposed to fall upon him, was the cause he was constrained to
raise his siege, and to see before his face that great City relieved, that was
then reduced to extreme Misery by want of Provisions. This slip of opportunity
proceeding certainly from the secret will of God, that decreed that Paris
should be yielded presently after to the will and obedience of her lawful
Prince, without the shedding of a drop of blood; for Henry the fourth was one
of the most active and experienced Commanders of that Age. Now I come to prove
by Instances out of the Word of God that all opportunities are guided and
directed by the special providence of God. 1. The favorable opportunity of
Genesis 14. 15.
Rebekah coming the first of all the Virgins to the well, according to the
request of Abraham's servant, cannot be said to be accidental, for the
circumstances do so clearly manifest, that it was guided by a special
Providence of God. 2. The gracious opportunity of the Genesis 37. 24, 25, 27.
Ishmaelites coming by presently after Joseph's brethren had cast him into a
Pit; that he might be sold and led into Egypt, to become the preserver of all
his fathers family, came not casually, but by a special and gracious
providence of God, proceeding from the love and care he has of his Children.
3. The blessed opportunity of Exodus 2. 5.
Pharaohs daughter coming down to wash her self at the River Nylus was not
accidental, but directed by an admirable Providence of God, to save Moses,
that he might be instructed in all the Sciences of the Egyptians, to be more
able to discharge the great and honorable charge the Lord had appointed him
unto, viz. to be the deliverer of his elected people of Israel, that groaned
under the cruel bondage of the Egyptians. 4. The favorable opportunity for 1 Samuel 10. 4, 5, 6.
Saul, of the loss of the Asses of Kish his father came not accidentally, but
by a special Providence of God, that Saul might be privately anointed King of
Israel, according to the will and pleasure of the Lord; neither did those
signs that the Prophet Samuel told him he should meet withal upon the way, as
he returned homeward, happen casually, but by the special Providence of God;
that the words he had spoken by his Prophet concerning the election of Saul to
the Crown of Israel might be confirmed. 5. The gracious opportunity that. 2 Samuel 17. 7.
Hushat took by the fore-lock, to overthrow the wise Counsel of Ahithophel,
came not accidentally but by an admirable Providence of God, that Ahithophel
might for his former impious Counsel concerning King David's concubines, run
headlong to confusion, notwithstanding his worldly wisdom, and that Absalom
should receive the just reward of his persidious and abhorred rebellion against
so loving a Father. 6. The blessed opportunity that 2 Kin. 9. 36.
Hezekiah King of Judah took upon the blasphemies of Rabshakeh against God and
the Temple of Jerusalem, to go up into the House of the Lord, and there
rehearsed all the words of Rabshakeh, and rent his clothes and humbled himself
greatly, was the cause that the Lord hearkened to his prayer, and sent one of
his Angels into the Camp of the Assyrians, and smote one hundred and fourscore
thousand of his men; and caused Sennacherib to return the same way he came. 7.
The gracious opportunity that Neh. 2. 3.
Nehemiah took upon the King Artaxerxes notice of his dejected countenance for
his extraordinary humiliation, because of the desolation of Jerusalem, was the
cause that he obtained a Commission from the King to erect again the Temple of
Jerusalem; and to restore there the true worship of God; and to deliver from
Captivity many thousands of the Jews. 8. The blessed opportunity that Queen
Esth. 7. 3.
Esther took by the fore-lock to petition to the King Ahasuerus when he was
invited to her banquet, for the preservation of herself and of her people, was
the cause of one of the greatest blessings that ever happened to the Church of
the Jews; for it was the cause of the preservation of all the Nation of the
Jews, and of the House and Family of King David, from which our blessed
Savior according to the flesh was to descend; and therefore an incomparable
blessing. By these and the former Instances we may see, that the observations
or omissions of all Spiritual, Civil, and Military opportunities depend upon
the special Providence of God; and that they are guided and directed by it to
that end, that God in his wisdom knows to be most convenient to conduce to
the greater advancement of his glory, and the good of his Church. And that we
are to address our humble supplications to him alone, if we intend for the
future to prevent the slips of such opportunities as he shall be pleased to
afford unto us again, or be able to embrace them as so many gracious mercies
of his favor to us in Christ. And that we are also to humble ourselves before
our gracious God, for having hitherto so carelessly omitted ten special
opportunities, that might greatly have conduced to obtain a blessed peace; and
to procure a happy Period to this Unnatural War, if he had been pleased to
have given us the grace to have embraced them; by which omission of ours; and
by as many more fair opportunities omitted by the other party, by the like
Providence of his, we may be persuaded upon a sure ground; since it is his
pleasure to poise in the balance of his divine Justice the events of this
Unnatural War so equally, that our Humiliation must be greater and more
sincere, before we can be esteemed fit for to see a gracious deliverance, and a
blessed end of these public miseries. I should now in this place to illustrate
this point relate these twenty opportunities or advantages omitted on both
sides; but I desire to be excused, since they are already but too evident to
ingenious spirits; and therefore will leave them to be exposed to the public
view in the next succeeding age by some that may then relate them truly and
unpartially without fear to offend any of the Parties: And will conclude this
point with this Christian admonition to the true Children of God; that they are
all obliged in the general, and every one in their particular to pray day and
night unto the Lord, that he will be pleased to indue his sacred Majesty, the
honorable Houses of Parliament, the Generals of their Armies, their
Magistrates, and all their subordinate Officers with such supernatural Graces,
Wisdom, and foresight, that they may embrace cheerfully all such
opportunities and advantages that he shall be pleased to offer unto them, to
obtain a blessed Peace with Truth; and to give a happy Period to these Civil
distractions, jealousies, and contentions that will by degrees if God in his
Mercy, and they in their care and Wisdom prevent it not, reduce this Kingdom
to an incurable consumption: for all advantages and opportunities in war,
except they aim and tend to that blessed end of peace abovesaid, are commonly
fatal to such as require it not, when they have an advantage to do it, for so
it fell out with the Samnites and with Hannibal, as it does appear by the two
first instances quoted in this Chap. for it is too late to entertain Treaties
of Peace, when a Kingdom is so extenuated of means or abilities, that it can
no longer contribute to the charges of war; because such a peace can neither
be profitable or honorable to any of the parties; for Necessity has no law,
and necessity will constrain men to hard conditions; There is more honor and
wisdom to give a Peace then to accept of it. This was the Sea Pierie Mat. in
King Henry the fourth his life.
Maxim of Henry the fourth both with his own subjects, and with the House of
Austria, whereby he obtained great honor, and restored a desolated Kingdom
into a flourishing estate; over-rigorous conditions to one of the parties makes
a peace of no continuance; It fell out so with u Charles the fifth Emperor of
Germany by the rigorous peace he enforced upon Francis the first King of
France, because of the advantage he had, the said King being then his prisoner;
but it proved fatal unto him, for after he had consumed in war thirty
millions of gold; and spilt much Christian blood, he won not a foot of ground
in France for all his labor and charges. God grant we may rather give an
honorable Peace, so it be with the continuance of his Truth and his Gospel,
then to accept of a Peace of no continuance with seeming advantages, etc.

The fourth Secondary Cause, is, Our Contentions and Divisions.
APelles the famous Athenian Painter was not more excellent in his Art then in
wit and ingenuity; for to cast the beholders of his works into a greater
admiration, he used to place next to the Picture of his beautiful Venus, when
he did expose her to the view of the Athenians, the picture of an old deformed
and wrinkle faced woman, that by her swarty complexion, grim favor, and ill
shape, the excellent Symetry, lineaments, and rare feature of his Venus might
seem the more wonderful. Even so it will not be impertinent for me to set
forth the deformity of Contention, and the dangerous effects of this infernal
fury, before I describe the perfection of the Angelical beauty of Concord and
Unity, that she may be more cherished and admired, and the other more abhorred
in these times of civil divisions. Contention proceeds from ambition, pride,
and envy; as we may daily see by experience, that contentious persons are
generally tainted with these vices, that come from fullness of bread, ease, and
a long and continued Peace. Now contentions produce divisions, and divisions
breed factions, and factions an intestine war; and all these an Antipathie of
affections which never was greater in any Kingdom then it is in this at this
present time; for the father is divided against his son, and the son
against the father, and the husband against the wife, and the wife against her
husband, one brother against his brother, and one servant against his fellow
servant. So that there is not a City, Borough, Town, Village, Hamlet, House or
Family at this present in this Kingdom, but is infected with this contagious
disease or venom of Contention. And this is not happened casually nor
accidentally, but by the special Providence of God for our correction and
humiliation, if we return unto the Lord unfainedly; but for our utter
destruction if we remain and continue in our impenitencie and hardness of
heart. But some may say, From whence does proceed this Epidemicall disease, or
this general division? we that are but worms cannot dive into the Counsels of
God, yet we may by his permission aim at the secondary causes of these our
Civil divisions, and antipathie of affections, which I conceive to be these:
The long peace that we have enjoyed in the time of Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and for 16. years together under our Sovereign King Charles his
reign, has increased this Kingdom in wealth, and inured us to ease,
idleness, vanity, and licentiousness; riches has bred in some of us
ambition, pride, envy, and self-conceitednesse, the very incendiaries of
contentions and divisions; And ease and idleness have begotten in us
lascivious desires, stubbornness and obstinacy to do and believe what
seems good in our own eyes; and so by degrees we have forgotten our Maker,
and like stubborn horses have kicked at, and rebelled against our gracious
God; I mean, that we are grown desperately sinful, and have despised his
Ordinances, erected a will worship, and gone a whoring after new Innovations;
And hereupon the ambition, pride, covetousness, and profaneness of the
Prelacie, seconded with the Loanes, Conduct, and Ship Money; and the apparent
approaches and inclinations to Popery, by the bowing, crouching, and kneeling
at Altars and Railes, have made us groan for a Reformation in Civil and
Ecclesiastical miscarriages. The which to oppose the Prelacie and the
Jesuiticall faction under color to increase his Majesty's Prerogative, have
withdrawn his love and his person from his most faithful Parliament,
persuaded him to forsake his Royal Seat, to go to York, to raise an Army
under color of a Guard for his Person, to annihilate the Privileges of
Parliament, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the Subjects, and so
formed the first party in the North; whereupon the honorable Houses were of
necessity enforced to gather forces, not to oppose his sacred Majesty, but
those that under his name, endeavor as much as they can to undo the whole
Kingdom. And this is the original secondary cause of our state divisions,
from whence arose that unparalelled general division and Antipathie of
affections, before spoken of; But these state divisions are not them that I
purpose to speak of, but only of those that reign and are fomented in the
Religious party, and in all members of it of what degree soever; And this
proceeds specially from diversity of opinions in matter of Religion, as I have
said already in another place; which is a greater sign that the wrath of God
is greatly inflamed against us; for it is against the course of nature, against
the Laws of Nations, and against the Principles of Religion: That those that
protest to fight for the true reformed Religion, The Privileges of Parliament,
The Laws of the land, And the Liberty of the Subjects, should endeavor, as
much as it is possible for them, to ruinate all these things at a blow by their
daily contentions, grounded many times upon punctilloes of vanity, which they
term honor. But it is a vain and a carnal one, and not a real or Spiritual;
for the true and spiritual Honor is to be lowly and humble in our own eyes;
for the more we are such, the more honorable we are before God and religious
men. Moreover, every time we contend and hinder the Cause by our contentions,
everytime we break our vows, and the solemn Covenant we have made lately
before our God. But to restrain or appease, if it be possible, these general
Contentions, I will prove by Instances what danger there is to foment them;
first, between particulars and families. Secondly, between Commonweals; and
lastly, between Kingdoms and Empires. 1. The envy and contention that Satan
fomented between Cain and Genesis 4. 8.
Abel, and between Romulus and Livius, decad. 1. lib. 1.
Remus, was the cause the two elder brethren murdered their two younger
brethren. 2. The envy, murmures, and contentions fomented by Satan in the
hearts of the sons of Laban was the cause that Jacob departed from Genesis 31. 1.
Laban, and returned discontented to Canaan with all his substance. 3. The
spirit of division and contention that Satan infused by the permission of God
between Abimelech and the men of Shechem, because of the murder of the
threescore and ten sons of Judge. 9. 24.
Zerubbabel, was the cause of Abimelechs shameful end, and of the utter
destruction of the men of Shechem. 4. The contentions that were fomented in
Carthage between Amilicar and Titus Livius, dec. 3. lib. 3.
Hano, and their families, was the cause of the desolation and ruin of their
Commonweals. 5. The contentions that grew from a trivial occasion, and
fomented by the envy and ambition that reigned in See Plutarch in their lives.
Marius and Sylla, filled the City of Rome and all Italy with murders and
blood. 6. The contentions fomented between Pompeius and See Plutarch in their
lives and
Caesar by their ambition and pride, inflamed the fire of a cruel Civil war
in Europa, Asia and Africa. 7. The contentions increased by favorites and
factious Courtiers, between Caesar in his commentaries.
Appian in the Civil wars of the Romans
Augustus Caesar and Marcus Antonius divided the world into two parties, and
filled the same with miseries and desolations. 8. The contentions and divisions
that were fomented between the Sea the Turkish History.
Emperors of Constantinople and their adjacent neighbors the Christian
Princes, was the cause of the loss of the East parts of the world, and that
the two Empires of Trebisonde, and of Constantinople were reduced to the
eternal dishonor of all Christendom, under the insulting yoke of the
Barbarous Turks. 9. The contentions fomented between the House of Austria and
the Houses of Valois and See Sleidan and the French Hist.
Bourbon, have been and are still the cause of great effusion of Christian
blood; and for no other cause, but for the Precedencie and an ambitious desire
of Superiority. 10. The ambitious contentions of the Houses of See Du Halian in
the French History
Orleance and of Bourgundy were the cause of the murder of two Dukes, and of
the death of many thousand men. 11. The contentions fomented between the Houses
of See Stowes and Speeds Chron.
Lancaster and York were the cause of the death of the greater part of the
English Nobility, and of the desolation of many Counties of this Kingdom. 12.
The contention fomented in Fance by the Spanish faction, between the Royalist
and the Catholic See the Civil Wars of France.
League, and of late years in Germany, have been the cause of the death of
diverse millions of Christians, whose lives might have been better employed to
destroy the enemies of Christendom. But because the emulations, contentions,
and the Antipathy of affections between Commanders in Chief, are very
dangerous, I will show here by instances, that other Nations have to their
cost, as well as we, found that it is perilous and destructive to a state, to
employ two Commanders in Chief in one and the same design or Service, if
there be an Antipathy of affections between them, 1. The emulation and
contention that was naturally between See Tit. Live. dec. 1. lib. 10.
Appius Claudius and Lucius Voluminous, Generals of the Romans, had like to
have overthrown their Commonweal, if it had not been suddenly prevented by
the Senate. 2. The emulation and contention that grew between Fabius Maximus
General, and Plutarch in Fabius Maximus his life.
Munitius the Master of his Horse had been fatal to the Romans, if Fabius
for the good and love of his Country had not with admirable humility and
meekness endured the affronts of Munitius, and relieved him in his eminent
danger rather then let him perish to vindicate himself. 3. The emulation and
contention that was fomenced by some factious men between the two French
Generals sent into Italy by Lewis the twelfth, the Lord See Des Serres
Inventary in the year 1500.
Aubigni and the Lord Trivulce, had been the cause of the loss of all
Lombardia; for what the one built with one hand, the other flung down with
another; If that wise King hearing of it had not presently sent them as far
distant one from another as Picardy is distant from Lombardia. The Antipathie
of affections, and the contentions that had been fomented formerly between the Sea the History of France in the time of Henry the fourth.
Admiral de Villars, and the Duke of Boullion, when he first sided with the
League and the other with the Royalists; But being at that time all reconciled
and united under the Service of Henry the fourth King of France; They were with
equal Authority and Power sent by the King to besiege Douclance, and to
over-runne and waste the County of Artois the Spaniards dominion, but meeting
a strong Army of the enemies, they came to a fight, wherein the Admiral
furiously and valiantly engaged himself so deep with a Regiment of horse in the
midst of the Battalia of the enemies, hoping it seems to be as well seconded
by the Duke, that he was slain and the greater part of this Regiment. His
death and want of relief being imputed to proceed from the sparks of the fire
of the former division of affections, that were not utterly quenched in the
breast of the Duke. And so for a private vindication a great part of the French
Army was routed, and the siege of Dourlance retarded. Many other Instances
might be produced to prove how dangerous it is for a State to employ Commanders
in Chief in one Service, that have had formerly, or may yet have secretly,
some Antipathie of affections; so much predominant are the passions of men over
their natural reason, except they be curbed and restrained by a great measure
of supernatural Grace. Now having sufficiently described some part of the
deformity, and of the dangerous effects of this fury of contention and
division. I come to show the sweet Harmony and the excellent fruits of Unity
and Concord. The whole frame of nature without Concord and Unity would suddenly
be changed into a Chaos of confusion, if the powerful hand of the Almighty did
permit contention to reign between any of the elements; for we see what
strange combustions happen in the air for a small distemper that befalls
sometimes between the Meteors. Concord and Unity is the humane savior and
preserver of Kingdoms and Commonweals; A Matthew. 12. 25.
Kingdom divided against it self cannot subsist, says our Savior. And how
much less shall a weaker party subsist, if it be divided by contentions and
Antipathies of affections, as ours is. It was an ingenious Metaphor used by a
Scythian See Herodolus his History.
King, to induce his sons to Unity, To command a servant of his to bring
before him a bundle of Arrows knit together, and to charge his sons one
after another to endeavor to break the same, but they were not able,
whereupon he bad them to take them one by one, and they brake them all easily.
Even so said he to them, If you remain constantly united one with another, it
will be impossible for the neighbor Nations to subdue or overcome you; but if
you let divisions and contentions be fomented among you, you will become the
prey of your meanest enemies. And for the greater confirmation of the point, I
will endeavor to prove it by Instances both ancient and modern. 1. As long as
the Ancient Greeks continued in unity one with another, it was impossible for
See Demosthenes his life.
Philip the first King of Macedonia to reduce them into servitude, But as soon
as they by the covetousness of some of their Orators were divided into
factions, it was an easy thing for him and Alexander the great his son to
deprive them of their liberty. 2. As long as the Roman Senators were linked
in unity one with another, the Roman liberty was preserved, and their
Commonweal flourished and commanded the greater part of the world; but as
soon as they were divided into factions, some for See Pompey his life.
Pompeius, other for Caesar, other for Crassus, and other for Lepidus; Caesar
in a short time deprived them of their liberty. 3. As long as the ancient See
Caesar's Commentaries
Gauls and Britanes were united together, they flourished and sacked the City
of Rome; But when they were divided into factions by the Roman agents, they
were in a short time subdued by the Romans. 4. The Unity and Concord that was
among the Sea the Civil Wars of France and La No^^e his Politic and Military
Discourses.
Commanders in Chief of the Protestant Party in the Civil wars of France
was the only means after Gods favor, of their subsistence; for one cannot
otherwise choose that reads that History but admire the wisdom and meekness of
the Admiral of Chatillon, and the great industry he used to accord with the
incompatible dispositions and natural inclinations of some that were violent
and fiery in all their designs and enterprises, as was the Prince of Conde and
Monsieur Dandelot and others; yet with his humility and meekness he did quench
all contentions that did arise from this Antipathy of dispositions; and kept
always their will and affections constantly united to the General Cause. 4.
The unity and concord that was between Fabius Maximus and P. Titus Livius, dec.
1. lib. 10.
Decius two great Generals, and Scipio and Lellius two other great Commanders,
was wonderfully profitable to the Roman Commonweal; and that of Phocion and
of Aristides to the Athenians Commonweal. 5. The unity of See Plutarch in
their lives.
Themistocles and Aristides (that were otherwise mortal enemies in their
private affairs) was extremely profitable to all the Greeks in the Council of
war, that was called by Euripidias their General before the battle of
Salamine, for their unity in opinion was the cause to obtain that famous
victory, and of the preservation of all the Greeks. 6. As long as the Duke of
See Stowes Chron.
Sommerset and the Lord Admiral his brother, in the time of Edward the sixth
King of England, were united and linked in love and affections one with the
other, they preserved their credit and honors at Court against all their
opposites; But as soon as they came to be disunited, and that by the
instigations of their Ladies, private discontents and contentions were
fomented, the Lord Admiral was presently arraigned, by the connivance and the
want of the assistance and support See Speeds Chron.
of the Lord Protector his brother, and he himself shortly after by the
potency of his adversaries brought to the same miserable end. To conclude this
point, all the well affected Christians are obliged to pray daily to our
gracious God, that he will be pleased to indue abundantly the honorable
Houses, our Commanders in Chief, the Assembly of Divines, the Civil
Magistrates, the Militia, the Committees in the City and in all the
well-affected Counties, the Citizens and common people with this special grace
of Unity and Concord, and with an unanimous spirit and resolution, to maintain
his Truth, his sacred Majesty's just Prerogative, the Privileges of
Parliament, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the Subject, according
to our last Covenant.

The fifth Secondary Cause, is, The unknown Method of our War.
OF all the Judgments of God that are familiar to men, the Pestilence, the
Famine, and the Sword are reputed to be the greatest; And of these three, War
is esteemed the most dreadful; And of all Wars, the Civil is conceived to
be the most destructive. And therefore it is no wonder, (when the Lord sent his
Prophet Gad, to King David, saying, 1 Chronicles. 21. 12, 13.
Thus says the Lord, Choose thee Either three years famine, or three months
to be destroyed before thy foes (while that the sword of thine enemies
overtaketh thee) or else three days the sword of the Lord, even the
Pestilence, etc.) if that good King did rather choose to fall into the hand of
the Lord (for very great are his mercies) then into the hands of cruel men.
Neither do we find in any ancient or modern Histories, that any Nation or
Kingdom has been utterly destroyed by the Pestilence, or the famine; for
these two Judgments proceed more immediately from the hand of God that is
merciful, and leave always a remnant, as an evidence to men of his
incomprehensible compassions and mercies. But War seems more to proceed from
men (yet there is not any war that has any beginning, continuance or end,
without the special will and pleasure of God) that are of a more cruel
disposition then Tigers, when the Lord has cast the bridell of permission over
their necks. And therefore it is by war that so many Nations, Kingdoms and
Commonweals have been utterly destroyed and consumed, and above all by an
intestine and Civil war; for a Nation being weakened by her own hands, it
breeds an opportunity for foreign Princes to fall upon it, and subvert and
conquer the same. But foreign wars are often profitable to Kingdoms or
Commonweals, so they be managed without the limits of those Kingdoms or
Commonweals; Carthage flourished as long as See Hannibal in his life.
Hannibal wasted Italy. But when Scipio came with a great Army to their gates,
misery and destruction issued upon it; See the Chronicle of England.
England flourished when war was maintained in France, but when the English
were driven home, it was wasted and desolated by Civil commotions, and an
intestine war; And therefore it is a sound and a sure Maxim or Reason of
State to entertain war abroad, that a Kingdom may be freed from it at home;
And this Maxim was carefully observed by the Romans for a long time, but as
soon as they neglected the same, they fell into civil contentions and into
intestine wars. As long as the French Nation entertained wars in Italy to
recover the right they had in the Kingdom of Naples and in the Duchy of Milan,
France did prosper and flourish; but as soon as that fatal Peace was concluded
between See the History of France.
Henry the second King of France, and Philip King of Spain by the procurement
of the Constable of France (that aimed more at his own ends, then to advance
the honor of his King and the good of his native Country.) And that Savoy,
Piedmont, and the rest of the dominions that the French held in Italy were made
over to the Duke of Savoy as an inconsiderate dowry of King Henry's daughter
that he took to wife, then issued presently after the destructive Civil
wars of France, that continued three and thirty years, and consumed above
eight hundred thousand men of the French Nation, and brought that Kingdom to
the very brim of destruction. But when it had pleased God by an unexpected
mercy, and by the wisdom, valor and clemency of See Matthew. in Henry the
fourth^i e.
Henry the fourth to reunite the alienated affections of that populous nation;
and to keep or observe the abovesaid Maxim, and to drive this intestine
war into Artois and Flanders, and to fire the dominions of the Incendiarie of
the French Civil wars, then began that Kingdom to flourish again, for this
diversion procured an honorable peace of ten years for the French, in the
which that politic King to entertain the foresaid Maxim sent most of the
licentious and contentious spirits of his Kingdom unto Hungaria and into the
low Countries, and by these means restored that desolated Kingdom into a most
flourishing estate. And his Counselors of State that had the managing of the
Military and Politic affairs of the Kingdom after his death, during the
Minority of Lewis the 13. his son, perceiving that for want of foreign
employment the French Nobility began to soment Civil Commotions in the
Kingdom aided by the Spanish faction, they were constrained to embrace again
this ancient Maxim, which they have constantly observed to this day; and have
by it maintained the honor of their King, and much increased their Dominions;
Even so out of this principle or Reason of State did Queen See Queen
Elizabeth's life.
Elizabeth undertake the protection of the Low Countries, that the English
Nobility might have employment abroad, and exercise themselves in Military
exploits, that she might have always ready some experienced Commanders and
Officers of Capacity to lead an Army, if her enemies attempted any invasion
upon her dominions; and this her wise and politic course succeeded most
happily, for she maintained thereby her Kingdom in peace and in a prosperous
condition, suppressed the rebellions in Ireland, aided the French with her
Treasures, and with experienced Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers, curbed the
insolency of the Spaniard by Sea, and made the natural color of that element
to be often changed into Crimson, by the undaunted valor and the great
experience of her Commanders, Officers, and Mariners in Sea Fights: And by her
warlike expeditions to Cales and the West India increased her Ships and Navies,
and all manner of Trade and commerce, and left at her death England and Ireland
in a prosperous peace and condition. By these Instances and many more that
might be produced to the same end, it is apparent that foreign wars are
often times profitable in these four cases, so they be managed out of the
limits of a Kingdom or Commonweal. 1. It purges them of licentious men. 2.
It frees them of Civil commotions, and intestine wars. 3. It is a Nurcery
for Commanders and experienced Officers. 4. It increases commerce and trading,
and does rather enrich a Kingdom then waste the same. 1. The Romans never
inroled any soldiers for their foreign wars out of their inhabitants or
Citizens before all the licentious and contentious men that are apt to breed
Civil commotions had been See Titus Livius in his Decades.
inroled; and when they had subdued a Kingdom or Province, they erected
Colonies in it, where they sent all the most licentious men of their City, and
their old soldiers, to whom they appointed so much land as they might live
with all. 2. It frees a Kingdom from Civil commotions; for if licentious and
needy people find but some discontented Nobles to side withal, they will
presently foment a party, and kindle the fire of a Civil war; but as the
only way to quench a fire is to take from it the combustible matter that
increases the same; even so to prevent Civil distractions, we are to purge
the City and Kingdom of licentious and decayed men, and to send them away into
foreign wars. 3. Few or none are ignorant that the Germane and the Low
Country wars have been the Nurcery of the greater part of the experienced
English, French, and Scotch Commanders and Officers that are now in these
days: It is true that of these three Nations, the number of the English is the
smallest, because that in the peaceable Reign of King James Commanders and
Officers of experience in war were not regarded, yet those that out of a
natural inclination to Arms, went thither to be trained up, are not inferior
to any, but the number of them is so small, that they are now constrained to
employ licentious Germans for principal officers; but Germany, Sweden, and
England it self is beholden to the Scots for Commanders and Officers of war;
And for the French the Maxim of Henry the fourth before related has much
increased the Capacity of the French Nobility, and of their foot soldiers in
martial exploits, so that for seiges, or battles, they are not inferior to
any. And therefore foreign wars are the Nurcery of experienced Commanders
and Officers of war. 4. For the increase of Trade and Commerce, the foreign
war that the French and the Hollanders have maintained these many years
against the House of Austria has much increased their trade and commerce, and
are now grown more opulent in wealth then all other Nations in Christendom.
This may seem a paradox to some, yet it is most certain, for although the
French are extraordinarily burdened with taxes, yet because the Country men
are freed from plundering and pillaging, and their cattle and corn secured,
and trades men set at work, and the commerce of all manner of Commodities in
request, to furnish the great Armies they entertain upon the enemies
frontiers, the money of their contributions remains in the Kingdom; and as
it goes out of one hand for taxes and contributions, so it comes in on the
other for the great utterance they have of all their Commodities. But alas it
is clean contrary in this Civil and Unnatural War of ours; for the trading
and commerce is utterly decaid in the City, and in all the Boroughs and Market
Towns of the Kingdom, most of the Country people are plundered of their
moneys, goods and cattle, the Gentlemen have their grounds cast up upon their
hands, although they pay all charges, and abate half their rent, and no
redress to be had; and the Sequestrations of the one side or the other bring
them to penury, and disable them be they never so willing to contribute any
longer to this war; by which means this Kingdom is likely to fall into an
incurable consumption, because of three pernicious qualities (besides the
miseries abovesaid) that pertain to her alone, and not to other Civil
wars. 1. It is of a consuming nature. 2. It is accompanied with an
unparalelled infidelity. 3. It is of an unknown Method.

I. For her consuming nature, it may justly be compared to the Hectic Fever,
that consumes not only the flesh of all the members of the body, but also by
degrees, the vital spirits, the radical humors, and the very marrow in the
bones of her patients, until she has brought them to their grave, more like
an Anatomy then a Corpse. Or like unto a fire kindled in a house seated in one
of the corners of a long street, the flames of which fire being driven by a
violent wind along that row of houses, does at last consume the whole street,
for want of pulling down speedily three or four houses, next to that house
that was first of all set on fire, to stop the flames of it to proceed any
further. Even so the flames of the fire of this unnatural war that brake
forth in the North, was driven by the violent winds of jealousy and discontent
into the North West, and then to the South West, and at last to the furthest
part of the West; and so by degrees has consumed already three parts of the
Kingdom, and left in the other part but a small degree of vital spirits, for
want of pulling down three or four houses to stop the flame of it from going
any further. I mean, for want of such Counsel as was given to See the History
of France
Charles the seventh King of France by his wise Counselors, that he should
give over (to quench the fire of the Civil contentions fomented between the
Houses of Orleance and Burgundy, that had almost consumed his Kingdom) into
the hands of Justice, at the request of Philip Duke of Burgundy, some of his
Favorites that had their hands in the murder of his father; to which Counsel
he condescended unto, although this murder had been committed with his assent,
whereby such a firm reconciliation was procured between these two Houses, that
it fell out to be the secondary Cause of the restoring of that desolated
Kingdom into its former flourishing Estate. Or for want (after the Noble
Embassage, and the humble Petitions of the Honorable Houses had been rejected)
to have sent speedily a thousand horse in the North, until a strong Army had
been sent to stop the flames of this fire to go beyond the River of Trent. But
by our accustomed delays, and the small forces that were sent to Woster, the
fire of this Unnatural War has spread it self, as it is to be seen at this
present day, and is like to spread further and to consume the rest, if God in
his Mercy prevent it not; and induce the Honorable Houses to change the Method
of this lingering and destructive War.

II. For the unparallelled infidelity of some of the Agents of one of the
parties, all the Civil wars of the ancient Greeks and Romans, or of the
modern intestine wars of the French and the Germane Nation, cannot produce
so much infidelity and apostasy as may be collected out of these three years
war. For where they sided at the first, they remained constant to the last in
that party, and never deserted the same, until an Accommodation was procured.
Nay, diverse of them have sealed their constancy with their See Caesar's
Comment. in the war of Africa.
death, rather then to accept of their liberty upon condition to serve against
their party. But diverse of ours that make show to fight for Religion more then
for pay, betray the trust reposed in them, and do us more mischief then any
of the contrary party. And it is no wonder, for Christian Runagadoes are more
cruel to Christians then the natural Turks; and the Protestant Apostates, are
greater enemies to the godly then the professed Papists; and the hypocritical
Saints, are more violent against the true Power of Godliness, then the Prince
of darkness. The cause of this infidelity may proceed 1. From the toleration
of diverse religions; for men that are not well grounded in the true Principles
of Religion are never cautious of their ways, and will betray their own
fathers for money. 2. From the great Clemency of the Honorable Houses, for if
the perfidious Synons of the North had been severely punished, so many Iudasses
would not have been found in the West to procure that blow, that we have
received there lately. Clemency is an Heroical virtue, but infidelity is
incapable of it, because it is so pernicious a seed, that except it be pulled
up by the root, it will over-grow the garden of the Commonweal. 3. From the
partial election of our politic and Military Officers, that are for the
greater part preferred by favor, and not for their sincerity in Religion, or
for their integrity and wisdom in politic or Civil affairs; nor for their
valor or experience in Martial exploits; but for fear to displease or to
please some in Authority; and that is the reason why we have so many weak
Committees in the City and in our Counties; and so many unexpert Commanders and
Officers in our Armies, that dare not look the enemies in the face; nor know
not how to lead a Troop of horse to a charge; nor set a Company of foot in a
posture of defense; And these are they that out of timiditie, inconstancy, and
for want of experience in warlike affairs, spinne out this unnatural War,
by surrendering of places of great concernement, that will prove dear favors
unto us. The remedy of this is, to punish severely the Synons of these days,
and to imitate in our elections the method and wisdom of See Du Hailian in
his History of France
Charles the fifth King of France; for it is recorded that he never elected any
of his Chief Commanders or Officers of war, or any of his Counselors of
State, Judges or Magistrates, to favor any of his favorites, or at the suit
of any of his Peers; but for their own merits, made known to him, by their
former actions in Military, Politic and Civil employments; And by this Method
and unpartiality in his elections, there never was King more successful in
his Military enterprises; nor more happy in his Politic Resolutions; nor more
beloved of his Subjects, because Justice was unpartially administered in his
days.

III. For the unknown Method of this war, it is different from the Method of
the ancient Greeks and Romans, and from the modern Method of the most warlike
Nations of these days, In these particulars, 1. In the true season of war.
2. In our Scouts. 3. In our marches. 4. In our preparations. 5. In our
Discipline. 6. In our rules of war. 7. In the stratagems of war. 8. In the
true Maxims of war.

1. In the season of our war.
There has been from time to time one season more fit and convenient for war
then another, as it may appear 1. Chron. 20. 1. 1 Chro. 20. 1.
At the time that Kings go out to battle, Ioab led forth the power of the
Army, and wasted the country of the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah,
etc. But because the seasons do differ according to the climate of the seat of
every Country or Nation, I will ground this observation according to the
Climate of those that come nearest to ours. In See Caesar in his Commentaries.
Africa the latter end of February was the ordinary season for Armies to take
the field. In Italy in the midst of March, and in France in the beginning of
April; so that our most convenient season should be to take the field at the
furthest in the midst of April; and to withdraw our armies into their garrisons
at Holland Tide, or at the latter end of October. But if we made use of Tents
(as we should indeed for the greater expedition of this war) then we might
conveniently keep the field, until the latter end of November. But as the
watermen that row against tide make less speed, and have far more labor to
go to their Journies end, then those that take the opportunity of the Tide:
Even so to spinne out this War, and to increase the labors of it, and to
waste our men and money, we ordinarily employ the greater part of the Winter
time in actions of war, and suffer the Summer to pass away in recruiting our
Armies, or in our preparations of war, whereas Winter is the most convenient
time to raise and inrole Forces, and Reserves, to recruit those Forces; and to
get ready all manner of provisions and necessary implements for war; And this
is a great cause of the spinning out of the public miseries.

2. In our Scouts.
One of the greatest Secondary causes of the spinning out of this war is our
want of faithful and diligent Scouts; The City of London should never be
without sixteen young, active, and faithful Scouts, that it might have every
other day true intelligence from all the parts of the Kingdom, and every day
from our Armies; for it would be the best spent money of any, and that would
soon come in again twenty for one; besides, it would prevent many false
rumors, that are daily spread in the City, greatly prejudicial to the City
and State. Moreover, for want of faithful Scouts, the City may very well be
surprised or taken unprovided of many necessaries for a defensive posture, as
many other have been for want of them; and diverse others preserved by the
speedy activity of their Scouts, as I might prove by instances, if I did not
fear to make this Treatise greater then I purpose to do. And for our Armies,
faithful and active Scouts would be the only preservation of them, and the way
to prevent for the time to come the slips of such Military opportunities that
they have lost heretofore; but these Scouts are to be experienced soldiers,
and very swift horsemen, and not silly country men, or unexpert soldiers,
but such as are acquainted with all the stratagems of war; and that have the
capacity to judge by the march of the enemies their project or intentions. See
You. Live. dec. 3. lib. 8.
Asdrubal General of the Carthaginians was defeated and all his Army for want
of diligent Scouts; for he never was acquainted that Claudius Nero and his Army
was joined with his Colleague Marcus Livius, until his Army was routed and
himself mortally wounded. 2. See Philip the Commines.
Lewis the eleventh and Charles Duke of Burgundy and both their Armies, were
extremely terrified and amazed and like to fly away by the false report their
Scouts brought to them, that both Armies were advancing, because they judged in
a misty morning some high thistles that grew upon a high and long banck in the
fields between the two Armies to be so many Regiments of their enemies
Lanciers. 3. See Plutarch in Marcellus his life.
Marcellus an active and valiant General of the Romans was slain and his
Colleague mortally wounded and his men defeated by Hannibal for want of
faithful Scouts to discover an Ambush that was laid to entrap them. 4.
Tiberius. See Titus Livius, 3. dec. li. 8.
Graccus and all his followers were slain by another Ambush of Hannibals for
want of Scouts to discover the same. 5. And See Marcus Crassus life in Plutarch.
Crassus a Roman Commander was preserved and all his followers by the
diligence of his Scouts. 6. Sir William Waller was surprised the last year at
the Vises; and my Lord General was ensnared this Summer in Cornwall for want
of faithful Scouts, for to acquaint the one in time of the sudden coming of
the enemies, and the other of the straites and narrow passages to Foy. The want
then of diligent and faithful Scouts in the City and in our Armies is a Cause
of the spinning out of this Unnatural War.

3. In our Marches.
The Roman Soldiers did always march when they did entrench themselves in a
fortified Camp See Scipio admirato in the ancient Discipline of the Romans.
eight miles a day, and carried upon their backs three days provision, their
Arms, and a Pallisado for the parapet of their Camp; and when they carried
nothing but their Arms and three days provision they marched 16. miles a day;
the Germans in Hungaria marched in my time three Germane leagues which is 15.
miles, when they had Wagons to carry their Lumber; and the French Armies march
ordinarily 5. French Leagues, that is above ten miles a day; and Claudius Nero
marched with his Army sevenscore miles in six days, by which activity and
swift March he defeated Hannibals brother and all his Army; And See Plutarch in
Caesar's life.
Caesar's Marches were so swift, that he and his Army passed the Craggie
mountains of the Alps, before the Roman Senate could have intelligence by
their Scouts, that he was departed out of France. But our Armies require six
weeks time to march sixscore miles, which is the overthrow of all Martial
expeditions, and the cause of the spinning out of this Unnatural War; for by
these long and tedious Marches the enemies conjoyne their Forces, or recruite
their scattered Armies, and so make our designs vanish away to smoke. In a
word, speed and activity in all Military attempts is as needful as valor, to
conduce an intestine war, as ours is, to a blessed Period.

4. In our Preparations.
If our Marches are tedious our preparations are yet longer, and yet we omit in
them the most necessary implements of war, I mean, Tents, Pick-axes,
Shovels and Spades, Wagons, Hand-barowes, and Wheele-barowes, Tortues,
Mantelets, and Ladders; If the Militia of the City of London does then desire
to see a speedy and a blessed end of this unnatural war, they are to provide
this Winter these necessaries following; for if our Armies were provided with
them, they would expedite more warlike attempts in one month then they can now
do in three months, as it shall be proved when I come to speak of intrenching
and sieges. 1. They should always have ready twelve hundred Tents of six yards
broad and eight yards long. 2. Four hundred Wagons, two hundred of them close
covered, and two hundred uncovered. 3. Four hundred Ladders, two hundred of
sixteen foot long, and two hundred of twelve foot long. 4. Fourscore light
flat botes to cross Rivers. 5. Four hundred Barowes, two hundred with
Wheels, and two hundred Hand-barowes. 6. Twenty Tortues and twenty Mantelets
that are Engines that go upon Wheels, to preserve Soldiers from the
Musket Shot, when they make their approaches, and are to be so made that they
may suddenly be dismounted and carried in Wagons. 7. Two thousand Pick-axes,
two thousand Shovels, two thousand Spades. 8. Eight Sommes of six penny Nails,
four Sommes of ten penny nails, and two Sommes of double ten penny nails. 9.
Four hundred deal boards of twelve foot long, and four hundred round deal
Poles of twelve foot long, and of six Inches thick. 10. And twelve Canons,
twenty-foure Colverins, forty eight Drakes ready mounted with all their
appurtenances, Balls, Powder, and Match proportionable. 11. One hundred Ovens
of iron plate to bake a Bushel of bread at a time. 12. Forty Bakers, forty
Brewers, forty Butchers, twelve young Carpenters with their Tools, and twelve
Commissaries of Victuals, having every one of them six Wagons apiece belonging
to themselves to provide the Army with all manner of Provisions: for if this
war continue but one year longer, our Armies will be famished, and not able
to advance, because the Counties will be so desolated, except there be
Commissaries of Victuals appointed to provide the Army by Wagons out of the
Adjacent Counties. But some will say, you persuade us to incredible and
unnecessarie charges, for the greater part of these things we can procure in
those Counties through which our Armies do march, or intend to lay siege
against any of the enemies Garrisons: I answer, it is a great improvidence for
an Army to be without the necessaries that belong to it; and we know by
experience that before the Country can be summoned to bring in Ladders,
Barowes, Pick-axes, Shovels and Spades, (for that only can be found in the
Country) that an Army may be entrenched about a Garrison Town; and suppose
they bring them in sooner, yet are they so worn, broken, and out of repair,
that they are of no service but to spinne out time; I remember when one of our
Armies was last year to storm or to scale Basing House, that they were
constrained to send to London to have them made, and so lost a fortnight of
fair weather, and then when the Ladders came, the weather being rainy and
cold, they were enforced to raise the siege for want of Tents; Now had they had
all these implements with them, they had come off with honor, and taken that
house; and not left the work to be done this year, or for the next, as they
carry themselves before it: The very charges then, that has been cast away
about that house, would have paid for ten times as many implements as are here
specified; besides, the loss of the time which is worth as much more, and the
blemish of the reputation of the undertakers, which is more then all the rest.
I conclude then, that an Army is not to advance without all these implements,
to cross Rivers, to besiege Towns, to entrench it self, to make mines, to
erect plat-formes, gabions, and to storm, or assault strongholds, without
loosing half a days time by staying for materials, to hinder their
prosecution in any warlike attempt.

5. In our Discipline.
Our indulgence in Military Discipline is also a great cause of the spinning
out of this war, for Soldiers do what they please, their Generals Commands
are not regarded at all. For an Officer this Summer against the special order
of his Commander forsook his Station, and by it endangered the whole Army, and
was the cause of the loss of many valiant men. And in the West, many have this
Summer forsaken their Station appointed by their General, and by their
disobedience sold his honor and Reputation; And the last Brigade of the five
Regiments that went out of the City, notwithstanding that an Order was expressly
published a month before they went out to be ready at an hours warning; yet
there went out very few with their colors, but lingered away the time two or
three days; our runawayes are neither degraded nor punished, and that is the
cause they make a custom of it, as they have lately done at Banbury, where
three months time, and a great sum of money has been cast away. If any See
Scipio Admirato in the Discipline of the Romans.
Officer or Soldier among the Romans did forsake the Station appointed to him
by his General, it was present death; if Soldiers did not go out of the City
with their colors, they were tried by a Council of war; if they runned away
before the enemies, the tenth man suffered for it, the Officers were degraded,
and the rest cashiered. The ten See Titus Livius in diverse places of his. 3.
Decade.
thousand that ran away from the battle at Cannes, notwithstanding the Roman
Commonweal had never so much need of men as at that time; yet all the
Commanders and Officers were degraded of their Nobility, and cashiered for ever
to bear Arms; and the common Soldiers banished for ten year into Sicile.
And surely if our Military Discipline be not reduced to the Roman austerity; or
after the Greeks, that was that all runawayes should stand three market See
Montagnes Essays, chap. 15. fol. 38.
days in women's apparel upon a stage to be derided at for their cowardice,
all will go to confusion; and this Unnatural war will be spinned out, till
there be no more oil in the lamp of this Kingdom to give it life.

6. In our Rules of war.
The order or rules of war were never so neglected as they are in our days.
1. In intrenchments. 2. In fortifying Camps. 3. In scaling. 4. In mining. 5. In
storming. 6. In our manner of assaults. Of all which particulars, I shall
speak of as briefly as may be.

1. How we are to entrench our selves in a siege.
By the Rules of war, a Commander in Chief that undertakes to besiege any
strong hold, if he does not begirt the same with a strong trench, and incamp
his Army in a fortified Camp in a fortnights time, and chance to be routed or
constrained to raise his siege, is to be tried by a council of War; This
ancient Roman Law has been lately revived in France, and many have been
punished for neglecting of it; And a Commander in Chief in Artois had lost his
head for it about three years since, if some great ones had not obtained his
pardon. And our neglect of it has been a great cause of the spinning out of
this war; for by this only neglect we have been foiled at Newark, at Basing
house both this year and the last, and now of late in Cornwall and at Banbury
Castle; And had also been foiled at York, if God in his mercy had not prevented
the same. All intrenchments are to be lined and directed by an experienced
Engineer, that may according to the situation of the hold, and the small or
great circumference of it, order the same after a regular or irregular form,
if it be but a Castle or a house, a square or a long square, or a Patagonde
form will serve the turn; so there befoure or five small Redoubts to flank
the trenches: if it be such another Town as Newarke, an Octogone form will
serve, so there be two bridges erected over the river and two small redoubts
erected to secure them, that the one side may be presently relieved by the
other, if it be a great City the Dyadecagone form is to be used, and the
trenches are to be lined within pistoll-shot from the walls or rampiars; for the
nearer the safer: And for the approches that are of al things the most
dangerous, they are to be directed by the Engineers; by whose advice and some
Mantelets to preserve the Pioners from the enemies musket shot, there will be
no great loss, so there be Brigades appointed to stand ready to hinder the
Sallies out of the enemies. Two good Engineers in a siege may do more service
to the state then a thousand men, by their counsel and directions. And for
want of experienced ones, we are daily foiled; there can be no money better
employed, nor that will be more beneficial to the State, then by a good round
pay to procure the most ingenious and experienced Engineers that can be
obtained.

2. Of a fortified Camp.
There is no erecting of fortified Camps, without Tents; and that is the reason
why I press the Militia to have a thousand or twelve hundred always ready of
that size spoken of, for to expedite sieges, that will be long and tedious
without them, and will consume a number of men by diseases; but having Tents, a
fortified Camp is to be erected upon a raising ground without Cannon shot of
the Town, if it be no bigger then Newark, one fortified Camp will serve, so it
be seated in the midway of the circumference of the Trenches between the two
Bridges, that relief may be sent to all the trenches speedily; but if it be a
great City that has a river running in the midst of it, then there is to be
two fortified Camps, on either side at a just distance on both sides of the
river; I mean, that there may be no more distance on the right hand to the
river side, then on the left, and from each of the two Camps there are lines of
Communication to be made to relieve without danger the trenches or the two
Brides, that are erected on both sides the City. I will therefore set out the
proportion of a fortified Camp, to contain twelve hundred Tents of that size
abovesaid, that will harbor four thousand horse and eight thousand foot with
conveniencie; if the Army be greater, it is to be increased, if smaller, it is
to be diminished proportionably. The form of this Camp is to be square and of
six hundred yards on each side of the square, that makes four and twenty
hundred yards of continent, and is to have four bulwarks at the four Corners,
to set two pieces of Ordnance in each bulwark, for to flank the Dikes of it;
that are to be of six yards broad and four yards deep, the rampire to be of
six yards thick in the bottom; and of four yards thick at top; and three
yards high besides the Parapet, that is to be four foot high and two yards
thick. This Camp is to have four broad gates, one in the midst of each side of
the square, and a square market place of two hundred yards one each side of the
square, that make eight hundred yards of continent just in the midst of the
Camp; then it is to have four broad streets, that are to be drawn upon a
strait line from every gate to the market place of twelve yards broad, in
manner of a perfect cross, and four great streets more, drawn out from one
corner of the Camp to the other; and every one distant from the rampiar ten
yards, that the soldiers may without impediment come from all parts to defend
the rampire. Now the four angles that remain are to contain the Tents that
are to be set up back to back, and on both sides a street of eight yards broad
to come in to the Tents, the ends of which are to be close together, that there
may be no passage between them, The two Angles toward the South are to be
reserved for the lodging of men; and the other toward the North for the horse;
The Generals Tent and other Chief Officers Tents are to be set up in the four
corners of the streets next to the market place; that all the officers may the
more speedily repair to him, and the Courts of guard are to be placed in the
eight Tents that make the eight corners of the four Cross streets next to
the gates. A Camp thus fortified and so ordered having lines of Communication
to the trenches of the circumference that begirt the Town or City, will be
able to make good a siege against an Army that should come to raise the same of
forty thousand men, as Caesar did in See Caesar's Commentaries in the Wars of
Africa.
Africa before Adrumet, and Henry the fourth did before See the siege of
Amiens in History of France.
Amiens against the Archduke Mathias, and the last King of Sweden before See
the Sweden Soldier.
Norenberg against the Duke of Walstaine. This fortified Camp may be finished
by six thousand foot soldiers in eight days, if the Army be provided, as it
is abovesaid, so the soldiers have but four pence a day paid them every night
above their pay, as a gratuity to encourage them in this work; and a Town so
besieged will be sooner reduced in a months time, then it will be in three
months, if the Army quarter in the adjacent villages, and with more ease and
less danger of the enemies, or of any diseases to infect the Army, for in such
a Camp with Tents and Straw they lie as warm and safer then in a City; and for
provisions the two hundred Wagons, and the twelve Commissaries of Victuals
above spoken of will furnish the same plentifully, so the horsemen be
appointed to cause the adjacent Towns to bring in Hay, Straw, Oats, and Pease
to the Camp.

3. In our scaling.
The design of the scaling of a hold, or Garrison Town is to be kept very
private, and then it may be done as well by the Garrison of a contrary party
ten or twelve miles distant as by a siege; so they march all night and keep all
goers and comers in their Garrison the day before. The fittest time to scale a
Town is one or two hours before day, for then the soldiers of a Garrison are
most of all overcome with sleep, and the Ladders are to be set up all at an
Instant; the number are to be two hundred at least, placed some six yards
asunder, that if one Ladder should be cast down, it may not cause seven or
eight to fall after it, and also for the greater diversion of the enemies, that
shall not be able to oppose in so many places, the soldiers are to be very
active and speedy, and the foremost are to have Rondaches in the one hand, and
swords in the other, and the next Musketeers, and the last Pikemen, as soon as
an hundred are upon the Rampire they are to fall upon the Court of guard that
is near to the next gate, that they may break it open; some do also carry
with them a couple of Petars that are to be made fast to the gates to blow them
open, while the other scale the Town. This way of taking a Castle or Garrison
Town should be used in these days for expedition more then it is, because of
the small charge, and the little danger there is in it; for all our Garrison
Towns, Houses, or Castles have no Casamates that flank the Courtines even with
the foot of the Rampires or walls; the which Casamates were the preservation of
Geneva when it was scaled; for the Ordnance in them broke and cast down all
the Ladders, and therefore the scalers here are out of danger of the Ordnance.

4. In our Mines.
We keep as little order in our Mines as in all other attempts; Mines are the
cheapest way after the scaling, to take a hold or a Garrison Town, only they
cannot be done safely before the hold or the Garrison Town be begirt with
trenches, for the Mines are to have their beginning in them; and although four
Mines are sufficient to take a great garrison Town; yet I conceive it to be a
safe Policy to begin eight Mines against a reasonable garrison Town, and
twelve against a greater. To delude the enemies, that if some of them be found
out and countermined, some may be left to serve to perform the design; the
mouth of every one of them is to begin in the trench that begirts the hold or
Town, at equal distances, that they may go round about the Town, and they
are to be made upon a strait line, until the Mine be brought under the midst
of the wall or Rampire, and when it is so, then every Mine is to be made as it
was begun, ten yards on the right and ten yards on the left hand, like a
perfect T. The Mine is not to be in no place above two yards broad and six foot
high, and at every yard it is to be propt with two rows of the deal poles
spoken of, that are to be sawed in two, and the deal boards are to serve for
bases below and above, for without boards under and above the props, they will
sink into the ground, and it will cause the earth of the Mine to cave and
overthrow the work; the Mines or four of them being ready, the very morning
that the Commanders intend to storm, there are four, six, or eight barrels of
Powder to be carried into each Mine, (for if they were carried the day before,
they might be taken away before the next morning by the enemies,) according as
they are fitted with powder; or in case of necessity four will serve, but the
more there is, the greater and the more level will the breach be when the
Mines are sprung; when these barrels of Powder are set in the Mines at an
equal distance one from another, if there be four barrels, at four foot
distance, if there be six, at three foot distance; then are the Cannoneers to
set a train of Powder between every barrel, and a train to come from the
cross of the T. down to the foot of the trench; but the Mines are to be
stopped at the cross of the. T. with rammed clay, only a hole of four Inches
square is to be left being supported with stones or brickes for the train of
Powder to pass clear from the very trench to all the parts of the Mines, and
when the Commanders have set their reserves in order; as it is described in the
next Chapter but one; then is the fire to be set to the Train; that as soon
as the powder of the Mines has done her operation, the reserves may suddenly
enter the breaches.

5. In our storming.
All sorts of Drakes, Sacres, demi Colverins or Colverins are of no use for
batteries, they serve but to spinne out the war, and to make Cony-holes in
stead of breaches; they are to be Canons, or at the very worst demy-Canons, and
they are not to be less then six in number, and all planted of a row, upon a
sufficient Platform that is well plankt under foot, and so raised with earth,
that the six Canons being pointed may batter within a foot of the foundation of
the wall or rampire; for high batteries serve only to spend powder and shot in
vain. And these six Canons being charged and pointed they are to be fired all
at one Instance, for such a thundering clap will molter more earth or shake a
stone wall more then forty Canon shot will do, if they be shot by intermission
of time; besides, the defendants cannot repair a breach that is made after so
violent a blow, as they may when it is made by intermission of time. Now before
the platformes for the battery be erected, the most experienced Commanders,
Officers and Engineers are to view the Rampires or walls of the Town, for to
take notice of the weakest places of it, and of the most convenient places
about the town to raise the platform, for if there be near the town any
rising ground, it will save a great deal of labor and charges if they erect
their battery there, howsoever the platform is not to be erected at the most
above a musket shot from the rampire or wall; for if it be but half a musket
shot it is the more powerful, and these platformes are to be defended with
strong gabions of earth, to prevent that the enemies Canon do not dismount
some of the six Canons upon it, and also to preserve the Canoneers lives that
would otherwise be exposed to the Canon shot of the enemies. If it be a City or
a great garrison Town, then it requires two platformes and two batteries with
six Canons apiece, the one on the one side of the town, and the other on the
other side; and both these platformes and batteries are to be made, and to
begin to play at the break of the day that shall be appointed for the storm;
and so they are to continue without intermission until they have made two
breaches of twenty yards broad apiece; and the dikes to be levelled with the
rubbish even with the firm ground; Now if these breaches cannot be done in one
day, then are the Commanders to give order that some Companies of Musquetteers
be appointed to stand on the two flanks of the breaches all night, one company
after another, to fire their Muskets at random into the breaches, to hinder
the defendants to repair the breaches, or from retrenching of themselves
within it; And then the next morning to storm again without intermission
until the breach be sufficient and the dike levelled as aforesaid. And in the
mean time the Commanders may set in order their reserves to come to a general
Assault after this manner following.

6. In our manner of Assaults.
There is an erroneous opinion crept in the mind of some men that say we are
not to take Towns or Castles by storming and assaults, to avoid the shedding
of Christian blood, but we ought rather to take them by famine. But these men
are either ignorant of the events of war; or desire this unnatural war
should be spinned out, until the Kingdom were utterly consumed. For it is
certain that long sieges consume more men by diseases ten for one, then are
slain by storming or assaults, as it shall be proved by Instances. 1. Titus
Livius, Decad. 1. lib. 5.
Vigentia a great City in Italy was besieged ten years by the Romans, (and at
that siege was the use of Tents first of all invented, because of the number of
Soldiers that perished by diseases, that did proceed from the wet and cold
they endured in Winter time) and Furius Camilius took the same in a month by a
Mine and a general assault. 2. The siege of See the History of France
Marseilles under Francis the first, and the siege of Mests under Henry the
second Kings of France, consumed above threescore thousand men by diseases;
because the Emperor Charles the fifth strove to take them by famine. 3. The
Protestants in the second Civil war of France besieged the City of See the
Civil Wars of France.
Poitiers with an Army of thirty thousand men, and because they did not storm
it at their first coming, they lost above six thousand men by diseases, and
were enforced to raise the siege. 4. The Sea Des Serres in his Inventory.
Earl of Foix General for the French in the Kingdom of Naples, having
besieged the City of Naples, lost his own life and the greater part of his
Army before it by the Pestilence, because he fell not a storming of it at his
first coming. In a word, long sieges consume more men, treasure and time then
towns that are taken by assault; There are so many accidents that happen by
the long time that a Town requires for to be taken by famine, that the events
of it are very seldom successful or happy, and there is no town or Castle
but may be taken by storming, as it may be proved by instances. 1. Henry the
fourth took See Pierre Matthew in Henry the fourths life.
Moutmeillan Castle in eight days that had required two years siege; for it
stood upon a steep Rock, judged of the greater part of his Commanders
impregnable, and well provided of Ammunition and provisions; But he having
viewed these at of it himself, saw there was another steep rock, within Canon
shot of it; whereupon he gave a Regiment of Switzers a Largess, to draw up
upon that rock six Canons with the strength of their arms; and these being
pointed and storming the same furiously, the defendants yielded upon
composition; If the like was done to Scarborow Castle, it would be taken in
three days; for it is nothing to the forenamed in seat and fortifications,
and it has also a hill that commands the same; and likewise Beaver Castle,
that is also commanded by a hill. 2. The Town of Gravilling, one of the
strongest Garrisons in Flanders that had required two years siege to take it
by famine, because it had three double dikes of forty foot broad and twenty
foot deep, and all flanked with bastions made with Casamates, and no
probability to come to an assault without Galleries; yet the French did so
terrify the defendants by their furious batteries and assaults, that they were
constrained to deliver the same upon composition, before it had been fully
besieged three months. 3. Our brethren the Scots might have endured many a wet
and cold night before New Castle, and have spinned out that siege until the
next Spring, if they had not nobly and valiantly stormed the same. If Basing
house and Banbury Castle had been stormed with six Canons that might have made
such breaches as are spoken of before, and had the besiegers given such an
assault, so ordered and the men so armed as followed, they had not lost their
reputation as they have; nor left that work undone, to spinne out this war to
the next year.

When a breach of twenty yards broad is made, and the dike filled up, as
aforesaid, even with the firm ground; then are three reserves to march after
one another in this manner, but if there be two breaches then six reserves are
to be in a readiness, and every reserve is to consist of fifty nine men, that
is for every breach one hundred threescore and seventeen men, and for the two
breaches it is three hundred fifty four men. These men are to be chosen men of
the most valiant and experienced soldiers of the Army; for raw soldiers are
not to have that honor, neither would they stand to so furious a storm; but
would turn back and run away, and overthrow the design; (for among the
French the Marshals of France, Earls, and Barons do not disdain to be of the
first rank that go up to the breach;) and those of the first rank are to be
of the most See Montlus Commentaries.
eminent in birth and degree; this first rank are to be all Rondachiers, armed
from the head to the knees with armor of proof, with broad swords in their
right hands to cut the enemies pikes, their Rondachiers in the left, and a
Pistol ready charged at their girdle, and are to be placed a foot asunder,
that the next rank of nineteen Musquetteers may fire their Muskets between
that foot light, and these Musquetteers are to be armed with good swords on
their side, a buffe coat on their back, and a Pistol ready charged at their
girdle, and a head piece on their head, they are to march two yards distant
from the Rondachiers, and next to them are to be a rank of twenty Pike-men
armed with Corselets and Cuisiers of proof; and are to march within two yards
of the Musquetteers, as it is here pricked down:

Now these three reserves are to march within three Rondachiers. Musquetteers.
Pikemen.
yards one of another, that if the first give ground the second may succeed,
and so the third; but if it get ground, they are to press on; Now the
nineteen Musquetteers of every reserve having fired their Muskets are to
wheel about to shelter themselves behind the Pikemen, for to charge their
Muskets again; And the Pike-men are to advance in their place to second the Sea Bayard Commentaries
Rondachiers, and to make good the breach until the other reserve comes up to
the breach, if in case the Rondachiers were tired, or some of them wounded. Now
on both sides of the breach there are fresh Regiments or Companies of
Musquetteers to be placed for to second these reserves in case they loose
ground, or to enter furiously the breach if the enemies loose it; for it is
continuance and constancy that carries it away in assaults; for the besiegers
being four to one will by continuance tire the defendants, as it came to pass
at the siege of Malte. In a word, if our breaches were made so broad, and our
men so well armed, and this order observed, I make no question but our men
would go on like Lions; but when they are to enter into Coney-holes in stead of
breaches, and have no armor of proof to withstand the Musket shot and the
Pikes of the Defendants, it is no marvel if they turn their backs and come
off with dishonor; now if there be two breaches or more made by Mines or by
the storming of the Canon, they are all to be entered at one instant, for the
greater diversion of the enemies forces; and besides these breaches it is
wisdom to have two hundred Ladders ready and commandment to be made, they
should be placed as far distant from the breaches as they can, that fresh
soldiers may get up upon the rampire, and so wheel about to fall upon the
backs of the enemies, while they defend the breaches: for by this stratageme
Scipio took the strong City of new See Titus Livius in his 3. decade lib.
Carthage in one day, notwithstanding it had a garrison of eight thousand men
within it. Now I return to the seventh difference of our Method of war.

7. In our stratagemes of war.
The stratagemes of war increase according to the acute ingenuity of
Commanders, and are very useful to reduce strong holds; or to preserve an Army
if it be overpowred, or brought in narrow ways, or in necessity of Provisions.
Now of all the ancient Commanders, Caesar and Hannibal have exceeded all others
in stratagemes of war; 1. Caesar being constrained by a storm at Sea, to land
near to a garrison Town of the enemies called See Caesar's Commentaries of the
War of Africa.
Adrumet, seated upon the coast of Africa, with only three hundred horse, and
three thousand foot, used such admirable stratagemes of war, that he defended
himself so valiantly against the potent Army of Juba, of Scipio, and of
Labiennus, that they could not force him in his Camp, nor streighten him from
provisions, but he continued there three months, until new supplies came to
him from Sicilia; and then he took the field, and by stratagemes, more then by
valor, defeated them, although their Armies exceeded his, four for one. 2.
Hannibal being in Italy, was led by the ignorance or the infidelity of his
guides, into a valley encompassed with high mountains, where he was presently
environed by Fabius See Plutarch in Fabius life.
Maximus Army; And there he had perished with his Army; if he had not found out
this stratageme of war to free himself: He caused some dry Bavins of shreds of
Vines to be fastened between the horns of two thousand oxen, that he led along
with him for the provision of his Army; and at the beginning of the night
commanded his soldiers to set them all at an instant on fire, and to drive the
said oxen with violence up the narrow passages of the mountains, at which
strange sight the Romans that guarded them were so amazed, that they all run
away for fear; and so opened a passage for him and his Army to pass without
impediment. 3. See Serres in the Inventory of Du Hailian in his History of
France.
Henry the fifth King of England, being encompassed by an Army of the French
near to Agincourt, exceeding his Army four for one, commanded his soldiers to
dig in the night great and deep trenches round about his Camp; and to stick in
them long pointed stakes, and then to fill them again up as lightly as they
could with the loose earth; by which stratageme the French Army was utterly
defeated; for the French horse coming in the morning furiously to fall upon the
English Camp, they fell upon one another backs in these hallow grounded
trenches, where the English Archers slew them at their pleasure. 4. Charles the
eighth King of France, at his return from the Conquest of the Kingdom of
Naples, was encompassed by an Army of all the confederated Princes of Italy,
(exceeding in number his Army three for one) as he came down the Mountains of
the Alpelins, near to See Des Serres in the Inventory of France.
Farnone, where he had perished and all his Army for want of provisions, if he
had not by a stratageme freed himself from the strait he was in, by commanding
over night that all his Ordnance, carriages, and baggage should be placed at
the break of day in the midst of his foot, and that his horse should equally
be divided into two Brigades, the one for the Van, and the other for the rear,
and himself riding in the front of his Van, charged the enemies so furiously,
that he broke through their Army, slew diverse thousands of them, and opened a
passage for himself and all his Army to return into France without
impediment. Now had we not been so barren in stratagemes of war as we are, our
Army in Cornwall had, as well as these, come out of their straits with honor
and reputation, for it was inferior to all these: But as I have said
heretofore, It was Gods pleasure it should be so, to humble us by that blow. 2.
Strong holds that would require long sieges may be reduced by a stratageme of
war in an hours time. See the Marshall of Montluc his Commentaries.
Montluc having intelligence by his Scouts that the Governor of a strong
Castle seated upon the lake of Canstance, did usually go to recreate himself
at a farm house of his within two miles of his Castle, placed an ambush to
entrap him, that took him and brought him before his Castle gate, and by
threatening to strike off his head from his shoulders, the Castle was yielded
and surrendered up. A good memorandum for some of our Governors, that go a
hunting with five or six horse, and endanger themselves and their garrison to
be surprised by the enemies. 2. The Governor of Dorlance took the strong City
of Amiens with this stratageme, he laid an Ambush in the night time within
half a mile of the City of two thousand foot, and of a thousand horse, and
sent six Wagons laden with Hay, under which Hay were six armed soldiers in
every one of the Wagons, and upon the last Wagons two soldiers disguised
like contrymen, having some baskets full of Wall-Nuts, and commanded them
they should not come to the City before the opening of the gates; where being
come, the Soldiers of the Court of Guard knowing some of the Carters by sight,
suffered the Wagons to enter, without driving a Pike (as the rules of War
require) through the midst of their Loads of Hay, and the last Wagon staid
still in the midst of the gate, to hinder that the Percullis might not be let
down, faining something was amiss at his See the French History
Wagon, and then the disguised soldiers let willingly one of their baskets of
Wal-Nuts fall down, whereupon all the soldiers of the Court of Guard forsook
their Arms, and ran to the gate to scramble for these Nuts. But in the mean
time, the armed soldiers of the enemies leapt out of the Wagons, and slew
them all, secured the gate, and did let in their Ambush, and so possessed
themselves of the City, before the Governor could gather Forces to oppose
them. 3. The strong garrison Town of Breda was taken also by the stratageme of
a small Ship laden with Turffes, under which were hidden a Commander and twenty
armed Soldiers, and this See Demetres History.
Ship being suffered to enter the Town, after it had been carelessly searched;
The Commander and his soldiers took their opportunity in the dead time of the
night to fall upon a Court of Guard next to the gate where their land Ambush
was laid, and slew all the soldiers of it, secured the gate, and let in their
Ambush, that possessed themselves of the Town. 4. For to prove the antiquity
of the Stratagemes of War; it is recorded that Josh. 8. 12.
Ai and Judge. 20. 36.
Gibeah two strong Cities of the Amorites were surprised by ambushes that were
laid in a hallow, attending when the enemies should come forth, for to enter
and set them on fire, and to fall upon the backs of the Inhabitants of them,
whereby they were utterly destroyed. And hereupon I conclude, that our
barrenness in stratagemes of war is one of the causes of the spinning out of
this Unnatural War. For many of the enemies garrisons might be taken with
small charges, if the Governors of ours, were as active and as much
experienced in stratagemes of war, as other nations are.

8. In the true Maxims of war.
As it is impossible for a Christian that is not instructed in the true
Principles of Religion to receive any consolation at all of his Progress in
Christianity, because the further he goes on upon erroneous Principles, the
less are his comforts. Even so, according to humane Reason, there is small
hope for us to see a speedy and a blessed issue of this war, since we observe
not the true Maxims of war, and specially these two following. 1. It is
dangerous for Generals of Armies to divide their forces in small parties; as it
shall appear by instances. 1. Tacitus in the war of Armenia.
Petus General of the Emperor Nero was defeated in Armenia because he had
dispersed his Army in several parties. 2. Tacitus, lib. 2. cap. 5.
Cicinna General of the Emperor Vitelius was routed by the Othonnians,
because he had divided his Army into small parties, and did not march all in
one body. 3. Tacitus, lib 3. cap. 12.
Valans another General of the Emperor Vitellius was routed and his Army
defeated by Antonius Primus General of the Emperor Vespasianus, because he
had divided his Army into small Brigades. 4. Tacitus, lib. 4. cap. 10.
Lucius Apronius was defeated, and his Army utterly routed by the Frizelanders,
because he did not set upon them with his whole Army, but by intermission with
small parties. 5. The French Army that was sent in the year 1497. to recover x
See Guichardin, li. 3. cap. 17.
Genua, was defeated, (says Guichardin;) because the French General had
divided his Army, and marched in three bodies. 6. Monsieur de la Noue in his
Annotations upon the same passage of Guichardin says, that an Army divided
into small Brigades, except they be in sight one of another, is like to a river
that is divided into diverse channels, that is fordable any where: Even so an
Army that marches not in a full body is easily routed and defeated; for as it
was impossible for See Herodotus in the life of Cyrus.
Cyrus to take the City of Babylon before he had divided the great river of
Euphrates into diverse small channels; so is it almost impossible for to defeat
a potent army if it march close in one body: because it is like a roaring flood
that drives all before it. But small forces cannot perform any considerable
service, because of their imbecility; and do rather consume the Counties where
they are, then free them from the oppression of their enemies. For Instance, if
we consider what the weak, the divided, and the independent Forces of the
Counties of North-hampton, Warwick, Darby, Nottingham, Rutland, and Leicester
have done since the beginning of this war, we shall find they have only
wasted themselves upon a defensive posture, and have not hitherto freed their
Counties of any of the enemies garrisons, that like so many leeches suck their
blood, and will consume them by degrees, like a lingering fire that consumes a
block of Timber. Except it pleases God to infuse into the hearts of the
Honorable Houses, to reduce all their forces into two potent Armies; the one
for to endeavor to drive the flames of the fire of this unnatural war in as
small a circumference of ground as may be; for the smaller it shall be, the
easier it will be quenched, and the sooner shall a blessed peace be obtained:
And the other to endeavor to clear all the Counties one after another of the
enemies garrisons; for they are the fomenters of this war, and the virulent
humor of our Hectic fever, because they revive the fire of discord every
where; and recruite suddenly the dispersed Armies of the enemy. Now the
blessed fruits that the conjunction of three Armies into one has produced this
Summer should in my opinion induce the Honorable Houses to change this
destructive Method of war, to embrace this I speak of: for according to
huumane reason, the rules of war, and our late experience, it is like to prove
more successful, because we see that the dividing of our Army this year into
two bodies has annihilated this Summers work; whereas if it had kept it self
in one body, it had in all probability freed the City from the fear of the
Southwest garrisons of the enemies, and driven the flames of the fire of this
unnatural war into the Western parts; And so by the omission of this Maxim
of war, the Jer. 8. 10.
harvest is past, and the Summer is ended, and yet we are not saved, etc. Now I
come to the second, that is of greater concernment then the first; viz. That
peace is the end of war, and that no war can have a blessed end, except the
principal end of it tend to peace: And that the fittest season for a state to
tender propositions of peace, is when it is in a prosperous condition in Arms:
And notwithstanding this prosperity, their propositions are to be equal and
just, that the peace grounded upon them may be of continuance. For the first,
if the Carthaginians had required a peace of the Romans after their victory at
Cannes, they had undoubtedly obtained a peace upon honorable conditions; but
because they delaid to require a peace till See Tit. Live. dec. 3. lib. 12.
Hannibal and Syphax with their Armies were utterly defeated, and Scipio his
Army advanced to the walls of Carthage; they were enforced to embrace any
conditions of peace. If See Plutarch in the life of Lucullus.
Antiochus the great had required a peace of the Romans, when they had war
with Phillip King of Macedonia, he had obtained honorable conditions of Peace,
but because he delaid to require a peace, till he and all his Forces were
driven out of Greece, and himself with a potent Army defeated in Asia, he was
enforced to accept very hard conditions of peace, which was, to forsake all the
dominions he had on this side the Mount Taurus, and to leave the^ to the will
and pleasure of his victorious enemies. For the second, a peace concluded upon
unequal conditions is never of any long continuance. The first See Titus
Livius, decade.
Punick war was ended by a rigorous peace for the Carthaginians; And
therefore as soon as they had an opportunity, they brake that Peace, and began
a more cruel war; And the first Peace made between the Romans and Philip the
second King of See Titus Livius, decad. 3. and 4.
Macedonia was of no continuance, because the conditions were too rigorous for
the Macedonians. The peaces that were concluded between Charles the ninth and
Henry the third See the History of France.
Kings of France, and their Protestant Subjects, were of no continuance,
because they were not sincere, but only varnisht over with dissimulation, and
proved rather snares to the poor Protestants then profitable Accommodations;
but on the other side the Peaces that See Pierre Matthew in Henry the fourths
life.
Henry the fourth concluded with his rebellious Subjects, and with the House of
Austria, were of long continuance, because it was the Maxim of that generous
King, to be rather too remiss then rigorous in his conditions of peace: for
when he had brought the Catholic See Pierre Matthew in Henry the fourths life.
League upon their knees, that had rebelliously proclaimed him incapable of the
Crown, injured his sacred person, and desolated his Kingdom by the foreign
Forces they brought in to dis-throne their natural King; yet did he grant unto
them honorable conditions of peace; and spilt not a drop of their blood in
vindication of their abhorred carriage toward him. And for the House of
Austria, although it had hatched that Cockatrice of the Catholic League, and
fomented the Civil war in France for three and thirty years together; yet
after he had recovered the City of Amiens out of their hands, and driven back
the potent Army of the Archduke Matthias into Flanders with great loss and
dishonor, and was advancing into Artois with his victorious Army; he embraced
the Propositions of peace that were offered him by Philip the second King of
Spain, and was so just and equal in his demands; (notwithstanding he had the
advantage in Arms) that the Peace that was then concluded was of long
continuance. But the Emperor Charles the fifth by the rigorous conditions of
Peace he imposed upon Francis the first King of France (that was his prisoner)
against the wise counsel of that famous Politician See the Spanish History.
Cardinal Ximenez, (that counseled him to set freely the said King at
liberty, and to take no advantage at all of his imprisonment, nor to require
but equal and just conditions of Peace from him;) filled all Christen dome
with war, and brought upon himself such incredible charges, that caused his
hoary head to descend to the grave with sorrow and vexation of mind. And the
greatest Politician of our days, the Sea this Cardinals life.
Cardinal de Richlieu did counsel Lewis the thirteenth King of France, to be
in all the conditions of peace that he tendered to the Dukes of Savoy and
Lorraine, and to his own Protestant subjects, rather remiss the^ too
rigorous; as being the safer way for to attain to a sure and a constant peace.
Now since it has pleased God to infuse into the hearts of all the Members of
the honorable Houses such an earnest desire to Peace, as they are now ready to
tender, and to send Propositions of Peace to his sacred Majesty, I conceive we
are all obliged in general and in particular to address our fervent Prayers
to the throne of Grace, that God would be pleased to infuse into his Majesty's
heart a true desire to conclude such a peace, as may tend to the advancement of
Gods glory, the good of his Church, and to the reunion of his Majesty's love
with his most loyal Parliament, as the only means to make his sacred Person,
and all his dominions, blessed and happy; And that he may for ever hereafter
have in his mind his Royal Fathers Motto, Beati pacisici.

The sixth Secondary Cause, is, The want of Perseverance.
THe Perseverance in the ways of righteousness is a supernatural Grace, and
a free gift of God, but in Civil, Politic and Military actions, it is a gift
of nature, or a property acquired by education or practice, that does
oftentimes overcome the natural instinct in men, and in unreasonable
creatures, as it shall appear by these instances: 1. See Plutarch in his
Morals.
Socrates that was reputed by the Oracle of Apollo the wisest, the most
temperate, and the meekest man of all the Greeks, was naturally inclined to
inconstancy, licentiousness, and wrath, as he did aver before his Disciples,
when they derided in their schools one that affirmed by the Phisiognomy of
Socrates, that he was naturally addicted to these infirmities; but he overcame
them by a constant observation of the rules and of the Principles of
Philosophy. 2. See Plutarch in Lycurgus his life.
Lycurgus to induce the Lacedaemonians to a constant Perseverance in the austere
diet and Military Discipline he had established in their Laws, caused a Masty,
a Greyhound, a Hare, and a Porrige Pot, to be brought before them, and having
loosed the Dogs, set down the Pot, and let go the Hare; the Masty ran after
the Hare, the Greyhound to the Porrige Pot; whereupon he spoke thus to them,
this Greyhound was reared in a kitchen, and this Masty among a kenell of
hounds, and custom has over-mastered their natural instinct; even so, this
austere diet, and military Discipline, that seems irksome to you, will be
easy and pleasant in continuance of time. Whereupon I observe, that our want
of Perseverance in Arms does rather proceed from the long neglect of our
breeding and practice in war, then from our natural inclination that was
formerly addicted to See the English Chron. in the lives of Edward the 3. and
Henry the 5.
Martial exploits. But before I come to the particulars of this want of a
constant perseverance in Military actions, and to prove the necessity of the
redress of it by instances, I desire to answer an objection that will be
objected by such as are not acquainted with the degrees of this perseverance.
You acknowledge (will they say) in your last Chapter, that our Civil war is
the greatest evil and the most dreadful judgment of God that could fall upon
this nation; And notwithstanding you persuade us to persevere in it, and
complain that the want of our perseverance in it, is the cause of the spinning
out of this war; which seems a paradox to us, because we conceive the less we
persevere in it the sooner we shall have an end of it? I answer that I do not
persuade any to persevere in this war, to the end to prolong the same, but to
endeavor by a constant Perseverance in Arms, to obtain by Gods favor a
blessed peace, from which we are deprived year after year, by our want of
perseverance in Military actions, as it shall be proved in this Chapter:
Neither do I complain only that it is the cause of the spinning out of our
miseries; But do also wish that my head were full of Jer. 9. 1.
water and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for
the desolations that this unnatural war and this want has brought already
upon this Nation. The which to redress, if it be possible, I will endeavor to
prove that a constant perseverance in all professions, is the way to attain to
honor in this life, to peace in this world, and to eternal bliss in the life
to come. If a tradesman be endued with this gift of a constant perseverance in
his trade, he will excel all others in excellency of work; If a merchant be
endued with this gift, he will excel all other merchants in wealth and
commerce; if a student be endued with this gift, he will excel his fellows,
and will attain to great promotion before them; If a Statesman be endued with
this gift, he will excel in Policy, and reasons of State, all his fellow
Councillors; If a simple Christian be endued with this gift of a constant
perseverance in the ways of Righteousness, he will excel the learned Doctors
in the power of Godliness, and dive deeper in the Mystery of our Salvation,
and in the Resolutions of difficult cases of Conscience then they shall: If a
Commander in Chief be endued with this gift above others, he will excel all
other Commanders of that age in Martial exploits; As it shall appear by these
great Commanders hereafter expressed, because they persevered in Arms from
their youth, to the end of their lives. Publius Titus Livius, dec. 3. lib. b.
Scipio rescued his father in a battle out of the enemies hand at fifteen
years of age, and at five and twenty he was General in Chief for the Romans
in Spain and in Africa. Titus Livius, dec. 3. lib 2.
Hannibal was sent from Carthage into Spain to be trained up in Arms under
Asdrubal General of the Carthaginians, at nine years of age. Plut. in
Pompeyes life.
Pompeius the great appeased a mutiny in his fathers Camp at fifteen years of
age; and triumphed at Europe, Asia, and Africa before he was thirty years of
age. Alexander the Marcus Curtius.
great conquered the greater part of the world before he was three and thirty
years of age. Plutarch in Caesar's life.
Caesar was a Commander in Chief at two and twenty years of age, and for his
active and constant Perseverance in Arms he excelled all the Commanders that
ever were to this day. La Noue in his Military Discourses.
Henry the fourth King of France was sent to the Protestant Army at eighteen
years of age, and was their Commander in Chief at two and twenty. Gustavus the
last King of Sweden was trained up I See the Sweden soldier.
in Arms very young under his father, and persevered constantly in Military
exploits in Polonia, Lituania, Prussia, and in Germany, till he was slain in
the second battle of Lipsick. And so all these admirable Commanders crowned
their heads with Military Trophies by a constant perseverance in Arms. But
these following perished or blemished their reputation by their discontinuance
in Military exploits; See Plut in Mar. Antonius his life.
Marcus Antonius the competitor of Augustus Caesar in the Empire, for want of
this constant perseverance in Arms, was surprised by the activitie of
Augustus, his Army defeated, and he himself enforced to fly to Alexandria,
where he slew himself. The Noble Prince of Transylvania See the Turkish
History.
Sigismundus Battor, that was in his youth the Bulwark of Christendom against
the Turkish Invasions, and had defeated in open field Sinan Bassa the Grand
Vizier of the Ottoman Emperor, for want of this constant Perseverance in
Arms, made over his Principality of Transylvania for a petty County in
Slesia, and a yearly revenew to the Emperor Rodolphus, to the great blemish of
his former reputation, and to the incredible loss of Christendom. See the
French History
Henry the third King of France by his discontinuance in Arms, lost the honor
he had obtained in his youth in Military exploits; and was enforced to give
over the managing of his Army to the Duke of Guise, and to some others of his
Abbettors of the House of Lorraine; whereby he came to be so despised of his
Nobility, and of his meanest Subjects, that they grew so impious, as to plot
and combine in his own court the Catholic League, that endeavored to
dis-throne this indulgent King; but their plot being prevented by the death of
the Duke of Guise, they caused him to be perfidiously murdered by a Jacobin
Friar. The victorious Army of See Hannibal his life.
Hannibal was utterly overthrown for want of Perseverance in Arms, for in
stead to keep the same in their Winter Camp, as his use was, he lodged them in
the lascivious City of Capua, whereby they became so effeminate, that they lost
by it their former valor, and could never be reduced again to their austere
Military Discipline; And for this reason did See Plut. in Marius his life.
Marius, and diverse other wise Commanders of the Romans, keep their Armies in
their Winter Camps, far from any City, or Market Towns, that they might
exercise their soldiers in the austere labors of war, and rather then they
should be idle, (for idleness breeds licentiousness) they kept them at work
in digging deep channels, to come out of one River into another, to enrich the
Country by Navigation. This point deserves to be taken into consideration by
them in Authority, that the Winter quarter of our Army may be placed upon the
enemies Counties, and as far distant from the City of London as may be, for it
is the bane of our Officers and soldiers, because they grow licentious and
effeminate, by their swilling and drinking in the City all the Winter time,
whereas if they lay constantly in their Winter quarter far from the City, and
in the enemies Counties; they would be constrained to be in action, and this
would enable them in the perseverance of the austere labors of war, and
greatly preserve our Counties that are now wasted by our own Armies; and by
degrees would reduce the enemies to that smallor circumference of ground, of
which I have spoken of before. Now we may conceive by all these Instances, how
necessary it is for us to obtain this constant perseverance in Arms, that
has three degrees. 1. The slow. 2. The swift. 3. The moderate and constant:
The slow is irksome and of no performance: the swift is fiery, dangerous, and
of no continuance; but the moderate and constant carries the Bell away; and
this is the degree of Perseverance that we should endeavor to attain, because
the want of it, is the cause of the spinning out of this unnatural war; but it
is altogether unknown to us: but the slow and the swift are too familiar with
us. The slow is seen in our tedious marches and preparations; and the swift
appears in our fights and skirmishes, that are fierce and fiery, but of no
greater continuance then the fire of thorns under a Pot. See Plut. in
Sertorius his life.
Sertorius a wise Commander of the Romans that was constrained to fly into
Spain, to avoid the tyrannical proceedings of Sylla; to induce his Army that
was composed of raw soldiers, to this constant and moderate perseverance in
war I speak of: caused a strong and a weak horse to be brought before them,
and commanded one of his strongest soldiers, to endeavor to pull off the
weakest horse tail at a pull, but being derided by the Army for his vain
attempt, Sertorius charged a young youth to pull hair by hair the tail off
the strong horse, and so by degrees pulled the same quite away in a short time;
whereupon Sertorius spoke thus to his Army: If you persevere constantly in your
Military attempts, it will be as impossible for the Romans to overcome you, as
it was for this strong soldier to pull off this weak horse tail at a Pull:
but if you fight by fits, and then lie still, as your Method is; It will be as
easy for the Romans by their constant perseverance in Arms, to reduce you
under their yoke, as it was for this youth, to pull away by degrees this strong
horses tail. This Metaphor cannot be applied in a more seasonable time then
this; for our war may properly be compared to barley-breake players, for
after they have by their swift running brought in some of their opposites, that
were issued out of their Centry, they breathe and rest themselves for half an
hour together, and so go to it again: Even so, if we have obtained by Gods
favor some victory, we breath and rest our selves so long, till our enemies
have recruited their routed Armies stronger then ever they were before. The
Lord was pleased to fight for us at Keinton, at Newbery, and near to
Winchester; but for want of this constant perseverance in war I speak of, we
made no use at all of these three victories; And yet such goodly Trees,
according to the rules of war, should not come without fruits. I mean without
the reducing of some Counties, or strong holds of the enemies; our Commanders
can by Gods favor overcome their enemies, as well as Hannibal, but we lack a
See Hannibals life.
Maharbell, a Master of their horse, to tell them they can make no use of their
victories; And as it is with our Armies, so is it with the forces of our
Garrison towns, in the greater parts of our Counties; for if they have by Gods
blessing defeated the Forces of one of the enemies garrisons, and greatly
weakened the same, in stead to make use of their victory, and suddenly
(according as the rules of war do require) to besiege and to begirt with
strong trenches that town, and to endeavor by storming and violent assaults
to carry it away, while the defendants are amazed and weakly manned, because of
their last blow: They retreat homeward, breathe and rest themselves for three
months together, and then they will endeavor to have another bout; Or will, it
may be, undertake to besiege that town, when there is no probability to take
the same; because it is better provided then ever it was; and so are enforced
to come off with the same reputation as the besiegers of Basing and Banbury
have done. Surely this is not the way to conduce this war to a speedy and a
blessed period; but rather to spinne out the same, until the Kingdom be
consumed. It must be upon a constant perseverance in Arms, that we must rely
upon, for to obtain a blessed peace; it is not thirty, threescore or an hundred
or two hundred horse taken in this or that skirmish, that will give an issue to
these wars, that is as a little oil cast into the fireto inslame it the
more; The Counties are to be freed of these garrisons, and all the fire of this
war is to be driven into a small circumference of ground by potent Armies, that
it may be the sooner quenched; and our advantages in war are to be followed
close at the heels; for it is more dangerous for soldiers to play with the
advantages of war, then it is for children to play with sharp edged tools.
See Hannibals life.
Hannibal lost himself and his Commonweal by this kind of play; and Monsteur
de See Des Serres in the reign of Francis the first.
Lautrec and a great part of the French Nobility came to a miserable end by it,
in the Kingdom of Naples, and many other more. And therefore the ancient
Romans held it for a special honor, if they were speedy in their expeditions
of war; and Titus See (...). Live. in his first (...).
Livius in his Decades does purposely record the names of diverse Dictators that
delivered their Country in sixteen, twenty, and thirty days of perilous war;
(that would require so many years in these spinning times of ours) for their
greater glory. And since it is the end of the work that crowns the head of the
workman; and that the triumph could not be obtained by the ancient Roman
Generals before the war they undertook was ended by arms, or by a firm peace;
I do therefore wonder that our Commanders in Chief do not endeavor to
attain to this honor, to be called after God, the deliverers of their
Country. And specially since they fight for the advancement of Gods glory, his
sacred Majesty's just prerogatives, the Privileges of Parliament, and their
own liberties. See Plutarch in Solons life.
Solon being demanded by Croesus King of Lydia, which of all the Citizens of
Athens had in his opinion lived and died most happily, he named a Citizen of
Athens that had lived virtuously and died valiantly fighting in a battle for
the defense of the liberty of his Country. Now if this heathen did repute him
happy, that lived and died thus; our Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers have
better grounds to be persuaded, that they shall be eternally blessed, if they
live religiously, and die valiantly in the defense of the cause they have in
hand. And this assurance should in my opinion be a great motive to induce them
to expedite this war; and to conjoyn with their constant perseverance in arms,
the spiritual perseverance that I now come to speak of (for the first will
not avail without the second) that is of a higher nature and of greater
concernment then the Civil, Politic and Military, as much as the Salvation
of men's souls is more precious and more excellent; and by consequent more to
be regarded, then the preservation of their bodies; because it is the most
necessary Grace for Christians, to attain to eternal blessedness; for upon
their perseverance in the ways of righteousness, or the neglect and
intermission of it, depends their eternal woe, or their eternal bliss. And
this supernatural grace is as free a gift of God, as faith and repentance is,
and not incident to natural, or unregenerate men, but only peculiar to the
true children of God; and is as it were the very seal of their Election,
Adoption, Calling, and Justification, and a true earnest of their future
Glorification. For except they persevere in the ways of Piety and
Righteousness, from their first Calling to their end, in mortifying their
corruptions, carnal desires, the lust of the flesh, and live religiously and
soberly in this present world; they will utterly fall away from the faith, as
did Tim. 2. 17.
Hymeneus and Philetus, and loose all that they have wrought. Now the greater
this gift of Perseverance is the more are they to be earnest and diligent by
fervent and continual prayers, and humble Supplications to God to obtain it;
and the greater is their obligation to him, when they have received the same.
This excellent Grace is compared to a Race, where all run, but none obtaines
the prize, but such as persevere to the end: for it is nothing for men to begin
well, and to be fervent and active in all the duties of Piety for a moment of
time, or to cast forth flashes of zeal, to seem to advance the Glory of God,
and their own private, or the general Reformation that is now in hand, except
they continue till the work be done, that they may so run, that they may 1
Cor. 9. 24.
obtain. The Architector that begins an excellent structure, and does not make
an end of it, nor finish it after that exquisite Symetry that it was begun, but
for want of patience or to save charges leaves it unperfected, or changes the
form or composition of the first erection, from a Corinthian form to the
Toscan, or Jonique, that are inferior to it in charges, beauty and excellency,
does diminish his reputation and not increase the same; for it is not the
beginning but the completing of a work in all perfection that honors and
recommends the workmen. Even so will it be with private men, that begin well
and walk fervently in the ways and duties of Piety, but do not continue to
the end. And also with our Worthies, if they should not porsevere to the end in
this blessed work of the true Reformation they have begun: For as the Apostle
says concerning our Christian Calling; That there are not many wise, nor many
mighty, nor many noble after the flesh called: Even so among so many millions
of men of all 2 Cor. 1. 26.
degrees, that inhabit these three Kingdoms, there are but some few hundreds,
that have been called to this blessed work of the Lord; And this extraordinary
grace and honor they have received of him, should, in my opinion, induce them
to persevere in this great work, till it be perfected; for the lesser the
number is, the greater will be their honor, because their unparalelled labors
will be the greater: And as for those that out of that small number have
deserted the work, preferring, like 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Demas and Alexander, the love of this world before the glory of God; let not
their Apostasy be a motive of discouragement to the faithful Ones, but rather
of a greater assurance of their perseverance in grace, from which the others
are fallen off, as I will endeavor to make it appear by instances. 1. They
began to run in the race, but they continued not; for as the Apostle says, If
they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but they went
out, that they might be made 1 John 2. 19.
manifest, that they were not of us, etc. 2. They had but a general and
superficial calling, and not the eternal, nor special, personal, and
peculiar calling. For the gifts of God, says the Apostle, are without Romans 11.
1. 29.
repentance, etc. 3. Nor the patience to run the race that was set Heb. 12. 1.
before them, etc. 4. Nor the grace to consider that the prize of this race was
not to be obtained by the swift, nor the victory of the Eccles. 9. 11.
battle by the strong, but by the grace of the Lord of Hosts, etc. 5. Neither
did they by prayers and supplications, nor by Ephesians. 6. 18.
watching and reiterated petitions require this grace of Perseverance of God,
etc. 6. Nor considered that the Laodiceans, and faint-hearted men cannot obtain
the Kingdom of God; but only the fervent and the Matthew. 21. 12.
violent carry it away, etc. 7. and such that press toward the Phil. 3. 14.
mark for the price of the high calling in Christ Jesus, etc. O what a measure
of supernatural Grace, has been then infused into those members of the
Honorable Houses that have remained constant until this day, and that shall
by the grace of God persevere unto the end; and finish and complete upon the
immovable Rock of the Word of God, this excellent Fabric of the true
Reformation already begun: The greatest work that ever was done in
Christendom, considering the potent and numerous opposers they are like to
have, that like so many Giants, will with all the malice and power of the
agents of the Prince of darkness, endeavor to traverse this spiritual
building. But let them not be discouraged, for since they have God on their
side, none shall be able to oppose, nor hinder the perfecting of it. If they
do but persevere as they have begun; and tread for the time to come under
their feet all carnal policies, although they seem according to humane
reason, necessary, and much conducing to that end, but truly and really most
destructive to it; as I have noted in my first Chapter; for the true Worship of
God is to have the precedencie in all Reformations, for the delays of it, that
are grounded upon Civil, Politic, or Military respects, do but spinne out
this war, and make all other endeavors fruitless; and the very work it
self more difficult; as we have had woeful experience of it since this war
begun. And will always be so, until it be prosecuted before all other
affairs, by an unanimous Perseverance and integrity of heart, by them in
Authority, that God out a special mercy to this Nation has elected, and
preordained by his eternal purpose, out of so many millions of men, to do
this work, before the beginning of the Creation, and to be the faithful
Reformers of the abuses and Innovations that were crept into the Church of
England; and the famous Restorers of the Purity of the true Worship of God, in
all the Dominions of his sacred Majesty, as it is now in Scotland, and in all
the best reformed Churches of Christendom. That the minds and affections of
the people of England, Scotland, and Ireland may be for the future united and
bound with the strongest links and bounds that be under the Sun, that is, by
a spiritual Conformity of Doctrine and Discipline; and that the Church of God,
and these three Kingdoms may flourish again under one King, one Law, and one
Religion. And that we may the sooner obtain from our gracious God, so great
and so wonderful and unexpected mercy; let all the Children of God address
their fervent Prayers to the Lord our God, that he will be pleased to return
the Person, the love, and the affections of his Majesty, to his most loyal
Parliament, and that he will indue him as the head, and them as the principal
members of the Politic Body of this Monarchy, with this spiritual Grace of
Perseverance, that he may be the Josiah, and they the Iehoiadaes to finish and
complete this great work of Reformation, to the increase of Gods glory, the
Consolation of his Church, and their immortal honor in this life, and their
eternal bliss in the life to come.

Amen.
FINIS.

