Imprimatur.

Guil. Pearson, Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Dno. Dno. Johanni Archiepisc. Ebor. a
Sacris. Dom.

Martij, 11mo. 166^.

A SERMON Preached upon the occasion OF THE Queen's Death, On the 4th. Sunday
in Lent; Being the 3d. of March, 1694/5.

By W. PERSE, M. A. Minister of Malton, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable
Lewis Earl of Feversham.

Dulce est Mori cum Plorant Sui. Sen: Trag: YORK, Printed by J. White, for
Robert Clarke, at the Sign of the Crown at the Minster-Gate, 1695.

To the Honorable the Lady Palms.
Madam,
WHEN I was once persuaded to make the ensuing Discourse Public; I did not in
the Least doubt with my Self to whom I ought to present it. The Place where it
was delivered, (as being part of your ancient Paternall Inheritance for which
you have done so much and for which you are still doing more good) the many
great Favors I have received from your Ladyship, Since my Lot fell in this
Soil; And the Subject matter of it, Seem naturally to direct me at what
Shrine to Offer it.

The great Esteem you ever had for that miracle of Virtue and Goodness, our
late most Gracious Princess Queen Mary, (now of happy, and glorious Memory,)
the tender concern you expresst for her, during her dangerous, and too fat all
Sickness, (according to the account you were pleased to give us here in the
Country) make me hope that the Offering tho but Small, yet as being well
intended, will in some measure atone for my Presumption in placeing your
Honors Name before it.

Besides: your great, and Singular Goodness, and Piety; Your extensive Charity,
eminently Shown, not only toward those of your own Town and Neighbor hood,
for whom you and your truly worthy Husband have set up a Linen Manufacture at
your great Charge to employ the many Poor among us, and to afford them a
Competent Subsistence; But also your Signal Bounty, and Liberality toward
those distressed Protestants who left their Country, Relations, and all that
they had for Christ's and his Gospells sake (in both which Remarkable
Instances, you did follow the noble, and truly Christian Example of our late
Gracious, and never Sufficiently to be Lamented Princess) Challenge this
Dedication as your sole Right from me who am so much indebted to your goodness,
and Kindness, ever Since I had the Honor to be known unto you; which I shall
ever gratefully acknowledge, and take this Opportunity, (as being the only
Public one I may ever have) to testify the same to the World, But shall ever
in Private Pray for the Happiness, Welfare, and Prosperity of your Ladyship,
and most worthy, and truly honorable Family both in this world, and that which
is to come; as is the Duty of.

Madam Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, William Perse.

A SERMON Preached on the 3d. of March, and the 4th. Sunday in Lent; With
Relation to the Queens Death.
St. Matthew 26th. C. 13, V. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this Gospel
shall be preached in the whole World, there shall also this, that this Woman
has done, be told for a Memorial of her.


I Have made choice of this remarkable passage of Scripture at this time, upon
a twofold Occasion, to both which it seems to be most fitly, and properly
suited: So that if the time be a circumstance, which like an Embroidred Border,
setts off the richness of a Garment; and if a Word spoken in season, and duly
applied, be as the Wiseman tells us it is, as comely and Ornamental as Apples
of Gold enclosed in Pictures of Silver, then these few words of our Blessed
Savior, who spoke as never Man spoke, will receive all the advantage that a
due timeing and a Seasonable opportunity can give them.

The happy action to which our Savior referrs; and of which he gives so large,
and so lasting a Commendation; had an immediate relation to his own Death and
Burial, which were shortly after to ensue: As he himself explaines it in the
Verse foregoing my Text; For in that she has poured this Ointement upon my
head, she did it for my Burial. We are now well entered into the days of
Mourning, and humiliation for our Sins, Our treacherous Sins, that occasioned
our Blessed Lords approaching Passion; which caused those Bitter pains, and
dreadful excruciations both of Body, and mind which he underwent for them: And
therefore ought at this time more then ordinarily to be lamented, and sorrowed
for by us; as being those Traitors which delivered him over to the merciless
Executioners; and which nay led him to the Cross: And which will without a true
Repentance and hearty sorrow for them, deprive us of all the benefits of those
exquisite, and all meritorious Sufferings that he underwent for us Men, and our
Salvation: And what can be more agreeable and seasonable to prepare our hearts
for the better, and more exact celebration of those devoute Exercises of
Religion, which the approaching Solemnity, of our great Passover requires of
us; then in the insisting on some of the particulars of Maryes most worthy and
significant Action which our Savior here so honorably commemorates, and which
he has applied to this very purpose; telling us withal that the sound of it
should go forth into all Lands where his Name should be known, and his Gospel
published through the whole World.

This is the First, and greatest Reason of my pitching on this Subject; but I
cannot say as our Savior does in answer to the Lawyers question; Which is the
great Commandment? That the Second is like unto it: Though there is great
reason for that also: For the wise man has told us that the Memory of the just
shall be blessed: And his Royal Father David has assured us, that the actions
of the Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance. Therefore when I
shall have shown you how proper a preparation that Action of Marys was for our
blessed Saviors Burial, and exhorted all those who design to solemnize his
Death and Passion in that holy Sacrament, which he Instituted as a perpetual
memorial of it, to imitate this blessed Saint and Convert in that signal Act
of Love, Charity, and Gratitude which she performed to her Savior in poureing
that precious Ointment upon his Head. I shall then crave your Patience, to
present a small free will Offering of the sweetest Oil I can pour out of my
shallow and narrow Cruse, mixed with a few grains of Frankincense for a
memorial of another Mary, our late most gracious Queen, now of Glorious, and
happy memory; whose Works shall ever praise her in the Gates, and whose
remembrance shall be like the Perfume made by the Art of the Apothecary; and as
sweet, and Fragrant to all that wish well to the Reformed Religion in general,
and to the Church of England, the most refined part of it, and to the
happiness, and Prosperity of these Kingdoms; as that precious Ointment, which
this Blessed Woman in my Text so liberally poured on our Savior, to anoint him
aforehand (as I do now his Glorious servant this day) to his Burial.

But First, I am to present you with this remarkable Action, of which our
Savior takes so much notice; which though full of Time, and which has seen
the end and Flight of many Ages, does it self never grow Old: This action so
long since performed, might with many others, which perhaps appeared more
glorious and conspicuous in the Eyes of Men have been by this time darkely
Buried in the Tomb of Oblivion; but that he in whose hand Time and Eternity is
grasp't, has promised that it shall ever Grow, and Flourish, -- Occulto velut
Arbor aevo, spreading it is branches far and wide over the Face of the whole
Earth; desying all the furious blasts and Tempests that the envy and malice of
the Prince of the Air can raise to overthrow it: For he in whose power, and at
whose command all Created Beings are, has Circumscribed the memorial of it,
with no other Limits then the Compass, and Duration of the whole World: Pliny
justy esteems them happy who writ things worthy to be read; but prefers them in
the degree of felicity who acted things worthy to Be written: In what blessed
Estate then must they be who have done such things which the holy Spirit has
thought fit to commend to Posterity, and to register in the never perishing
Volumes of Gods word, and which shall be read, preached, and published through
all the Nations, Quarters and Corners of the Earth: of which Sort our Savior
assures us this is one: Verily I say unto you Wheresoever this Gospel, shall
be preached, there shall also this that this Woman has done be told for a
Memorial of her.

Which words contain our Saviors defense, and commendation of an Action which
to some of the Disciples seemed worthy of a sharp and reproachful Censure.
Wherein we may observe these 3 parts.

1. The Glory and Excellency of the Action: It was thought so worthy, and
deserving by our Savior as not fit to be smothered and buried in Oblivion, but
to be told and spread abroad.

2. The end of the Publication; for a Memorial of her: to encourage others to
follow her good example, Praise: Credit, and Reputation are great incitements,
and Invitations to the promoteing of virtuous Actions in the World.

3. The Extent of this glorious Publication. Where ever the Gospel should be
Preached in the whole World. No good Action whatsoever, shall go unregarded or
unrewarded: But such Eminent acts of Piety, Love, and Gratitude, such as this
was, shall have an especial Mark, and Star of honor affixt to them: They are
Cedro linends; they are to be anointed with the Oil of Cedar, to preserve them
from corruption; Things worthy of Immortality; to be had in everlasting
Remembrance,

What this Excellent Action was of which our Savior gives this great Elogy, we
find Verse the 7th. of this Chapter. There came unto him a Woman having an
Alabaster Box of precious Ointment, and poured it upon his head as he sat at
meat

In which we are to consider,

1 The Quantity which this good woman presented, and bestowed upon Christ. It
was an Alabaster Box; which when filled with that Ingredent denoted a stated
Measure.

2 The Quality of the Ointment which she dedicated to Christ's Service, it was
precious Ointment; Ointment of Spikenard, pure, and unmixt, a confection of the
purest nard; and of the choicest part of it: the Spike, or Top of it: both for
the making true, and for the value costly: as we may gather from Herodotus,
who tells us that Cambyses King of Persia sent an Alabaster box of Ointment
(the very same quantity) as a present to the King of Ethiopia.

3. We are to consider the two Several ends at which this Action aimed

1. The end to which Mary designd it; which was to give a noble testimony of
her Love, and gratitude to her Lord, and Master, by that honor which she
Showed him in pouring that quantity of Precious Ointment upon him at that great
Feast.

2. The ultimate End to which the Divine Providence had orderd it: that is, to
be a preparative to our Saviors Death, and Burial.

1. For the Quantity: her Present was large, as we may gather from the vessel
wherein it was Contained; an Alabaster Box; which denotes a vessel of Such an
exact Size, and figure wherein those precious Ointments were preserved: and
relates not so much to the matter, as to the form, and, capacity of it: For
Theocritus makes Mention (...): And Epiphanius in his book of measures tells
us, that this Alabaster Box of Ointment was a pellucid Vessellof a glassy
Substance, (else it could not so easily break) containeing a pound: Which
exactly agrees with what St. John mentions, John: 12 c: 3d v. And Mary took a
pound of Ointment: A very larg proportion, considering the searceness, and the
richness of the persume. where the Heart is well affected, there the hand will
soon Sympathize: where the heart strings are dilated, the fibers of the hand
will not be contracted. Love sooner and more infallibly then Night shade,
makes all Locks and Bars fly open before it: when once that charming Power
has insinuated it self into the Breast; it dissolves the before stony and
unrelenting heart, and in larges the before narrow thoughts and dispositions of
the Soul; it thaws the joy, and cold Temper that was predominant; and makes
the waters which were sluggish, bound, and without motion to overflow those
shallow banks wherein they were formerly confined: If we love Christ as this
blessed Convert did, we shall be ready to imitate her generous Example; and be
liberal in the expressions of our kindness to him, and his poor Members: she
had received largely at the hand of God, and she returns according to her
ability, plentifully: as Christ had shown the greatness of his Love to her in
forgiving: so she endeavored to express the largeness of hers in giving: and
as she had much forgiven, so she showed by her Present, that she loved much:
She gave not by drops, but showered it down in streams: And as she had received
the unction of the holy one, mentioned in the 1. Epistle of John 2. c. 20. v.
in a plentiful Measure from him who had it without Measure, so she returned of
the Ointment which she had at her great cost procured, very liberally; and
having received freely of spirituals; she was no niggard of her temporals. It Is
to no purpose to give sparingly, when we may affor'd thorough Gods blessing to
scatter and pour forth largely: for the Charitable Man gains by what he parts
with; whilst the Covetous wretch whom God abhors looses even what he seems
to keep.

2. As what this devout Mary presented unto Christ was large for the quantity,
so was it most excellent, and precious for the Quality. She would not as David
told Araunah, Offer unto God of that which cost her naught; it was Precious
Ointment. The same Quantity as I told you was a present for a King. And To was
he to whom this grateful acknowledgment was made: No less then the King of the
whole Earth: And though he stand in need of none of our Services, seeing the
earth is his and the fullness thereof, yet he kindly receives, and graciously
accepts what we offer with a willing and cheerful heart, even for our sakes;
that he may be provoked to scatter his blessings more profusely and abundantly
upon us: And therefore looks upon his Divine Majesty to be affronted when we
show the smallness of our respect by the meannesse of our Oblation; either
pinching him in the Measure; or which is worse, giving him of that which is
vile and of no estimation, for the Nature and Quality of it.

Indeed a Mite is accepted; but it is where the will is large and the ability
small: And this good Woman received our Saviors Praise and commendation for
this Act, because he expresses it in the 4th. of Mark 8th. v. she did what she
could: As she was very rich, and wealthy for her substance, so she showed the
Munificence of her spirit by the Price and value of her donation. From whence
we may observe: that God accepts us according to what we have, and not
according to what we have not: If we have but a Mite, he does not look for a
farthing: And if we have ten thousand Rivers of Oil, he does not expect to be
put off with a cup of cold Water. Tho he is pleased rather to abate then to
exact the whole of us, taking short of what he might justly require of us:
Otherwise were he exact to mark either what we omit, or wherein we have done
amiss, who might be able to stand before him; but still our Obedience must
bear some Proportion to our knowledge, our Power, and our opportunities of
yielding it; when we do what we can, then we do in Gods sight what we ought;
when we do what he by his Grace inables us to perform; we need not question but
those Testimonies of our Obedience shall be graciously receivd, as this happy
Action of Mary Magdalens was, when she poured a Pound of precious Ointment on
our Saviors Head: for as she was not niggardly as to the quantity, so was she
not negligent as to the quality: She would serve God of the best. Abels
Offering was accepted, because he took of the choicest of his Flock, and of the
sat of it; and Cains rejected, because he brought of the fruits of the ground
which first came to hand, without picking or culling: And it is to be observed,
that in all the Commands that God gave concerning Sacrifices or Oblations, he
always ordered the best, and the choicest to be presented for his Service;
nothing that was common, or defective was to appear in his presence; nothing
that had any spot or blemish was to fall before his Altar: God in some Cases
abated of the Measure and quantity; if the Offender were not able to bring a
Lamb for a sin Offering, God would accept of two young Turtles, or two young
Pigeons; but we never read that he dispensed with the quality of any
Sacrifice: that he either received the halt or the blind.

But alas! How little do we follow these Precepts and Commands of God? How
little do we follow this good Woman's Example, in giving the best of our store
to his use and Service? No, rather on the contrary, we are apt not only to
pinch him in the Measure, which few scruple at; but to show our disrespect to
him likewise by setting apart that which is most vile and contemptible for the
sacred Portion: But above all how careless and remiss are we in offering up the
calves of our lips; in the dedication of the Sacrifice of our Prayer unto God,
there be but too many who in this sense offer unto God, of that which costs
them nothing; no, not the least thought, or consideration: They pour sorth it
may be whole torrents and streams of words, but without a drop of sense or
meaning; of Zeal or Devotion. But surely we cannot be of their minds who think
that the bare performance of the Duty, without ever minding of the manner after
which it is performed will serve the turn; who think they have sufficiently
answered the end, when they have mumbled over so many Pater Nosters and ave
Mary's, and gone over such a set of Prayers, or traveled so many miles bare
footed to visit the Shrine of a Saint, or to kiss some holy Relick: But we have
not learned so to serve God; this is to worship him by Rote, without either
will, affection or understanding: No! As those Sacrifices were best accepted
which were wholly consumed by fire from Heaven of which we have some Instances
in Scripture; so we may assure our selves, that no Sacrifice of Prayer, or
thanksgiving will find any acceptance at the hand of God which is not first
kindled by a Heavenly Zeal, and then ascends by virtue of that holy Flame to
him who presents it in the golden Censer of his own Merits to his Almighty
Father. Let us be careful in all our addresses unto God, In all our Divine
Services to be intent upon what we are about; to be elevated, and raised in our
Spirits; and how short soever our Prayers be, let us endeavor they may be
fervent and sincere; if we offer up but two young Turcks let them not want
their wings. Mary we see was careful in what she presented unto Christ; the
scent of it perfumed the whole Room, the Whole house: as St. John tells us, was
filled with the Odor of the Ointment: And if the Acts of our Love, and Charity
to Christ, and his Members be as unadulterate, and diffusive, as hers was, we
shall not fail of the same gracious acceptance that she met with, whilst she
went to pay the acknowledgment of her thankful heart to her beloved Lord and
Master. Which leads me to the first end for which this Action was designed;
that which Mary aimed at in anointing our Savior at this time with her costly
Ointment. viz.

1. To give an ample Testimony of her Love, and Gratitude, her kindness and
respect to her Savior who had done so great things for her; that was all she
aimed at: She dreamed not then either of his Death, or Burial. The greatest
honor that could be shown to Guests of the best Rank, and Fashion by the
Master of the Feast, was to perfume them with precious Ointment; and that this
was customary among the Jews, and Romans, and the Greeks also, I might show
you, were it either a matter in question, or worth the dispute: the only thing
extraordinary in this, was the Quantity; and the anointing of our Saviors
feet, a thing unusual, even where ease, and Luxury did most abound: And Pliny
tells us that Otho did first teach Nero to besmear his feet with precious
Ointments: But this, as I shall snow you had a Mysterious signification, which
neither she nor any of the company were aware of. O blessed Mary! Sweet was thy
Ointment But Sweeter was thy Love: Graceful was thy Action, but more graceful
was thy affection: The Scent of the rich Perfume, was quickly gone; but the
Sweet Odor, and the fragrant Smell of thy pure, and Sincere Love shall be
preserved in the Sacred Records of the Gospel, as long as the world endures;
and the memory of that precious Ointment wherewith thou did anoint thy
Saviors head and feet, shall be more lasting, and incorruptible then the oil
of Cedar, the great Preservative against the moth of time;

2. Though Maryes design was only true, and unfeigned Love in this Action, yet
as our Savior intimates the divine Providence had a further reach, and
prospect: Viz: That this anointeing which was common both to festivalls, and
Burialls should emblematically presignifye our Lords approaching Death, and
Passion: Thus our purposes often times unawares to our selves, serve Gods end
and look farther then we direct them. This Custom of anointing the Body for
the sunerall, and of strawing it over with rich gummes and Spices among the
Jews is made plain from the last Offices that were performed by Nicodemus, and
Joseph of Arimathea, to the Body of our Savior after it was taken down from
the Cross, and before it was laid in the Sepulcher. At feasts the head was
generally anointed, but when the Body was dresst, and prepared for a funeral
all parts Shared in the anointeing: And if we look into the nature, and kind
of this particular Ointment which this good woman poured upon the Head, and
wherewith she anointed the feet of our Savior we shall find that as it was a
very fit present by reason of the richness of the scent and the greatness of
the Value, to express her Love, and gratitude, so that likewise it was very
proper and correspondent to the end to which Gods providence had allotted it:
Viz: To foreshowe his Death and Burial.

The pure confection of Nard was no dry Ointment, but moist, and fluid: Whence
Nonnus calls it (...); a dew, or watery Substance, and is reckoned among those
precious Ointments, which distill out of Canes or Stalks either of their own
accord, or when cut, and bruised by others: hence this was called Spikenard,
from the Tops of the Plant from which that Odoriferous Liquor issued, either
natural; or which it yielded after it was bruised, and wounded; and in both
these respects was proper to represent Christ's death, and Burial. Thus it
foreshowd that natural Balm, his precious blood, which was Shortly after to
flow in streams from all the hollow Vessels of his body: And as the stalks
were sometimes bruisd before they yielded that Sovereign Balsame, and as Mary
brake the Albaster Vessel before she poured forth the Ointment, so his Body
more white, and pure then any Alabaster, was bruised for our Sins; and broken
for our transgressions, and from thence did issue forth that noble Juice, that
precious liquor, which not only by the fragrancy of the Smell, (as being a
Sacrifice of a Sweet smelling Savor) makes us acceptable unto God, but also by
its healeing balsamic quality cures all our inward wounds, and heales all our
sinful distempers.

Well did thou O Mary to diffuse thy Ointment over the blessed body of thy
Lord and Savior, the holy Jesus, to mollify it against the then approaching
time of his bitter, and dismal Agony in the garden; wherein he was to sweat
blood out of every pore for thy sake: well did thou to anoint that Sacred
Head, the head of the universe, which was shortly to be crowned with thorns:
well did thou to anoint those feet the extremest parts which came nearest to
the Earth to which he descended for thy good: those feet which had taken so
many Sharp, and painful journyes for the benefit of mankind; well did thou
to anoint, and Supple those feet which were to Support his Body in carrying up
the heavy Load of his Cross, made heavier by our sins, up that steep, and
craggy hill, Mount Calvary: and which were to drop forth a more generous and
Sovereign Juice to heal all our Spiritual Infirmities.

Alas; O Lord thou did not need any of these, to the unnecessary Ceremonies,
either liveing, or dead: Thou like the Rose of Sharon and like the Lilly of the
Valley, (to both which thou art compared) had, as being free from all the
pollutions and corruptions, of our decayed Nature, an innate sweetness in thee,
far surpassing all aromatic perfumes: and as there went a healing virtue out
of thy Body, so likewise we may well imagine that an Odoriferous scent must
needs Transpire out of that exactly tempered Complexion, and constitution:
Neither did thou need either Spices or Ointment, to preserve thy body when
dead, and laid in the Grave; for that, as the Prophet David has assured us
could suffer no Corruption, could admit of no Putrefaction: And yet O blessed
Jesus thou wast pleased to permit these usual Offices to be performed to thy
self, and kindly to accept of them: To show us that thou do allow of
neatness, and cheerfulness, of the Oil of gladness, and of the Wine of
rejoicing; and that we may be thy Disciples without wholly abjureing the use of
those Creatures, which thou of thy Almighty wisdom, and Infinite bounty have
provided for the comfort and refreshment of mankind; and to show us likewise
that we may, and ought, to take a decent care of our Bodies after their better
part their Immortal Companions have left and forsaken them, seeing that which
shall cre long be crumbled to dust, shall by thy allquickning spirit return to
itsold form, and those two old Friends be reunited never to suffer a second
separation. Thus O Lord, both thy Life and thy Death, both thy Burial, and
Resurrectioun, and every circumstance thereunto appertaining, teach us some or
other good Lesson, and whilst our Meditations are concerning thee, we cannot
fail, of wholesome Instructions.

2. The second General part of the Text is the end of the Publication of Maryes
good work: it was done for a Memorial of her; where ever virtue and goodness
break forth eminently, and exemplarily like the Sun in its noone-tide strength,
there always remains the indelible Character of a happy Remembrance: The
commendation of this Woman in my Text is chiefly excellent in these two
respects.

1. It is such a praise as shall never be in any danger to be lost, it points
to futurity; it shall be told in Ages to come: Praise not any says the wise
man before his death; because such commendations are neither safe on his part
that commends; in that it begets a shrewd suspicion of Flattery; nor on
his part that is commended; because if he conceive the praise that is spread
abroad of him to be true, it is much to be feared that it may puff him up with
Pride, and vain Glory, so that the most opportune time to give Virtue her
deserved commendations, is when a man can neither be hurt with Flattery, nor
infected with Ostentation.

2. The Praise that is given of her, is a true, and real Praise, settled upon a
solid foundation; she is not much extolled for the Ornaments and good qualities
belonging to the Body, as Beauty, comeliness, and the like, which she had in
great Perfection; all which are common to the bad as well as to the good; but
she is magnifyed for the Graces of her Mind, for her virtuous and charitable
Works, and is the only Praise that Solomon admits in a Woman: Give her of
the fruit of her hands, and let her Works praise her in the gates; with which
he concludes his Proverbs, and I the second General, and proceed to the last,
which I can barely mention.

3. We have here the extent of this manifestation of Maryes Praise: It shall
reach as far, as the sound of the Gospel shall be heard; and that is from one
end of the Earth to the other. And this had I leisure to prosecute it, would
yield much matter worthy our consideration; I will give you in a little to
understand how much might be said of it.

1. It teaches us that the praise of the Just is of a certain duration and
continuance, in respect of him from whom it proceeds; for it is not founded
upon the Judgment of Man, who often judges things to be Praise worthy
according to the outward appearance, which oftentimes have no real and
intrinsic worth, and value in them. But this is grounded upon the Judgment of
God, who neither is, nor can be capable either of Ignorance, or Error I say
unto you.

Judge not says the Apostle, 1 Ep: to the Cor: 4. c. at the 5th v. before the
time; until he come that shall bring to light the things that are done in
darkness, and manifest the Counsels of the heart, and then every one shall have
Praise of God: It Is Christ who gave this Testimony of this Woman, whose word is
more firm, and assured then the Poles and Basis of Heaven, and Earth, for
Heaven and Earth shall pass away but his word shall not pass away.

It shows that the Extent is universal: for the Gospel is a Message of glad
Tidings that is to be communicated to all People: It is not sent into the World
to be concealed, or kept close; not to be muttered in an unknown Tongue: No Man
lights a Candle to put it under a Bushel; the light of the word is not to be
shut up in a dark Lanthorn; nor is the Gospel given unto Men, that with that
unfaithful Servant they should hide it in the Earth; nor is it to be kept in
the heart only; Mistake me not; God grant that it may take deep root there, and
that the fruits of it may appear in our Lives, and Conversations; my meaning is
this: All those to whom God has been pleased to reveal the Mystery of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, are bound when lawfully called, and Authorized
thereunto, to Preach and divulge it unto others, yea a woe is denounced against
all such as do it not: Though it may be thought foolishness in some who would
be thought to be carnally wise; yet it has pleased God by such foolishness to
make them that believe, truly wise unto Salvation: Let men therefore Reverence
the Lords dispensation, and be glad to accept of Salvation, upon such terms,
and by such means as he has appointed.

Thus have I at length finished my observations upon the main design of the
Text, so far forth as the time allotted for this Exercise would give me leave,
and in some measure answered one End in pitching upon it.

Suffer me now therefore in the second place, which both my Duty and
inclination lead me to; to pour a little sweet Oil, and to present a few drops,
(not of what is Precious, for such have I none,) but of the best that I have,
of that which is true, and sincere; as preparatory to the Solemn Exequies of
our most incomparable, and most Virtuous Princess suddenly to be celebrated and
performed. Another Mary, our late gracious Queen, whose Memory shall be
preserved fresh, and sweet in the lasting Records of Fame, so long as Virtue,
Piety, Charity, Meekness, Humility, Wisdom and all that chain of Graces that
added luster to her Royal Quality shall find any respect or Countenance in the
World: And truly if ever a larger Tribute of tears then ordinary were due; if
ever a more then usual Portion of sorrow were allowable; it is certainly at
this time for the great, and never enough to be lamented Loss of that most
excellent Priucess, who as she was the Glory of this Age, so shall she be the
wonder and Admiration of the next. To say nothing of the infinite, and
irreparable Loss sustained by her right Valiant, and truly kind Lord, the sole
partner of her Affection, as well as Power; whose mutual indearments were as
much above the ordinary level as their Sacred Persons were. To say nothing of
the inestimable Damage that the Nation in general feels for want of such a main
and strengthening Pillar for the support both of Church and State, we cannot but
passionately mourn, and lament the sudden and untimely end of her still
blowing, ever growing Virtues; which even in their early Spring yielded such a
Sweet, and Fragrant Scent, (like the precious Ointment in my Text that perfumed
the whole Room) as comforted, and refresht all that had the happiness to be
near her.

My intention is not, as an Herald to proclaim her great Quality, the royal
stem from which she was descended, nor to set forth the worthiness of that
ancient, and Illustrious family of Nassau, the Support of the Protestant
Religion, in the Low Countries for the Last Ages; into which she was so happily
married: But give me leave, ut Proeco Evangelicus, as an Herald of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ to blazon Some few of those many virtuous, and most excellent
qualities for which she was, and ever shall be eminent; and which shall allways
be told for a memorial of her. These are the most fragrant flowers that can be
strewne upon her hearse, the richest Spices, the sweetest Gums, the most
precious Ointments wherewith her honorable Name can be embalmd.

Her Exemplary Piety, and Devotion justly challenge the first place; for as
that was allways paid first by her unto her God, so ought it first to be
remembered by us: How frequent, yea how constant was she in her private
Addresses to the Throne of Grace: Her Closet, that little Oratory was allways
filld with the sweet Incense of fervent, and well directed Prayer: There was no
ceaseing of that holy Sacrifice from her Altar: She preferred that
with-draweing Room before her own Presence Chamber; as that beloved place
where she could enjoy a more ravishing delight, and Satisfaction then in all
the pompous Ceremonies of her own Splendid, and magnificent Court: where at
highest she could converse but with Princes, who though they are called Gods,
must, (which alas she her self has too Soon for us, experimented) dye Like
men; But in her own retired apartment she could pay her homage to the King of
Kings, to her Savior, to her Redeemer: Here it was that she so often mourned
like a disconsolate Turtle the Absence of her dear Consort whilst he was
exposeing himself to all the hazards of war, to all perils both at sea and
Land for our sakes; Here she put up her constant, and ardent prayers, here she
Sent up her most fervent Wishes, for his safety, his success, and his happy
Return; And questionless if the Prayers of the faithful are available as to be
sure they are; we are not a little beholden to her devout Orisons, which we may
be sure were offered up with a Fervent, Zealous Spirit, filled with pure and
unfeigned Love, for those many wonderful deliverances of our most Gracious
Prince, whose Person, and affairs she so earnestly, and so constantly
recommended to the Divine Protection: Neither is it a small loss that the King
and the Nation sustain, in the now missing the benefies of those winged
Messengers, which she so often sent up to Heaven to implore its assistance for
his, and our security and Preservation: But sure if there be any knowledge in
Blessed Spirits departed hence, of what is done and transacted here below;
((...)) if there be any sense remaining of humane Affairs, she does not fail
to put up her most fervent wishes for her dear Lords Prosperity, and success in
all his hazardous undertakings: she does not fail to cast a kind, and Pitying
look upon these poor Nations, now deprived of her cheerful Prefence, whose
Interest she did so Zealously espouse: Neither was she less constant at the
Public Service of the Church, in her Chapel Royal which she as often as
convenient Opportunity would give her leave, graced with her Presence: Never
was the true Reformed Religion, and the pious and Learned Ministers of it more
countenanced, and encouraged, since our most renowned Queen Elizabeth's time
(of whom in many things she was a lively Pattern) then in her days: So that
the Church as well as State have lost in her, their great Patroness and
protectress.

Thus did Our Gracious Queen Mary like the Mary in my Text anoint the Head of
Christ with her precious Ointment; the Church whereof Christ is Head; neither
was she wanting in the other part of that Virtuous Woman's Action; for she like
her, anointed our Saviors feet also: The Poor, the lowest, and extremest of
his Members, and which therefore were most subject to cold as being fart
distant from the chief Seat of life, felt the warm Inffuence of her diffusive
Charity in a Princely manner, and an abundant Measure descending upon them for
their nourishment and refreshment: The Poor which she had always with her.
The Poor which were her continual care and Charge, tasted liberally of her
Royal Bounty: Her Munificent hand, to those who stood in need of her
assistance, was like Mary to our Savior, (and what is done to them he looks
upon as done unto himself;) no less than a whole Pound of Precious Ointment:
her Charity, and liberality to them was of the largest Size, and dimensions;
contained (if it had any bounds) in the biggest Measures, heaped up, pressed
down and running over: These are the Innocent Causers of our great, and
unspeakeable Loss by her so speedy Removal hence: These were the Importunate
Beads-men who have solicited Heaven so earnestly for her; who have prayed her
up out of a troublesome World, to Heaven, too soon for us, though not for her
self.

Neither must her unparalleled Clemency, that truly Royal Virtue, for which
she was so Eminent, and which so many who so little deserved it experimented,
be forgotten; how unconcernedly did this Noble hearted, and undaunted Princess,
at a time when her dear Lord was absent, and when all things did not answer our
hopes, and expectations (as the Events of War are various) bear the rude
Behavior, and as bad Language of some Insolent, and disaffected Persons, which
she passed by with a generous disdain; punishing them most nobly, and
Christianly, and withal severely by taking no Notice of them. This is that
Heavenly Virtue that shined so bright in this adorable Princess; and was one of
the Beauties of her large, and well complexion'd Soul; which could forgive
almost as much, and as easily as others could offend: This was that Princely
Quality which made her not an Angel, but as one of the best of those Gods who
have the subordinate Government of the World under their Supreme and Universal
Head Nam cum vincamur in omni Munere, Sola Deos aequat Clementia nobis.

It Is this Noble Virtue that transforms our Nature, and makes it in some degree
like unto him who is tender hearted, compassionate, of great kindness repenting
him of the evil.

I shall not meddle with her Political capacity, as being beyond my Sphere;
though upon the observation of those who took notice of the posture of Public
affairs, during the time of her Administration; when upon unavoidable
Necessityes; the Husband, and Wife, likeas of Old, the two Brothers Castor, and
Pollux, ruled by turns when one rose, the other set; have agreed, that in the
mostdifficult Occurrences, She managed all things with that Prudence, Conduct,
and Courage; as if the Brave, undaunted, Heroic Soul, of the only Partner of
her Throne, and Bed had acted in her, or rather that they were both one.

Her affability, Candor, Humility, and unsullied Innocence, her sweet, and
inoffensive deportment, and that Noble train of graces already mentioned, that
constantly attended her, as they gained her the esteem and veneration of all
that knew her, so they fitted and qualified her for that blessed Company, with
whom she now converses, so that she scarce needed any Change, for her Admission
into that Heavenly Society. Her stayed, and solid Temper of spirit must, (not
without praise) be remembered; a temper not to be altered by all the several
divertisements, and avocations, which the high and public Orb she moved in
must necessarily expose her to: She used this World, though living in the
greatest Splendour, and Glory of it, as if she used it not; as knowing that the
fashion of it must, as she her self has now done, pass away; receiving the
innocent satisfactions without the Vanities, and Impertinencies of it: Like the
Famous River Arethusa that runs through a large Sea without mixing her pure
Waters with that salt, and troubled Element, she conversed with her Court, the
best of which cannot but be tainted with some blemishes, without partakeing of
the Corruptions of it.

Thus by well ordering and disposeing of her time, she lived much though she
Lived not Long: Like a Chymicall Spirit whose quantity is Small, but its Virtue
and operation great, she had crowded a great heap of life into a narrow
compass: not like the many of the world, who can give no other Testimony that
they Live, but that they breath, and that Scarce wholosomely too; the greatest
Sign of whose Life is their motion, and that generally a very irregular one
too. But she, a true Mary, whilst others cumbred themselves about the gay and
unnecessary Vanities of the world, minded the one thing necessary which shall
never be taken from her: for her good works like the Ointment which that
blessed Convert poured on our Saviors head shall perfume her glorious memory,
and make it Smell Sweet in every place where her Sacred Name is mentioned as
Long as the world endures: These good works, and virtuous qualities are the
Orators, Eloquent without fiattery, which give her a lasting and never dying
Encomium; the loud tongued Speakers that have commended her even without a
figure, to the very Heavens?

And now perhaps you may think that by my long insisting upon a few of those
many particulars I might have named, that I have been endeavoring to raise
your Passions to an unallowable height, and to Leave Such firm impressions of
our unutterable loss upon your memorys, as will not easily be worn out: And
truly the parting with so much virtue, and Goodness as she was Owner of,
especially when it is a Treasure in this degenerate Age not commonly to be
found, cannot enough be lamented: But my design is more Christian; It Is to raise
in you, after her Example an undervalueing of those little gay Vanities
wherewith the generality of mankind are so much infatuated, and to beget in you
a generous imitation of those many most excellent Qualities for which this
blessed Saint, and most renowned Princess is, and ever shall be deservedly
famous.

I have but one thing more to add. I told you the Poor, the many poor whom she
fed, and whose necessities she relieved, were by their continual Prayers to
Heaven for her, the Innocent Causers of her so speedy, and sudden removal out
of a wicked, and deceitful World into the Regions of Everlasting Peace and
Happiness; Let me put you in mind now what have been the guilty Instruments
which have pulled down this fatal calamity on our heads, and deprived us of
that great and inestimable Blessing which we so lately enjoyed; that so we may
seriously mourn, and lament for those unhappy Causes that have occasioned all
this trouble and Mischief unto us; for God does not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the Children of Men.

They are our Sins our Crying and heinous Sins of all sorts, and amongst the
rest our horrible Ingratitude for the many deliverances which God has sent us
by the miraculous hand of his over ruling Providence, that have caused God to
take away the desire of our Eyes, and the Joy of our hearts With a stroke. It Is
Sin, which like a Mell-dew, (properly so called being seemingly sweet, but
really pernicious) has smitten our early hopes, and blasted our most forward
Expectations in a moment. It was Sin that wrought the first disorders in
Nature, and brought the whole Creature into Bondage, from which it longs, and
groans to be delivered. Endless it would be to show how this hellish
Enchantment has removed the mighty Kingdoms, and Empires of the Earth;
tossing them like a Ball when they came to her hand, to be under her Dominion,
from one to another; from the Assyrian to the Persian, from the Persian to the
Grecian, from the Grecian to the Roman; with whom by reason of Temperance,
frugality, Justice and Natural Honesty which then reigned amongst them, the
Seat of Majesty continued for a long Period of Time; till Foreign Conquests
introduceing exotic Vices, and Orontes pouring forth its wanton and Lascivious
streams into the before cold and chaste Tiber, she by degrees received the
fatal Infection, and dyed at last of a Luxurious Surfeit. What turns and
alterations of Government; what dire effusion of Christian Blood, what Ruin,
and havoc, this too successful Instrument of Hell has made in all Places
wherever she came; is too dismal a Story, (but might befit this sad occasion)
to remember: No wonder then that we who have drunk so largely of the enchanted
Cup, should feel the miserable effects of it, and that we who have been
intoxicated with the Bewitching Potion, should partake of the shameful
Spueing: Let us therefore whilst the stroke of Gods hand is fresh upon us truly
bewayl our manifold Sins that have put our hopes so far backward, and that have
already cost us so dear, and amend our lives lest a worse thing befall us. God
miraculously delivered the Children of Israel from their Egyptian bondage but
when they murmured against their Deliverer and were disobedient, and
continually repining, they provoked him to swear in his wrath, that none of
them should enter into the Land of Promise: He could have led them to Canaan by
a sar nearer way; but for their ungrateful carriage toward him, for their hard
heartedness and unbelief, he harass't them out in the Wilderness, till all but
Joshua and Caleb, of that vast number that came out of Egypt were consumed. Let
us take heed lest for our ingratitude, and rebellious dissatisfied Temper we
provoke God to put a stop to that happy deliverance he has so graciously begun
among us; and reserve the consummation of it for another Generation that will
be mote thankful then we have been, and will bring forth better fruit; then we
have done; Lest for our unworthy behavior toward him, and his Laws, he let us
only have a Pisgah sight of this Palestine and never let us enter into an
actual possession of that happy state of Rest and Peace of which we have had so
fair a Prospect. Into which State of everlasting Rest, and Bliss, of which
Canaan was only a Type, the Lord of his Mercy bring us all, under the Conduct
of our most holy Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation who has purchased it for
us with the Price of his own most precious blood: To whom with the Father and
holy Spirit be all honor and Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

