Jovis, octavo die Novembris, 1666.
ORDERED,
THat the Thanks of this House be returned to Doctor Perrinchief; and Doctor
Sandcroft, Dean of St. Paul's; for the Sermons by them Preached Yesterday before
this House; and that they be desired to Print their Sermons: And Mr. Crouch is
to return the Thanks of the House to Doctor Perrinchief; and Sir John
Berkenhead to Dr. Sandcroft; with the desire of the House to each of them to
Print their Sermons.

Will. Goldisbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House OF COMMONS, At St. Margarets
Westminster, Nov. 7 Being the Fast Day appointed for the Plague of Pestilence.

By Richard Perrinchief, D. D.

Published by Order of the said House.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty in St. Bartholomews Hospital, 1666.

Lev. 26.18. And if you will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then will I
punish you seven times more for your sins.


ALthough God has laid Obligations enough upon the Souls of men to serve him;
though there is such an evident wisdom in his Counsels, such a beauty of
Holiness shines in his Law, as are sufficient to ravish our Reason to a
compliance: Yet men seldom or never are prevailed upon without something that
concerns the Sense. For the Outward man must be invited by somewhat that will
allure the carnal affections, or terrified by what represents the loss of their
satisfaction. Therefore God was pleased so far to stoop to the infirmities of
mankind, that when he gave his Law, which in it self is holy, Romans 7.12.
just, and good, he added to his Precepts those Promises and Threats, which
should assure the more sensual part, that there are all just and solid comforts
in Obedience, and that to Disobey shall be neither safe nor pleasant. The
Gospel also, though it be a more plain and open institution for the spirits of
men, and a direction for the life to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
yet invites Godliness with the promises of this life; and has the sanction of
Indignation, Romans 2.8, 9.
and wrath, tribulation, and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil.

More particularly in this Chapter are proposed those Blessings which shall
make the sincere in heart rejoice, and crown those heads that are wise with the
fear of God: and then afterward, from ver. 14. to the end of ver. 17. he
denounces the several effects of his Anger which shall weary and grieve the
ungodly, and consume the sinner.

But then, his infinite Wisdom foreseeing the variety of events which should
be from his Judgments, and that though some in their affliction should seek God
early, Hos. 5 15.
yet others would not regard when his hand was lifted up, Isa. 26.11. Chap.
9.13.
nor turn to him that smote them; does therefore in this Text declare how
dismal shall be the issue of such a stupidity: And if ye will not, etc. then
will I punish you seven times more for your sins.

The Text consists of 1. A Supposition, And if you will not for all this
hearken unto me: 2. A Consequence, Then will I punish you seven times more for
your sins.

In the Supposition you may observe, First, The Persons concerned; Ye, who have
already been punished, that have had terrors appointed over you, and against
whom God has set his face. Secondly, What is supposed of these Persons; That
they will not hearken, not repent, and turn to him in obedience, but continue
still in the perverseness of their ways. Thirdly, The aggravation of this
perverseness; That it was in contempt of all those discoveries of God's Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness, which he does manifest in his Judgments: For all this.

In the Consequence are, First, The Consequent, Punishment; I will Punish.
Secondly, The Necessity or Certainty of the Consequence, I Will punish.
Thirdly, The Terror or Measure of it; Seven times more. Fourthly, The Justice
and Equity of it; For your sins. The consideration of these parts, with a
reflection on them how far they concern us, will be proper to the Occasion of
our present meeting.

I. The Supposition, That a people on whom the Judgments of God have passed may
yet not hearken to him that smote them, nor seek the Lord of Hosts by
repentance. This may well be supposed, because it is possible. For all the
Providence of God, how apt soever they are in their own nature to affect the
spirits, and awaken the consciences of men, yet being intended by God only as
motives, perswasives, and convictions, and not designed as instruments of
violence to force the Soul, leave them still in the natural liberty of their
wills. His Mercies indeed are as cords of love, to elicite and draw forth our
affections; to raise longing and panting passions for the enjoyment of that
fountain from whence flow such pleasant streams: Yet they are but as the bands
of man, work in such a manner as is fit for a reasonable Soul; not leading it
in chains, not dragging it as a slave. Therefore how much soever they may
ravish a pious man, yet they may be despised by him who is proud to do wickedly.

So likewise the Judgments of God, though they may consume all those things
about us for which we sin, cut off the darlings of our lusts, and the vile
prices of our damnation, show us what bitterness is in the end of
transgression; yet they may leave the heart of man unwounded, without the least
impression of a true and penitent sorrow. And if the heart of man be yet left
free to it self, there may flow from it the issues of death, Evil thoughts,
murders, Mat. 15.19.
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false-witness, and blasphemies, and all
those other pollutions which defile a man. So that all the terrors of
Judgments, the fall of Heaven, the shakings of the Earth, the ruins of the
dissolved world, may leave the sinner where they found him; amazed, perchance,
and terrified, yet still infamous, with an inclination to all his abominations,
which waits for the next opportunity of his shame.

But it were well for mankind if this supposition were grounded only upon a
possibility, that it were only a speculation, and never practicable; for we
have too many sad Histories, and too frequent Instances of others, besides our
selves, whom the Judgments of God have not altered. The Deluge of waters in the
time of Noah was the most universal and terrible Judgment that God ever brought
upon mankind; yet did it not cleanse all that outlived it, and were saved from
it: for Cham, who had been one of the witnesses how soon the glory of this
world vanishes, how all the acquisitions of blood and violence were swept away
by the opening of the windows of Heaven, how all the frolic joys at Marrying
and giving in Marriage, all the lusts which by eating and drinking were
nourished to a prodigy, concluded with shrieks and cries at the breaking up of
the great Deep; he who beheld how fruitless and vain were all the labors of
men to secure themselves from indignation, and escape the wrath of an incensed
God, being forced at last to submit to the execution, and end their days with
horror and lamentation; he who had an experience that there was no safety but
in righteousness, Genesis 7.1.
that it alone had made an Ark for a Sanctuary to his Father and his Family:
yet even this man entered upon the new world with all the sins of the old, and
revived those impieties and injustices for which God before had cut men off
from the face of the earth. The Israelites were as it were pulled up by the
roots from the Land of their Fathers, carried in chains to Babylon, and there
made to serve so heavy a service, as rendered the Egyptian bondage
inconsiderable, Jer. 23.7, 8.
and was imbittered with the various reproaches of their God: Yet this very
people, when they were delivered in so miraculous a manner, that they could
scarce believe their own happiness, and doubted their freedom to be but a
daydream, Psalm. 126.1.
and their safety too great for a reality; yet soon declared by their
practices, that they had left nothing but their chains at Babylon, and came
home loaded with their old crimes of Violence, Oppression, and Uncleanness, for
which God before had made their Land to mourn. It is needless to recite more
instances; what has been already done, may be done again. It deferves our
consideration to enquire into those dreadful causes that bring this possibility
to an actual existence; that render ineffectual to the reforming of our lives
the Judgments of God, either as threatened, or executed.

1. The bare threatening of Judgments is one of those methods the Divine wisdom
thinks fit to use to draw men off from their sins, to warn before he strikes,
and to brandish his Sword over our heads before he wounds them, that if by this
means men would be brought to repent of the evil of their doings, he would
repent of the evil he had spoken against them. This was he pleased to do in the
Old Testament very particularly: He sent his Servants the Prophets to such and
such a Nation or People, that they should deal clearly, and plainly charge them
with their sins, denounce Judgments in proportion to them, and in particular
determine the limits of the time wherein they should come to pass; as, within
three years, Isa. 16.14. Jon. 3.4.
as years of an hireling, within forty days. And yet many of these were not
regarded, so that the threatenings being despised, the execution took place on
them.

In the times of the New Testament, though God is not so particular, yet is he
as positive. Romans 1 13.
For the general declarations of his wrath against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, attested unto by
so many several instances of such that have fallen under this wrath, leave every
man to conclude God's anger against his own particular sins, as certainly as if
a Prophet had been sent on purpose unto him. For it is not the appearance of a
Prophet, nor his particular application, that makes the threatenings of God
effectual; because then all would have been prevailed upon to repentance to
whom the Prophets did address themselves, which it is plain they were not. Or
more certain; for no one particular Prophet can possibly have so many evidences
of his being sent by God: as there are of the whole Scripture, of Jesus
himself, and all the Prophets which spoke by his Spirit. So that whosoever is
not moved at all by these threatenings of God in his Word, though general, the
same person would also despise a Prophet, had he no other business from Heaven
but to forewarn him what should be the issue of his sins.

Besides, these general denunciations may by prudent observation be fixed to
particular Times, and Persons. Our Savior told the Jews, it was as possible
for them to know the signs of the times, Mat. 16.3. Luke 12.56.
that is, the approach of Judgments, as to tell what weather the face of the
sky will wear-the next day. For there are some previous Circumstances in the
state of affairs, in the lives and conversations of men, by which wise persons
may gather, Public ca^lamities and ruins are hard at hand; such as are, the
general debaucheries of men's manners, the impudence of sins, obstinacy in the
prosecution of our lusts, contempt of the worship of God, either cherishing, or
chastising us. By these, and the like, the approaches of common distress, and
troubles are as conspicuous, as a following storm or tempest is in the
gathering together of the blacker clouds. 2 Chro. 25.14, 15, 16.
When Amaziah the King of Judah was so strangely infatuated as to forsake the
God who had given him a wonderful victory, and to worship those of his defeated
enemies, which could not deliver their own people out of his hand, and was so
obstinate in his folly as to terrify the reproving Prophet; the Prophet
concludes from thence that his destruction was nigh, for it is said, that he
forbear, and said, I know that God has determined to destroy thee, because
thou have done this, and have not hearkened unto my counsel. Nor are such
Conclusions to be drawn from men's practices by Prophets only: Macchiavel (who
was conceived to be no great admirer of God's ways of Providence, yet being
true to his own observations) sets this down as a rule of Augurie of the state
of Nations, Disc. l. 1. c. 12. Nissuno maggiore inditio si puote havere dalla
rouina d'una provincia, che redere dispregiato il culto divino.
We cannot have a greater sign of the ruin of a people than to see the Worship
of God despised. Thus many men prudentially comparing together the Word of God
with his most usual Providence, and applying them to the times and lives of
men, have been able to foresee and declare those future events, which have as
certainly come to pass as if a present Inspiration had enabled them to
prophecy. So that the threatenings of God, how general soever they are, may yet
be brought home to the hearts and consciences of particular persons, to move
them to a serious repentance, without the expectation of Prodigies, or some
portentuous Signs from Heaven, which are dark and ambiguous in their event. But
if these prove ineffectual to this great end, the fault is not to be imputed to
any defect in the Divine goodness, as having waved his former methods of
long-suffering and patience, and intending to surprise us, but to the various
and strong corruptions of men, which truly are those hardening causes, that
make them not hearken unto God. And such are these:

1. Some harden themselves by Infidelity, and that wisdom of the World which is
now in Vogue; Not to believe any thing but what brings a demonstration to our
reason, or satisfies our sense to an assent: therefore because things future
are not to be demonstrated, nor can our senses be certain of that which is not
yet in being, they feoff at the Oracles of God, and make their sport at the
affirmations of Heaven. So that it is unlikely they will be forced from the
pleasure of their lusts, Genesis 19.14.
by that which is the object of their scorn. Thus Lot's Sons-in-Law
discrediting the news he brought them, that the Lord will destroy this City,
(for he seemed to them as one that mocked;) they continued in Sodom, and the
sins of it, till fire from Heaven did, too late, convince them of the truth of
his kind intelligence. Infidelity hatches our lusts, as Cockatrice-Eggs, till
they become flying Serpents. Look about you, and observe how impudent they are
in their sins, how impenitent in their lives, how regardless of the public
miseries, who mock at Religion, and draw matter of rallery from the Scriptures;
who scoff at past Prophesies as antiquated Stories, tales that never had
accomplishments; and endeavor to impose upon the securer world a dis-esteem of
all the threats of God, as the troublesome dreams of some hungry melancholy
Priests, who divine for a reward. These scoffs you know make up a great part of
the vain discourse of many in our Age; whose Infidelity arises not from a want
of evidence in the truths of God, for there are more degrees of probability in
all his threatenings, than there are of desirableness in the things for which
they sin: but because they are so far in love with their lusts, that, like
importunate Adulterers, they quarrel, and duel all those who would persuade or
divorce them from their unlawful embraces; so that Infidelity, and Lust, do
mutually spawn, and nourish each the other.

2. Others are not wrought upon by the denunciation of Judgments through a too
fond Credulity, a believing too much. For howsoever they are persuaded; that
what God has said shall certainly come to pass; yet, cheating themselves into
an Imagination, that they are his choicest Servants, his dearest Children, they
are confident he intends nothing but smiles and embraces for them, and that the
anger which he threatens is to fall to the lot of others. And this persuasion
arises from some peculiar opinion, or practice of theirs in Religion, different
from the rest of mankind; on which while they put too high a value, they
believe it commends them so to the Love of God, that though they do those
things for which the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians.
5.6.
yet by some vain words they are cheated to think, that they are chosen for his
Jacob, and separated to be his Israel, and that God sees no Iniquity in them:
and when they believe God so kind to them, they will not be less kind to
themselves. And it is no wonder if such persons are not changed by the
threatenings of God, since they presume there is nothing in them can provoke his
anger. Thus when the Prophets told the Jews of those several destructions that
should fall upon them, how Plagues should consume them from the earth, and yet
a wrath pursue them beyond the Grave, they trusted in lying words, they
believed without any ground, Jer. 7.4.
saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, etc. viz. that the
Lord dwelling among them as in his Holy place, and they being a people nigh
unto him, none of those things should happen unto them, so that instead of
hearkening to God by repentance, they more provoked God by injuries to those
his servants.

3. Some render all the threatenings of God fruitless, through their shortness
of discourse, whereby they fool themselves into a presuming upon his mercy:
they commit the Attributes of God, and to all declarations of his future
justice they oppose, that God is Gracious and Merciful, plenteous in Goodness,
that he is not extreme to mark what is done amiss, that satisfied with his own
Rectitude he descends not to mark our follies: and, as he is the most perfect
Being, whose glory is Goodness, that is, an incomprehensible Inclination to do
good to his Creatures; anger and fury is not his: neither can so Gracious a God
appoint eternal torments for punishments of finite creatures, or temporary
transgressions: thus they baffle his Veracity with his Clemency. Or else they
make his Long-suffering to wear out the sense of his Justice: as those
Scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
who walking after their own lusts, said, Where is the promise of his Coming?
For since the Fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the Creation. Such wilful ignorance as this made the unfaithful
Steward to argue from his Lord's delaying to come, Luke 12.15.
that either he would not call him to an account; or that he might have leisure
enough to beat the menservants, and the maidens, and to eat and drink with the
drunken. How far such foolish Collections as these will prevail to harden men's
hearts, the Wiseman tells us, Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil
work is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of men are fully set in
them to do evil.

These are the most common and ordinary ways which harden the hearts of men
against all the severity of Gods threatenings, and render them as ineffectual to
a change of life, as if they were deemed but causeless curses that never come,
as the passionate Rants of weaker persons, who would terrify where they cannot
persuade, and frighten those whom they cannot force. These keep the finner more
close to his sinful enjoyments; suggest unto him a more than vulgar wisdom not
to be shaken as a fool with words, and a mistaken courage, which is but
obstinacy; not to be Hectored out of his carnal satisfactions. And as the
Corruptions of men, or their common Enemy, has found out these arts to delude
God's goodness and long-suffering in the use of his threatenings; so

2. There be various causes which do hinder the converting effects of his
Power, manifested in the execution of Judgments: so that they leave no more
impression on the hearts of men, than Arrows do of their paths in the air;
their presence may cause some disturbance, but leave no lasting alteration: For

1. Some men clude the convictions which Judgments bring along with them, by a
kind of Skepticism; doubting and questioning whether public calamities, and
common miseries, come from God? or whether they be the production of natural
causes, which in certain Periods of time have their conjunction? or the event
of a fortuitous concurrence of malignant agents, free from the management of
any superior, and designing Cause? Thus men affecting a repute of knowledge
above the Vulgar, the esteem of Speculativi in searching all the ressorts of
nature to trace the effect, and abhorring any resolutions into Providence as
the Sanctuary for ignorance, and confession of it; they first doubt, and
afterward (their Lusts precipitating the determination, and inclining the
balance where they may have least check,) deny, that God was at all concerned
in our miseries. And therefore if it were not he that smote us, why should we
turn unto him? Why should we forsake a beloved sin, to seek a Lord, who does
neither good, nor evil? Whereas God owns the works of natural causes, as well
as those whose speed and greatness discover his immediate hand. The Plague of
Locusts was confessed to be as much an effect of his indignation on Egypt, as
any of the other prodigious Punishments; for they desired Moses to intercede
for their removal: Exodus 10.13, 19.
yet it is said, that an East wind brought them, and a West wind carried them
away. But when God hides himself behind a traverse of immediate Instruments,
and wraps up his all-disposing hand in a cloud; when, as the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 97.2.
Clouds and darkness are round about him; we seldom consider the Righteousness
and Judgment, which are the habitation of his Throne. Thus while God God
suffered the Devil to rival him in power, so that the Magicians could vie
wonders with the servants of the most High, Pharaoh concluded the Lord's hand
was not in the Plagues; he discredited the Credentials of Moses, which were his
Miracles, as the issues of some common art, and rejected the Embassy; for it
is said, Exodus 7.23.
That he turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this
also.

2. Sometimes, though men acknowledge the evil which befalls them was the Lords
doing, and through a cloud of tears behold the brightness of Gods power, yet
they render Judgments ineffectual to their amendment, by assigning them as
vengeances for other men's sins, and punishments for the abominations of those
who differ from them; from whence they conclude, Repentance to be the duty of
others, and there needs no change in themselves. The several parties of men do
in common miseries, as routed Soldiers in a defeat: transfer the blame from
themselves, and lay the cause of an overthrow upon another shoulders. How
often have ye heard every one of those Judgments which have fallen upon this
Land, by men of different Parties charged upon the sins of their contrary
Faction? This side thinks the Rebellion of the other, and the innocent blood
they have shed, did cry so loud for vengeance, that the Almighty could not rest
till he arose to avenge it on the Inhabitants of the earth. That side imagines,
the Luxury, profaneness, and impieties of their Opposites to weary the
patience of God, till he take away our comforts, and strip us of all our
glories. One Sect believes, that all the sad Providence under which we groan,
are but the inseparable concomitants of a war which God now wages against
Antichrist, whom they think is to be seated among those who are dissenters from
them. The other is as firmly persuaded, that the Schisms, Haeresies,
Blasphemies of the Holy Spirit; the neglect of Public worship, the malicious,
and designed Disbedience to lawful Magistrates, the Incharitableness and Envy
of their fellow Subjects, which the others are infamous with, have justly
provoked the God of pure eyes to make his anger smoke against such an
infatuated and perverse Generation as this is. Thus every Party confines Gods
love and hatred by their own measures, and are so far in love with what is
theirs, that they think God doats upon their Cause as much as they do
themselves: and therefore suppose he calls others only to return; their
business is to stand still. Whereas all and every Party, yea, the best of men,
have sins enough to justify Gods greatest severity: his indignation calls for
all our tears, and his Judgments make no difference. In the Pestilence we saw
the same pit devour the spotted Carcasses, that had before ranged themselves
under contrary Persuasions; nor was the destroying Angel more tender of one
Congregation than another. The late Fire preyed upon the stock and dwellings of
the Orthodox, and Fanatic; and the houses of private Meetings, together with
public Churches, were mingled in the ashes. And should our provoked God give
us over into our Enemies hands, they would spare no Sect, that had wherewithal
to gratify their lust and rage. Therefore in such Common Judgments we can
never do our duty, till every one be affected as the conscious Prophet, and
take up his confession, Jon. 1.12.
I know that for my sake this tempest, this misery, is come upon you. And could
we be so happy to attain to a common repentance, and walk by the same rule in
turning to the Lord, it would remove that other Judgment of our Divisions,
which is pregnant with many mischiefs; for, the Apostle assures us, Phil. 3.15.
If in any thing else ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this even unto
you.

3. Some men by their very deliverance from a Judgment, through a prodigious
folly, become impenitent after it: accustomed dangers harden the escaped fool
oftentimes to a stupidity; the ruder Mariners, that have weathered out several
storms, will steal, blaspheme, and be drunk in the next tempest. Dion Cassius
tells us, That Catiline, being accused for the murders, and rapines committed
on those whom Sylla had proscribed, and escaping the condemnation under which
others fell for the same crimes, (...), Dio. Romans Hist. l. 37.
did from this grow much worse, and by this did at last perish. So we often see
him that has come off safe from one Judgment, careless to avoid another by the
amendment of his life; especially if he can any way fancy that he owes his
deliverance to some poor Art of his own: for then he promises himself, that
without the austerities of Repentance, or making himself any longer a burden to
Providence, the same Arts, or the like, shall be his constant refuge. And
wicked men are always confident in their own counsels. The Prophet charges the
impenitencie of the scornful men of Jerusalem upon the confidence of their own
Arts, Isa. 28.15. For they said, We have made a Covenant with Death, and with
Hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it
shall not come nigh us, etc. Besides this, the prospect of some advantages
which a deliverance represents, takes off all thoughts of repenting in those
that are escaped, and employs them to gather up the relics of another ruin,
the spoils of a common wrack, to repair the breaches of their own fortunes, or
increase their estates. So that they conceive a public Judgment to lose its
nature as to them, and that it was but a kindness of heaven to advance their
private interest; and therefore they interpret those loud Calls to repentance
to signify in their sense, invitations to eat, drink, and be merry, because
they have more goods laid up for them. Thus the men of Samaria turned not to
him that smote them, because they saw an advantage arise from the blow: Isa 9.
10.
For they said in the pride and stoutness of their hearts, The bricks are fallen
down, but we will build with hewn stone; the Sycomores are cut down, but we
will change them into Cedars. By these, and several such like follies, do many
men transform their deliverance it self to a greater Judgment, and make the
saving of some temporal concernment, the occasion of their spiritual ruin.

Lastly, Corruptions and Lusts having got strength by frequent satisfactions,
and by a constant practice arrived to habits of sin, are not to be taken off by
common and ordinary means; but are as the Leprosy, when got into the walls,
Lev. 14.45.
that was not to be removed but by pulling down the whole house. The instances
of impossibilities are used to express the difficulty of reforming a customary
sinner; Jer. 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also
do good that are accustomed to do evil. It is a miracle of Mercy, and an
extraordinary triumph of Grace, if ever an habitual sinner be changed or
altered. For sin, by wilful and habitual enterprises, having gotten dominion,
makes the soul of man naturally incapable of the means of Repentance. The
Scripture tells us, what strange monsters men become by constant practices of
Iniquity: Zech. 7.12.
Their heart is as an Adamant, and exceeds the hardness of rocks; their
foreheads are as brass, Jer. 6.28.
that cannot blush at the reproaches of any wickedness. The Historian observes,
Tac. An. l. 110.
of those that are grown to the height of impiety, Novissima voluptas est
infamia; Infamy is their last pleasure; their understanding, which is naturally
impaired by frequent acts of sin, is debased to the narrowness of sense; and
therefore to the most stupid Creatures does the Holy Ghost compare them, as to
the Ox, Isa. 1.3.
the Ass, the wild-Asses Colt, the deaf Adder, Job 11.12. Psalm. 58.4. Hos.
7.11.
the silly Dove, and the wandering Sheep; and the advantage lies on the side of
the beast. In this condition they will blindly charge through a legion of
destroying Angels to come to their sinful enjoyments, and to attain their
wicked hopes. In such persons, all the gracious methods to repentance are
disappointed: For the Prophet observes, Isa. 26.10. that Let favor be showed
to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: So that goodness prevails
not; nor is wrath more succesful, for it is added, Ver. 11. Lord, when thy hand
is lifted up, they will not see: All Corrections and Chastisements bestowed
upon these, are like blows spent upon wild beasts, which do rather more
enrage, than tame them.

These are the dreadful causes which make good the supposition in the Text,
that bring the possibility into an actual being; and therefore require all our
industry and caution to avoid them, lest they betray us to the sadness of the
inevitable consequence: Which is next to be considered, it being.

The second part of the Text; Then will I punish you seven times more for your
sins. Wherein the Consequent, which is Punishment, and the necessity of the
Consequence, I will punish, do first require your contemplations.

1. That punishment should follow sin, there seems to be a necessity of nature:
For, were sin rightly considered, and did it appear as hateful in our eyes, as
it is in the eyes of God, and good men: we should see so much misery in it
self, separated from the horrid train of its effects and merits, that we should
deem it torment enough to satisfy any revengeful Adversary without the
superadditions of his fierce anger. Men reckon for punishments, not only the
loss of Life, or Limb, or Estate; but put into the Catalogue, a forfeiture of
privileges, the degrading from honors, and the imposition of base and servile
offices. All this is Sin in it self, for it is a renouncing of all our rights
to the Divine Goodness, a laying aside our robes of righteousness, a stripping
and making our selves naked of innocence, which is the glory and honor of the
Creature, and it is also a drudging, and service, of the soul to the carnal
appetite, which was appointed to be her slave. This seems to be so accounted by
God, for he is said to hide his face from the sinner; which though it admit
many other senses, yet may be also true in this, that he does as a Father, who
is unwilling to see his child carried about as a public shame, or behold him
panting upon a Wrack. And pious men apprehend it no otherwise: for the
transgression exacts more tears and groans from them, than the terrors of a
pursuing anger. There is indeed a different respect betwixt sin, and punishment
as commonly apprehended, because that is our own choice, when this is accounted
the effect of another displeasure; yet the event, diminutio capitis, a real
loss, is the same in both: which in one comes forth by way of emanation, in the
other waits the formality of a Judge and Sentence. But this may be thought a
notion too nice for our grosser apprehensions; and indeed, God's Justice is not
satisfied in it, as not fully answering his ends in punishing: For it is not
enough for the correction of the sinner, who by his sin being grown more
sensual, must be afflicted there where he is most delighted: Nor is it enough
for the terror of others, who cannot survey and be warned by our spiritual
losses. Therefore he has established between them a

2d. Consequence, as from a necessary cause to the effect, all the effects of
sin being afflicting and consuming. For wickedness burns as the fire, Isa.
9.18.
it devours the briars and thorns. Iniquity preys upon the Transgressour, if it
be let alone, till it has consumed him. For every sin does in its way and
measure either waste the body, fill it with diseases; abate its strength,
shorten its day, obstruct its lawful delights, and keep off the solid comforts
of life: or it impairs the reasonable Faculties, weakens the Understanding,
confines it to poor and low cares; limits, and restrains the Will, cloggs it in
its brave essaies, pinions it as to noble flights: discomposes the passions
with sad apprehensions, or frolicks of madness. Or else it plainly wastes his
Estate, brings the sinner himself from a plentiful Table to a morsel of bread,
and sends his Children to seek their meat in desolate places, Or else it
corrupts his Fame, makes his Memory an execration, and his Name an
astonishment. These are real punishments, which thus afflict the Transgressour,
and raise an horror in those that are about him: God having put a kind of
Nemesis, a vindicative Justice in the course of things, and chained Sin and
Punishment together, as the Romans did their Malefactors to the Soldiers that
were to be the Keepers or Executioners. But this is not all: for there is a

3. Necessity of the Consequence, which is that of Justice to the Merit: From
sin immediately flows guilt, which is an obligation to punishment answerable
unto it; and the execution of it depends not upon the bare efficacy of sin, but
upon the Rectitude of some Cause without, who, as a Judge or Prince, orders and
disposes those things which are apt to afflict or destroy the Offender. So God,
the Great Judge, and King of all the earth, does in justice prosecute the
Offenders, using and disposing the other Creatures for the execution of his
anger: Sometimes he makes the Air upon its wings to convey infection and
rottenness into our inward parts, as in the Pestilence; sometimes he causes the
Fire to kindle upon our houses, and a Flame to waste our illgotten stores.
Another time he calls the Beasts of the field, to come and devour: Or he alarms
the Nations to war, bids one people besiege another; to scoff at Kings and
Princes: Hab. 1.10.
to deride every strong Hold, and take them: Or, he admits the accusation of
the great Adversary of mankind, and suffers that greedy Executioner to lead the
guilty captive. 2 Timothy 2.26.
These, and several other ways has this Great Judge, to trace out sin with
punishment; and he uses each of them in their seasons, as his wisdom thinks
fittest, to convince the wicked, point out the fin, and declare the Glory of
the Judge. His punishments are al ways certain on the impenitent, though it be
not certain to us what way he will execute them.

Therefore those frequent complaints and scandals which men take at Providence,
as if not careful enough in observing this consequence betwixt sin and
punishment, because they sometimes see the wicked prosper, Psalm. 73.5.
(as they imagine) and to come into no misfortune, nor to be plagued as other
men, are false and vain, and arise from our own weakness, and impatience.

For first; It is a vulgar error, to think that there is no punishment but
what is obvious to our senses, so that unless we see the sinner clothed with
shame, ruined in his estate, or cut off from the face of the earth; men murmur,
Psalm. 73.11.
and will question, whether God knows, and doubt whether there be knowledge in
the Most High? For we do not see, or else take no notice of, the continual
decaies in the body of the finner, the daily wasting of his soul, the declining
of his reason more and more to brutishness and sensuality; we cannot behold the
cares and anxieties that do afflict his spirit, disquiet and continually
turmoyl his inward man; we see not when God gives him over to a reprobate mind,
and to vile affections; Romans 1.26, 28.
when he leaves him in the hardness of his own heart, by which he does as it
were shut him up in prison till he be brought forth to entertain the World with
his public Execution: and yet these are as real, yea, more dreadful
punishments, than loss of Life, and Fortune, and all; though not so visible,
yet more insupportable.

Secondly, It is another Mistake, when men think Outward prosperity to be
inconsistent with God's punishments. For even in the greatest wealth, and the
supreamest fortune, all the vindicative effects of sin may be in their
Execution: for, besides those less visible punishments, the very crimes, and
lusts themselves turn into a punishment; while they contend one with the other
which shall have the speediest satisfaction, and every one strives against the
natural checks of the light of Reason, (which often makes them boggle and start
at the Commission; vary and alter the designed times of execution; neglect the
present, and torment them with thousands of fears in expecting a future
opportunity; Pla. l. 9. de Rep. (...).
) the mind is so torn and distracted: that Plato concludes, If their breasts
were transparent, we should see such laniatus, and ictus, such galls and gashes
upon their minds, as rods of iron, and scourges of steel make upon the mangled
bodies of some condemned Wretches. Tac. An. 6.
And Tacitus makes Tiberius an instance of this: who in spite of his fortune,
his guards, and beastly divertisements at Capreae; could not but confess in his
Letter to the Senate, Tormenta pectoris, suasque poenas, etc. the tortures and
punishments his soul endured, to be such as he thought the Gods could not
inflict greater. Dii me deaeque pejus perdunt, quam perire quotidie sentio.
Thus Nero also, for all his fidling, singing, and rioting through many the
chiefest Cities of the Empire, had yet the conscience of his impieties, to
interrupt his pleasures, which made him tremble in the Temples, as if the Gods
did appear, like revengeful Furies, to his conscious spirit; or, Tac. An. 14.
facinorum recordatione nunquam timore vacuus, the memory of his crimes
appaling him with continual fears. These, and many other Instances, which
Historians have observed, show: No outward condition secures the offender, or
reprieves him from the deserved punishments.

Lastly, We might observe, that God traces sins even with outward punishment;
were it not for our own impatience, which arises rather from a too nice sense
of the injuries we suffer, and from an envy at the wickeds prosperity, than
from any neglect that God can be charged with. We would have fire come down
presently from Heaven, a thunderbolt immediately hurled, and an Angel with all
speed dispatched to remove the loathed sinner from our troubled sight: and
permit not that leisure, and those seasons which the Divine wisdom of our Judge
thinks fit to choose. Whereas if we did in patience possess our souls, curb and
depress their violent and inconsiderate motions; we might perceive, even to a
satisfaction, how God seldom, or never lets an infamous offender go off from
the stage of this world, without some evident marks of his Indignation; either
in his own Person, or those of his Family. For sometime God cuts him off in
such a way and manner; in such a time, and place; in his Arts, and by his own
wickedness, while he riots in his crime, or before he gathers the expected
fruit of his impious designs; that men may plainly conclude, that the Lord's
hand was in his ruin. Or, though the fire of Gods anger burn not clearly out
in his lifetime, or at his death: yet it may flame brightly on his children;
and his posterity, with the inheritance of his criminal gains, may have that of
his punishments. And this may be his punishment, as being within his prospect:
for before the darkness of death seal up his eyes, he may see the train laid
that will blow up his house; the follies, vanities, and lusts of some heir, or
cursed offspring, that will waste all he has gathered, and bury his name and
memory in the ruins of his house. Therefore God seems to limit his anger on
the posterity of the wicked to the third or fourth Generation, Exodus 20.5.
because their miseries may be within the foresight of the sinner, and have
the same men witnesses of the inflictions, that were of the offenses. The sad
apprehensions of which, joined with the awakened fears of an approaching
Judgment at the Throne of Christ, may make his end as comfortless as all the
fury of men can render the execution of a Malefactor. And these ways of
Providence justify the Righteousness of God in observing the consequence
betwixt sin and punishment. Add to this,

2. The terror of the Consequence, I will punish you seven times more. This
expression is so large, that it alarms all our fears, comprehends all that we
deserve, and whatsoever an Almighty wrath can inflict. For God by this does not
bound himself to definite degrees of punishing; because when we by an obstinate
continuance in sin, in despite of all his methods to repentance, have forfeited
all our rights to the Goodness of God, it must be only his pleasure, and our
capacity of suffering, that must give measure to his punishment; therefore this
seven times more may signify,

1. Greater and more punishments than those formerly inflicted: for when past
Judgments have left us mad upon our sins, his Wisdom may bring some new, fuller
of terror, and more pregnant with destruction, to bring us to our wits again.
Or his Justice may multiply our Miseries to a proportion with our Iniquities,
which are increased by our unprofitableness under foregoing corrections.
Besides, our case requires it; for every affliction that has passed over us
without any effects to amendment, have made our hearts harder: therefore if he
intend us any good, he must multiply, and agg randize his Strokes. So that
whereas God before did whip us with Rods, now he must do it with Scorpions: he
may add fears within to the terrors without; if before, his punishments came
singly, now he may amass them into troops, and bands; bring Desolation,
Poverty, Pestilence, a War within, and War without, all at once.

2. Punishments of another kind, and to other purposes: That whereas at first
he did chastise, and correct to amendment; now he may make us an Example, and
Terror round about. In his corrections he may retain his love, his
chastisements are reconcilable with his fatherly kindness. But he deals with
us as an Enemy, brings us into Judgment with him, when he pleads with us before
men; puts us to an open shame, and discovers our nakedness in sight of all that
go by the way; makes us an astonishment to them that see us; so that they wag
their heads, and say, These are the Men that took not God for their guide; This
is the People that forsook God their Savior; This is the foolish Nation, and
unwise, that did evilly requite the Lord that bought them, and thus shall it be
done to all them that forget God.

3. Punishments to Excision; his making both a full end of us, and of punishing
us. When he is weary of correcting, and shaming us, and weary of his own
repentings, as he was of those, Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more,
ye will revolt more and more? When he is tired out in his waitings for fruit
from barren fouls, then he cuts them off, and will not suffer them any longer
to cumber the ground; Luke 13.
then he will cut us off from being a people, and our name shall no more be had
in remembrance, nor shall we be reckoned among the Nations.

4. Punishments to Vengeance; when he casts the sinners into Hell, and there
makes their pains and sorrows as lasting as their sins would have been, had
they continued to Eternity. This is a farther degree of punishment than the
former; for God may cut off many, as to this life, for their transgressions;
and yet bound his wrath in the Grave, and not pursue them with Punishments in
the state of the dead. St. Paul says, many of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.30.
for the unworthy receiving of the Sacrament, were sick and weak, and fell
asleep, that is, died: but yet, that is too soft an expression to signify
their being damned: for in the language of Scripture, Isa. 57.1, 1.
the taking away of merciful men, from the evil to come, and the death of those
that walk in their uprightness, is called, their rest in their beds. But when
men have opposed, and obstinately endeavored to disappoint God in his end of
Judgments by impenitencie, we may with reason think they shall be turned into
Hell; for that is styled, the Congregation of Giants: Pro. 21.16. (...)
and that you know is the Title of notorious fighters against God. Thus all
these Punishments are comprehended under that number of seven times more: and
therefore render the Consequence exceeding terrible. Which yet is but just; For,

3. The Justice of the Consequence is in those words which are as a reason of
the increased punishments: I will punish you, etc. For your sins; that is,
because you have deserved them. For the horror of any punishments inflicted by
God, argues the Offense proportionably heinous: there being so great an Equity
in all the Judgments of God, that they never exceed, but for the most part are
beneath the transgression. So that if God so severely punish our not amending
after Judgments, it is because that Impenitencie is a most horrid provocation;
and such in truth it is, being a contempt and despite of all his Gracious and
Glorious Attributes. For,

1. His Wisdom is slighted, and an affront is put upon his infinite
Understanding, which did invent the Consequence betwixt Sin and Punishment; to
turn men from the vanity of their ways, that they might be advised not to dote
upon evil, which draws after it such an inseparable throng of miseries. But he
that has both tasted sin, and felt punishment, and yet thinks the first worthy
the hazard of the latter, and that one is a cheap purchase for the other;
reproaches the Divine Knowledge of having not sufficiently provided for the
attainment of his end.

2. The goodness of God is turned off with scorn: for if he has only afflicted
us, so that we live; it is clear, that he reserved us for his service, and the
embraces of his love; because, had he resolved no more to accept of our
worship, he would have shut us up in the pit, Psalm. 6.5.
where there is no remembrance of him, and closed us in the grave, where none
do give him thanks: but if he let us live, it is clear he intended that we
should praise his Name, and upon that to show us his Salvation. But if he that
was afflicted, yet not destroyed; terrified, yet not broken in pieces; shall
have no new songs in his mouth, nor will order his conversation aright to
please him who pulled his feet out of the mire, and set him upon a rock; such a
man does rudely scorn the kindness by which he was saved, and rejects the
courtship to a more endearing love.

3. The Power of God is undervalued, and his Omnipotency braved. For, he that
has escaped one stroke of God, and yet will not amend upon it, but still
affronts him to his face, must be concluded to think; God has wasted all his
Thunderbolts, emptied his Quiver, and broke his Sword in the past encounter;
and become like those poor Animals, who lose their sting in the first wound
they give. The routed Syrians had not renewed their Invasion of Israel, 1 King.
20.23.
had they thought the God of Jacob could triumph in the Valleys, as gloriously
as upon the Hills, and had strength enough for a fresher victory: This vile
esteem of God thrust their infatuated Prince upon another overthrow. The same
thoughts, if not formally, yet virtually, those men have of God, who having
hardly come off from one Judgment, yet do by repeating their sins, seem to
challenge him to another. For did we seriously think, that that God, who at
first did but lightly afflict, could plague us seven times more; that he which
brought the Pestilence upon our nation, could spread our own persons over with
Spots and Tokens; that he, who by a Flame consumed our goods, and houses, could
turn our bodies into ashes, and after that cast our souls into Hellfire; that
he, who has brought our enemies out to the battle, could give us up as a prey
to their fury; that he, who has gathered Foreign Nations against us, could
also turn the swords of every man into the heart of his neighbor, and appoint
each one as a slaughter-man of his brother; did we but consider what Judgments
can be brought upon us by an Almighty Arm: we should certainly follow the
Counsels of his first Providence; be ashamed that our Father has spit in our
faces, and not weary him till he smite them with a Leprosy, or make the earth
open to swallow us up. We should humble our selves more in the appehensions of
what might befall us, than be troubled, or murmur for what we already suffer,
lest God punish us seven times more for our sins.

The Text being thus considered; the Application of it will show us what we are
to think of our present and future condition. For Our case is the same with
theirs in the Supposition: as if we also had been the very People God had in
his prospect when he spoke this Text. We of this Generation have been a people
of wrath, and seem to have been born to be as Fuel for Judgments; or to have
been called from the Womb, and summoned from the lower parts of the earth, to
come forth and behold what desolations God can bring upon a Land, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein. For those plagues and miseries which did
use to be divided among several Ages, and to come singly, and in certain
Periods of time; have all fallen upon us, with as much speed as that of hasty
Messengers, one treading upon the heels of another; that we have had scarce
time to survey the wastes which one has made, ere another came to call for our
tears and wonder. Let us sit down upon our Ruins, and recount them if we can.
We have seen a tedious Civil War, with all the innumerable Series of its
miseries, and of its sins, bringing Poverty, and Desolation, upon the far
greatest part of the Kingdom; desiling most men with innocent blood,
introducing Schisms, Haeresies, Blasphemies, and Atheism; tempting men to
perjuries, and the practice of most damnable Arts; which iniquities ought to
fill us with more sorrows, than our outward miseries did.

When this was ended by a Mercy above our merits, and too great for our hopes,
in the restoring of our lawful Prince, and our ancient Rights, and yet neither
our late unhappinesses, nor present blessings, did prevail to repentance; but
God had waited three years, seeking the fruits of his Providence, and finding
none, yea, had granted one year more to the intercession of his own Goodness;
then came upon us a Foreign War. Wherein, though we have hitherto no reason to
complain of a want of mercy; because he has crowned our just battles with
success: yet still that which costs so much Blood, and Treasure, must be
accounted a Judgment; and it is no little misery to be necessitated by Arms to
maintain our own rights.

While we were thus busied with cares against men, God surprises us with new
fears from himself, and brings such a Plague upon us, that neither we, nor our
Fathers, nor their Forefathers, for many Generations, had ever known the like.

Ere the destroying Angel had finished his work here, and while he was raging
in many other places of the Nation, a merciless Fire and devouring flame, came
upon our chief City, the Queen of our Provinces, which consumed the prices of
many years labors, and those public Ornaments which had out-lasted the
injuries of many hundred Ages, in the space of far less hours. The sad
Consequences of which, are yet not known, as if clouded in its own smoke: but
we may conceive that as burning Mountains scatter their ashes, and spread a
desolation and barrenness over the neighboring Plains and Fields; so this
burning City, may overspread the lesser Towns and Villages with want of Trade,
and Poverty; and cast forth something of her ruins upon the whole Nation. But,
notwithstanding this is come upon us, which I conceive are greater punishments
than the Text supposes, yet the other part of the Supposition is also too true
of us; For,

We have not yet for all this hearkened unto the Lord, Alas! this is too poor
an Expression for us to say, We have not hearkened, for we have revolted more
and more; we are so far from forsaking our sins, that we have increased them;
made it our business to outvie Judgments with our Transgressions; as if
Punishments were Instructions to impiety, and it is too evident they have been
used as opportunities for greater Crimes. I am ashamed to rehearse them, they
are so brutish and abominable; besides, their number exceeds, as well as their
foulness affrights the memory: and indeed there is no need to represent them;
for our Iniquities are not only marked before the Lord, but they are also, as
written with a beam of the Sun, so plain, that he who runs may read them.

Thus therefore when our Case is wholly the same with the Supposition, what
remains for us, but a fearful looking for, and expectation of, God's more fiery
Indignation, that on us also the Consequence should be fulfilled, and that God
should punish us seven times more; that he should bring upon us greater, and
other sorts of Punishments. He has already punished us to Correction, and we
have not amended: Nay, we are not confounded, though he has punished us to a
terror and example; for he has called Heaven and Earth to witness; he has
cited all the Nations, that know us, in the world, to Judge betwixt him and us:
for he has pleaded against us in his Judgments, discovering our nakedness, and
putting us to an open shame. For all the world knows, that the righteous Judge
will not deal unjustly: and therefore in that he has brought upon us so great
destructions, it is certain we had greater abominations; for where Judgments
are engraven, on the reverse Iniquities are inscribed; there needs no more to
declare the guilt of Sodom, than to tell the Travelers as they go along, There
once was a City where there now is a pitchie Lake. And when the Mariners and
Ship-Masters shall sail by our Shores, and say, How is the Joyous City become
a desolation? They will soon subjoyn, How was the faithful City become an
harlot, and unrighteousness lodged in her? Therefore God has already punished
us to an Example, and there remains only now that he should punish us to
Excision and Vengeance, which himself only knows, how soon may come upon us,
and by what ways his wisdom will proceed to execution: we our selves may guess
by our sins and terrors that it is not far off.

I tremble to think, that he may make our proud and cruel Enemies to land upon
our Coasts, who shall sport with our blood, and make our labors the
ministeries to their lusts: who may drive us to seek the mercy of less
barbarous Indians, and leave the Land of our Fathers to their satisfaction. Or,
he may cut off us, and this good Land together, withdraw the Foundation of this
(as Histories tells us, he has done of other) Island, and let it sink from the
arms to the bottom of the Sea. Or, he may by some unheard of way, turn this
whole Nation into Hell, that have so long forgotten God. These are the horrors
of that Consequence, which we deserve should seize on us; and which certainly
will, unless we labor to prevent them.

But how can that be? Can it be by a continuance, and increase of sin? If so,
let us go on then, and let us increase our confidence; Let the Sons of Impiety
invent some new sin that may surprise the foresight of Eternity; let them find
out some bold, and brave transgression that will secure men from Omnipotency,
and terrify God himself from his own wrath. But alas! how can the potsheards
of the earth strive with their Maker? How can the small dust of the balance
contend with him that sits on the Circle of the heavens? Who ever hardened
himself against the Lord and prospered?

If then it cannot be done this way, can we do it by breaking off our sins by
repentance, and humbling our selves before the Smiter? Yes, this will do it:
For, the amendment of our lives is able to rescue us from our present miseries,
and preserve us from the evil that is yet to come. Such a change in man works
another in God; turns all his frowns into smiles; makes his Fury against, to
become Zeal for, us; alters the thunder of his threatenings, to the sounding of
his bowels; and his compassions and repentings will be kindled in him instead
of kindling the fire of his Jealousy; so that this will prevent that Ruin
which we see gathering about us.

But then the difficulty returns, How shall this repentance be wrought, if the
Judgments of God will not do it? For, though we may believe, many private
persons mourn in secret for the sins, and miseries of the Nation, yet this is
not enough; because, public sins must have a public repentance; besides, God
may take away these merciful men from the evil to come; and then by whom must
we look for a common deliverance? When there are so many Atheists and
Hypocrites, so many fools and half-witted Scepticks, so many factious and
voluptuous persons, as make up the greater bulk of this Nation; who all think
there is no need of repentance, or are resolved not to do it themselves: what
hopes can we have of a public amendment? There remains nothing visible for our
comforts but this, The Example, and Industry of those in Power to take away all
public abominations; this under God is our only ground for hope, and this by
his assistance will perform it, (unless our Iniquities come to the full, ere
they apply themselves to the work:) For Government is the soul of Society, and
Magistrates in Church and State are as the upper soul and Intellectual
faculties to guide the whole to safety, and honor: if these therefore be once
set right in a way that is good, I cannot say, They shall have all; but am
sure, they shall have many followers, and the tears of repentance will bedew
the public face of the Nation.

This I humbly conceive to be, in some measure, the duty of the Honorable part
of this Assembly, who have their share in Government. It lies upon you, within
the just limits of your power, to do that Right to God, to this your Country,
and to your own Honor, which are justly expected from you. For, if the Public
be guilty, You cannot be thought innocent: if we be miserable, You cannot be
happy. Let it not be said in following Generations, (if there shall be any
after this,) That You sat in Council, and the whole Nation committed folly.
Let not Posterity say, and future Historians write, These men were concerned in
the Public Justice, and yet Impiety was so high, that God brought such and
such dismal Plagues upon the Kingdom. Public miseries are taken as reproaches
of those who are in power to prevent public Sins. You have exceeded all
examples in your provisions for the Honor of your King, and our safety from a
Foreign Enemy: Let that move you now to exceed Your selves, do something also
for the honor of God, and the advancement of Righteousness. You have comforted
the hearts of the People by your Zeal against the Old Adversaries of our Faith;
let the same be exerted against all. Give some Reverence to Religion; that if
wicked men will not love it, yet they may not dare to despise it; that, if
their hearts will not renounce their lusts, yet let it not be safe to act them
in the face of the Sun. Give some power and force to Holiness; make some brave
Attempts, in spite of the Corruptions of our Age, to restore somewhat of the
Discipline of Christianity, that Wickedness may be clothed with shame, and be
the astonishment of a City and Nation. Consult the Honor of your own Assembly,
and let your Lives and Examples be as Sacred as your Laws: that men may praise
them, and not dare to violate these. If God shall be pleased by your means to
bring this great, yet miserable, People, to repentance; and to save them from
the depth of misery, on whose brink both You and We do all now stand: How will
all Generations call you blessed! your Memories will outlast Monuments of Brass
and Marble. God will make you rejoice with his Inheritance, and your Seed shall
possess the Land, in the fruition of all those comforts wherewith he satitates
righteous Hearts, and crowns wise Heads; For which, may his infinite mercy fit
you and us, through the merits of Jesus Christ.

To whom, with the Father, and the Eternal Spirit, be given all obedience, and
ascribed all Honor and Glory both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

