Immanuel The Salvation of ISRAEL. The Word of the Lord came unto me the
twelfth day of the sixth Month, in the year accounted, 1657. concerning the
Jews and scattered Tribes of ISRAEL, As I was waiting upon the Lord in spirit,
in Legorne in Italy, which in the Name of the Lord I give forth to be copied,
and sent throughout the World.

Written by a lover of Righteousness, a mourner over the scattered Tribes, a
seeker of the lost, that the Remnant may be saved,

J. P. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth
near Aldersgate, 1660.

The word of the Commandment of the Lord to his Servant concerning the
scattered Jews in Italy, Spain, Portugal, France Holland, and the rest of the
Regions, and every Island throughout the Earth and the Seas, to write these
words following to them all.
WHether you will hear, or forbear, this is the word of the Lord God unto all
you scattered Jews throughout the whole Earth, God of a truth is arisen to
gather unto himself his peculiar Seed, from the four winds of the Earth, Isa
(...) 25. Jer. (...) 7.8. Jer. 14, (...) Ezekiel 4^, end.
that Jacob may possess and inhabit his inheritance, and the Seed of Israel
the Holy Land.

And according to the Prophets, he has began at the North, and is streching,
and has streched forth his Arm over the South, and over the East, and over the
West.

And behold it comes to pass, and is at hand, and not as a day afar off, but
even nigh unto the door, that the Lord will separate of all Nations, both Jew,
and Gentile, the just from the vile, him that fears God, from him that feareh
him not; him that keeps the Law of God which is written in his heart,
(through the sanctification thereof by the power of the Lord ruling in his
conscience, mind, spirit and life from him that in words which professes God,
and his Law and Statutes, and ordinances, and yet walks in his life and daily
practices, contrary to the Law written in the heart, which God spoke unto Moses
saying, De(...) 14; (...)
The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou may do it,
See, I have set before thee this day life and good, death and evil.

And unto ye, Oh Jews is the same come, and before you, in the Name of the Lord
coming unto you, do I set life and death, light and darkness, in this the day
of the Lord, which is dawned unto a measure of the Remnant, even in this day
which is light and not darkness, wherein the promise of God is fulfilled, and
it came to pass according to the Prophefie, in a day when it was neither night
nor day,

And not as from the traditions of my forefathers, or the generations of men in
the corrupt and polluted nature, in the degeneration from God, and alienation
from the Covenant of life and promise: (who confessed the Messiah as this
generation does, to be come in words, with their corrupted tongues, and
polluted lips, but in their works, and by their practice and life, make his
coming void, and of non-effect unto them) neither by the reading of the
Scriptures came I to know that he was come as he is come, but by the spirit of
the Lord, (by which I was chosen in the womb, and sanctified in the day of my
birth, by which also I am separated from the Land of my natural nativity, and
brought unto the feeling of sorrows in a strange Land for your sakes) I come to
know, and now to declare unto you, that Immanuel, who is God with us, who is
the light of the world, the Messiah in the power of God, who is a spirit, is
come reigning in spirit in the hearts of his people, over whom, and in whom he
rules as King, treading down, and trampling upon all principalities and powers,
making the Earth new, and the Heavens also, warring against all which is
contrary to his own pure nature, in many, until he has put all his enemies
under his feet, and then will he give up the Kingdom to the Father, that God
may be all in all.

And for this cause also, even for your sakes (who are of most men despised in
heart) I pass as one desolate, and despised, and hated and mocked of many, and
many more of the nation of my natural birth would gladly have my blood; yet am
I not forsaken of him that sent me with his message unto you of salvation, and
everlasting glad tidings of Redemption.

And now he that has an ear, let him hear, and a heart to perceive, let him
understand.

Be it known unto you all, That God has more regard to your souls then that
you should perish in your sins, and your souls is more precious in his eye (for
which he has ordained life everlasting, for as many as come to believe) then
the pleasure and ease of your corrupt carcases, which are to rot in Graves and
Sepulchers.

And therefore for the Lord to regain his own Image which is lost in man
through fall in the transgression, and to r^store man unto the same
uprightness, where in man was created which was the promise of God unto man in
this wise, the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head.

Behold unto you it is given forth and declared, for the redemption and
restoration of the seed, the Messiah came, and now is coming the second time
without sin unto salvation, even he comes now in spirit and in power, who was
the Rock whom your Fathers in the Wilderness forsook; and the light of the
world whom your Fathers slew at Ier^salem, which brought a grievous curse upon
you of being a people trodden upon by all the world, and not only so, but the
most lamentable thing and curse which is over you, for which cause my soul
mourns for you, that such cruel hard-heartedness, distrust, doubt, jealousies
and unbelief, coveting, fraud, deceit, dissimulation, and Hypocrisy has
veiled your hearts, and grossly darkened your understandings.

Oh that is the worst of all! that is the greatest curse, in how much
throughout ages, the Jews have been given over unto vile affections,
hard-heartedness, sin and unbelief; which is the cause why ye cannot rightly
speak of the things of God, and understand the Prophets writings which were
spoken, Ezekiel 2.
and do stand as mysteries, yea deep mysteries to your thick hearts, your
understandings being covered as with a thick cloud of darkness, Hos. (...) 9.
Jer. 2^ Jer. 3^ Jer. 3^.
(which now we the seed Abraham, of the true Jew inwardly, do walk by the light
thereof as a Pillar of fire by night) and therefore said the Lord by his
Prophet, for want of knowledge my people perish.

The Prophets they prophesied of the M^ssiah to come in spirit, in a mystery to
the whole world Jew and Gentile, so that when he came he was not received but
by the Remnant in them days, as he is received now in these days; but unto
whom the spirit of wisdom and understanding was given, to read and understand
that which the Prophets spoke forth in Parables, to the whole world of mankind,

And therefore ye Jews now in these days, ye ought not to speak of God, or to
name his name in perverseness, whilst ye have to be reformed in your hearts,
minds and spirits, but ye ought to hear the Message of the Lord God, and to
ponder it in your hearts, that you may see how far ye are yet from the
Promise, being not come in truth, in spirit and in life, unto the condition
thereof fulfilled and made up in you, until which ye cannot justly expect the
fulfilling of the promise unto you in the substance.

For whilst you are in your sins, as your Fathers were in their sins in the
day that they slew Jesus at Jerusalem, you cannot but as men in the flesh, look
with any other than an eye of flesh, for a God of flesh to come among you, and
to save you by the Arm of flesh. Oh blind and sottish, of dull ears and dark
understandings! and so could not your Fathers, neither can you now as you
stand, see him that comes to ransom the seed in spirit and in power.

Behold none other but Immanuel the Messiah which is God with us, the light of
the world that is come unto us, and is passing through the whole world, who
will smite the earth with the Rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
he shall slay the wicked. 1.4.


Now this is wisdom, to know and understand that birth and nature of the
wicked in you, and to feel the power of that breath in you, thereby to taste of
the pangs of that slaughter in you, and then ye will witness the Messiah come
in you in spirit, (...) 1.2. ^^e. 3.
and in wisdom, and in a deep and quick understanding, making the Heavens new
in you, and the earth new in you, as Solomon says, God has set the world in
man's heart, wherefore man cannot find out the work that God makes from the
beginning to the end thereof; he that has an ear to hear, and heart to
understand, may now come to discern and read (Nations, Kingdoms, Countries,
Armies, Philistines, Egyptians, Aliens, the seed of the Jew, and the generation
of the Gentile) in him, Mountains, heaps of Stons, Sodom Built, and Gomorrah
fenced, Jerusalem trodden down, Zion and her Daughter in bondage, and her seed
in great Captivity, lamenting as in solitary places, left and forsaken as in a
wilderness, and as a Virgin Daughter in a strange land altogether left
comfortless, the poor, the widow and the fatherless, the blind, the halt, and
the maimed, all left without pity; I say, search your hearts in secret, and see
if this be not truth, the light of Immanuel, answering in all your consciences
and hidden parts.

Again, I say wait upon God, with your minds staid upon the light in all your
consciences, and thereby God will show you, even by the coming of his son Jesus
the Messiah the light of the World, the fulfilling of the Law and of the
Prophets in you, (that is to say, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and thy Neighbor as thy
self,) this is the sum and substance of all, which the light in all your
consciences if ye follow it in your minds, will perfectly lead to the
fulfilling of; and then ye will know that Immanuel the light of the World, came
not to destroy the Law but to fulfill the Law; that the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit; which is according to the leadings of the light in all our consciences,
and this is from the Lord both to the Jew and the Gentile.

Furthermore to the scattered Tribes of the house of Israel, this is the word
of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who is the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, who by a mighty hand and outstretched arm, by the hand of Moses his
Prophet and Messenger unto the seed in Bondage in great Captivity, brought the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt: Even unto you Oh ye Jews this is
the word of the dreadful Lord God of Hosts, and as a sign unto you, and among
you, and in you, it shall stand unto the end of your days, if you perish in
unbelief and in your sins; that the Messiah is come, Jesus whom your Fathers
slew through unbelief and hard-heartednesse in their days, who slew him for
saying in words, that which they themselves did own concerning themselves in
the substance, according to their profession, that is to say, he declared that
he was the Son of God, and therefore they put him to death as a Blasphemer, and
they said that God was their Father, yet were in their wilfulness so far
blinded that they could not discern that their words in manner of the
declaration, tended to the same thing, and was of the same nature, and this
shall stand the sign thereof unto the end, if ye perish in unbelief to your
perpetual judgment, that he has lightened you all with his true light which
shines in all your conscences, which shows you in secret the deceitfulness
of your hearts, and convinces you in your minds, of lying, cheating, coveting,
envy and of all sin and unrighteousness, (which is not according to the Law of
God, written in your hearts, this sign) the light in your consciences shall
never dye in you, which all your burning Lamps, and washings, and Altars, and
vails, and holiest of holiest, and all the other ceremonies were but signs and
sigures and shadows of this everlasting sign and substance, which shall
perpetually stand to justify you if you love it, and follow it, and walk
according to it, or to condemn you for evermore if ye hate it, and walk
contrary to it.

And be it also known unto you, that if you expect another Messiah then him
that is come (which is Immanuel, God with us in spirit and in life and power)
leading out of sin, the land of bondage and darkness, and in virtue, and in
wisdom, and in counsel, and in judgment, not judging according to the seeing
of the eye, or hearing of the ear, but with righteous judgment in spirit, who
searches every spirit, and the bottom of every heart with his light in every
conscience; ye are but Seekers unto this day for flesh to come, yet farther to
be an ease unto your flesh, and to purchase more ease and liberty for your
flesh, in which state ye already stand, even in the ease and lust of the flesh,
which God Almighty by the coming of his Son will destroy, for because of sin
and iniquity, and men living in the ease and lust of the flesh, the Lord God
will hasten judgment upon the earth.

Now consider, search and see, ponder it and lay it to heart, that you may know
what you have waited for; that you may understand whether you have waited and
sought for the true thing to come to pass, that henceforth ye may seek aright,
else you may all wait till your limbs fails you, and your eyes perish in their
holes, and in the end you fail of the expectation and fulfilling of your vain
conceptions, and blind imaginations; wait therefore in spirit in humility of
heart, that Immanuel the light of the World, Jesus the Messiah, by whom ye are
lightened, ye may come to know and feel the power of his light in your
consciences, by it leading you out of all your sins and iniquities, which is
Satan's bond, the Devils chain of darkness, linking you together in
hard-heartednesse, and binding you in the lusts, ceremonies, customs, and
traditions of blindness and ignorance, thereby ruling in your minds and
spirits, Isa. 28.
that knowing him, ye may also know by him the breaking of the bonds of Hell,
and the disanulling of the Covenant, which is made with death, and ye set at
liberty in life and spirit, Hab. 1.13.
to serve the Lord God of life who is a spirit (and of purer eyes than to
behold iniquity or countenance sinners in their evil ways) in the uprightness
of your hearts and integrity of your souls, that ye may be made unto him the
praise of his name throughout the whole earth, according to his promise, that
so ye may descern and feel the curse removed and taken from you, which for many
ages past, has stood upon the heads of the generations of your forefathers,
and remains unto this time upon you, until the eye of your minds which the God
of this world has blinded, be opened by the Messiah, Isa 42.7.
which is come and coming to open the eye of the blind, and to give the simple
an understanding to discern the day of redemption, Isa. 35.8.
and to be made partaker of his hour of salvation, which is held and hid in a
mystery, who is appointed for a way, and to be a high way for the ransomed of
the Lord, such as the wayfaring men, though fools shall not err therein.

Oh how do I mourn! Oh how do I travel as in pain and great grief and sorrow
for your sakes O ye Jews! reading, seeing and feeling, that darkness which is
over your hearts, even the same which was, and is in Egypt (Spiritual Sodom and
Egypt) even such thick darkness as may be felt.

Oh why do ye yet in your hearts seek murder? Why say and contend ye for more
blood? Seeing the slaughtered Lamb is a^ready come, whom you say is to come,
and not yet come; for if he were to come, whom I declare in the name of the
Lord is already come, behold your generation are to be his slaughterers, and
the shedders of his innocent blood, for the fulfilling of the Prophets, that by
the offering of his blood once for all, he may for ever perfect them whom God
sanctifies, read Isa. 53. Chapter, which is fulfilled, and see how far you put
our selves from salvation, by seeking yet cruelty and murder in your hearts,
which your unbelief and wilfulness is the ground of.

How many signs would ye have? ye have heared how many were showed unto
Pharaoh, yet would not he let Israel go free, and will ye have, or do ye seek
greater then the Sun to be darkened, Joe^ 2 31.
and the Moon not to give her light, and the stars of heaven to fall? and is
not this manifest unto thousands? And cannot you yet read within? Will you say
that you believe all that the Prophets have written? Or can you say so, and
speak truth, whilst you have not that spirit by which the Prophets writ forth
the Scriptures? Or could your Fathers understand the writings of the Prophets,
who wickedly persecuted and slew the Prophets? Nay, nay.

Behold this is the word of the Lord unto you all, Jesus the Messiah has cast
his Rod before Pharaoh, the Prince of darkness in you, and it is become a
serpent which wounds you in secret (I speak unto you that have any sense or
the least feeling of God) and it devours your rods, yea and will eat your life,
and will bring all the plagues of Pharaoh upon you, (for as much as your
unbelief is but his sin) until destruction unto death as a flood overwhelms
you, except ye repent, that God may be entreated for you.

And know ye that God has been long suffering, and now shows his mercy in
this visitation of his love unto you, showing you the Messiah which is come,
Isa. 49.6.
and has lightened you, and is the light of the Gentiles also, that he may be
the salvation of God unto the ends of the earth. Isa. 60.1.13.19.


Of a truth from this ye cannot be hid, neither can ye in righteousness deny
but that ye are lightened with the light of the world, Isa. 42.6.
which is Immanuel the light of the Gentilies, which also enlightneth the
understanding of the Jews, else could not the Jews unto this day understand
that Moses was a Prophet of the Lord, for he was and is the same, even the word
from the beginning, which God said unto Moses is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and
in thy heart, which showed him the Law to be nigh, and not to be sought for
from a strange Land, by which the children of Israel were condemned for their
sins, so that the guilt thereof stood upon their heads from year to year, as
in like manner the guilt of your transgressions stands unto this day upon your
heads, which your sacrifices cannot clear you in your consciences from, for it
is impossible that the carnal things can make satisfaction unto insinite
justice, which stands over, and measures all transgression, and therefore
says the Prophet, Wherewith shall I come before the Lard? Mic. 6.6.7.8.
and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands
of Rams? Or with ten thousand Rivers of oil? Shall I give my first borne for my
transgression, the fruits of my body, for the sin of my soul? He has showed
thee O man what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee? but to do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

In this ye are all concluded with the great idolaters of the earth, and with
the Arminans and heathens also, they have their Images without, that is to say,
beads, erosses, p^ctures, vessels, and herein the Jews in the nature are also
one with them, who have their synagogues, and vessels, and Offerings, and knows
not him whom you imagine you make offerings unto, and these are offerings of
strange fire unto the Lord, for which cause God has not regard unto your
serviers; Jer. 2.3
for your Fathers forsook the fountain of living mercies in their days, and
then he spoke by the mouth of his Prophet, saying who has required these
things at your hands? your solemn meetings are abomination unto me.

And ye are now in the same footsteps of your forefathers in the corrupted way
of sin, Isa. 1.11 12, 13, 1^
and blind path of hard-heartedness and unbelief, and yet ye say, ye worship
God aright; and furthermore this is your great sin and dangerous evil, as other
professions, have their abominable Idolatries in the show without, your Idols
are set up in your hearts, and ye put the stumbling block of your iniquity
before your face; read diligently with true understanding, Isa. 8.14.15. Ezekiel.
1^ 4.
and mark your stumbling offense and fall.

And with you in the same nature all the Protestants, Presbyterians,
I^dependants, Baptists, Seekers, Ranters, and the rest called Christians in
general do worship, although you and they are all diverse in the Traditions of
your and their Fathers in the manner of the practicing your services, yet in
the substance, you are but one, that is to say, Cains nature ruling in you all,
who offered a sacrifice and killed the just in him; he killed just Abel without
him, and that nature which murdered Abel without him slew the just within him,
and so your several words, and diversities of opinions, which stands but in
the shadow, is not at all that which makes a difference, in the ground and
substance, being all but in one nature of transgression, and way of the ungodly
in unrighteousness; and you cannot one stain or spot another, or take glory
unto your selves over another, seeing the best of all your sects upon the face
of the earth, are but speckled beasts, and parti-colored birds, and not one of
you all are come into the way of the promise of God, which is come to pass,
wherein the ransomed of the Lord shall only walk, and no unclean thing can
tread therein.

And as for us who are the remnant of God, and his seed gathered to his honor,
praise, infinite, endless, everlasting glory; all ungodliness and worldly
lusts our life abhors, and we are the redeemed of the Lord, through the
purchase of the blood of Immanuel, the light with us, and in us, by which we
are kept in the pure fear of the Lord God eternal, to spread his name among
you, unto whom also the promise is, that the seed shall be gathered.

God has begun in the north Islands to perfect his praise throughhout the
earth; and because the Lord has redemeed us from Nations, Kindreds, Countries,
tongues and people, we are despised of all Nations, both Jew and Gentile, and
of the scornful people of our own Nation England, are called Quakers, who are
the Servants of the Lord in spirit.

This is written by an upright tender lover of all souls, John Perrot.

THE END.

