THE Sole and Sovereign Way OF ENGLAND'S being saved, Humbly proposed

By R. P. Minister of the Gospel.

O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved; how
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?

Jer. 4. 14. -- In his favor is life.

Psalm. 30. 5. Poenitentia amara est quidem ad tolerandum, saluberrima autem ad
convalescendum.

Bern, in Sermon. de verbis Sapient. Ut malorum omnium haec causa est, quod Deus
offensus faciem abscondit, ita plena salus ab unico favore ejusdem, est
expectanda.

Moller. LONDON, Printed by W. G. and are to be sold by J. Hancock, at the
three Bibles in Pope's Head Alley, N. Ponder at the Peacock in Chancery Lane,
and W. Adderton, at the three Falcons in Ducklane. 1671.

TO The Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS ALSTON, Baronet.
Much Honored SIR,
THE Treatise here ensuing, being calculated, not only for the weal of greater
Communities, as Nations, Cities, Towns, but also of lesser Societies, as
Families, yea and particular persons: In tenders of my service to your Self,
and your so worthily Honored Lady, I make bold here, what it is, to present
it: and the rather, because it pleases the Lord, by a distemper, which so often
renews its onsets upon you, to give you so frequent memento's of that Turn,
which Moses declares to be the inevitable fate of all indefinitely. Thou
turnest man to destruction, and say, Psalm. 90. 3.
return ye children of men. Thus we run here a short round, and soon come to
our races end; fetch but a turn, as it Comparat oursum vitae nostrae gyro* etc.
Calv. in loc.
were, and then return back again. Now may the Lord be pleased so to sanctify
those frequent memento's of your bodies turn to destruction, as to advance more
and more thereby that happy turn of conversion, here treated of, and so thereby
bring you more and more under the shines of his face, and comfortable
displayes, and refreshing beams of his favor. I have often thought, and
sometimes upon occasion declared, that however things appear to common sense,
yet certainly that is best for us here, that state, that condition, those
dispensations, be they what they will, though never so afflicting, that are
most effectual, and have the fairest and most essential influence, as to the
advancing of our spiritual good here, and our eternal happiness hereafter; that
is best for us in our way, and where we take up only for a while, that does
advantage us most at our journeys end, and where we must stay and abide by it
for ever; that, not which pleases us best for a moment, but profits us most for
ever, for things are here, and are so to be counted of here, as they relate to
eternity, and as to what is spiritual and everlasting, which being the main and
chief, and that which is of greatest concern, is in every thing to be the rule
of the rest. And because afflictions many times are most conducing here, hence
the Lord is pleased often to afflict those most here, which he intends most
good to hereafter. And truly let our present condition be what it will here, if
the Lord does but please to mould it for our eternal weal hereafter, it is an
act of infinite mercy. Lord, lance here, sear Domine hic ure, hic seca, mod^ in
aeternum parcas.
here (cried Austin) so thou spare but hereafter; so truly it matters not much
what God does with us here, so he spare but hereafter. And by what he does with
us, or to us here, does but the more fit us, and the better mould us for
Feliciter infelices, infeliciter felices.
himself, and glory hereafter. How many are happy in being seemingly miserable,
while others are miserable in being seemingly happy? because their seeming
happiness hinders their real; for having Psalm. 55. 19.
no changes, therefore they fear not God: so that to live still in prosperity,
as is said of Nabal, and not to experience those 1 Samuel 25. 6.
changes as others do, nor be in those troubles as others are, as is said of
the foolish Psalm. 75. 5.
and the wicked, is no such desirable state, as many deem, but dangerous. It
is said of our Edward the fourth, Never lived Prince whom adversity more
hardened Difficile est in honor esse sine tumore, in praelatione sine
elatione, in dignitate sine vanitate. Bern.
to action, nor prosperity softened to voluptuousness. Edward the sixth was
wont to say, No danger to the godly, unless by wealth and prosperity. And we
see David himself, though a man after God's own Psalm. 30. 5.
heart, yet in his prosperity he grew secure. It is said of Moab, He has been
Jer. 48. 11.
at ease from his youth, and he has settled on his lees, and has not been
emptied from vessel to vessel; neither has he gone into captivity, that is, he
has not been hurried up and down from place to place, Non immutavit
habitationem, non suit ^edibus suis pulsus, etc. nullam adversitatem* expertus
est. Theodoret. i^s locum.
as Israel was, etc. and what follows? therefore his taste remained in him, and
his sent is not changed: his pride, impiety, and impurity still continued: for
it is said, he magnified himself against the Lord, and we have heard of the
pride of ^. 26. 29.
Moab, etc. Even as Wines not being drawn off their lees, and put into other
vessels, are not meliorated, but retain their first taste and sent. So we read
of others, who being settled on their lees, Zeph. 1. 12.
and not being emptied from vessel to vessel, they say in their hearts, The
Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil, that is, they grew stark
Atheists, boldly scorn God and men, deny God's providence, and make as if he
was a very Idol, and regarded not, nor took notice of the affairs of men; and
others, because God kept silence, and did not punish them, Ps. 50. 21.
they thought God such a one as themselves. Now certainly, it was better our
lives were made up of nothing but changes, than to come to such a pass, and not
to have our souls blessed and enriched with so great a good, as the fear of God,
which is said to be the treasure of Kings, and Is. 33. 6.
which the Lord has declared to man from heaven to be his wisdom, and which,
Job 28. 28.
issuing forth into obedience to God's commandments, Solomon, the wisest King
that ever was, and one inspired by God, has concluded, and left upon record,
Eccles. 12. 13.
to be the whole and all of man. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter, (...) quia hoc omnis homo, vel hoc omne, homo est.
Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. It is
in the Hebrew only, this all man, that is, as it may be rendered, this is all
man, or all this is man, man indeed, and this only is truly and properly man,
that which speaks man indeed. And without this, man at his best state, as to
the very quintessence, and greatest confluence of all Psalm. 39. 5.
other things, is but altogether vanity. And this was that which King David his
father, when he was to dye, left him in charge for to do, as whereby to show
himself a man, which he therefore the rather commends unto others: Now the 1
King. 2. 1, 2, 3
days of David drew nigh, that he should dye, and he charged Solomon his Son,
saying; I go the way of all the earth, be thou (...) and eris in virum, i. e.
praesta^te* virum. Pisc.
strong therefore, and show thy self a man: and how must he do it? And keep the
charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, etc. And we can never indeed show our selves men, unless we do
this, but are as brutes. Man that is in Psalm. 49. ^^.
honor, and understands not, i. e. so as to fear God, and depart from evil,
which is the only true wisdom and understanding, is like the beasts that
perish. And God is said to tread down such as dirt, and -- 119. 118, ^. ^.
to put them all away as dross yea to take them away as dung, till it be all
gone, 1 King. 4. 10.
though never so great, but the godly he has set apart, as persons of honor
for Psalm. 4. 2, 3.
himself, to be for his honor, and high and excellent uses here, and then to
be happy in and with himself for ever hereafter. And O that the Grandees and
great ones of the world would at length know, and be thoroughly convinced of
this! that this is man, and this is true greatness, and grandeur indeed, To
fear God, and keep his commandments, to pay to him, who is their maker, owner,
and benefactour, all due observance; to look upon the study and glory of God as
the importantest employment, and accordingly to give up themselves to it; to
have honorable apprehensions, and highest estimations of him, strongest
affections toward him, and wholly to devote and dedicate themselves to him; to
have the very drift, aim, and bent of their lives for God and his glory, and
heaven and salvation; so to serve, honor, and please God here, as to come to
enjoy him for ever hereafter. And as for the honors and profits of the world,
and the sensual pleasures and delights of the flesh, to contemn them, and the
rather, when Nemo dignus nomine hominis, qui unum diem velit esse in voluptate.
Tullius. Major sum, and ad majora natus, quam ut mancipium sim corporis mei.
Seneca.
that a very heathen could say, that he deserved not the name of a Man, that
would wast but one day in pleasure; and another, that he was greater, and born
to greater things, than to be his bodies bondslave. And when Titus the
Emperor, though a Pagan, sitting on a time in company, could cry out, O my
friends, I have lost a day, in regard he had spent it without doing some good.
To think O amici mei perdidi diem, etc.
that book worthiest reading, which is of God's own inditing, and which King
Alphonsus is said, notwithstanding all his other employments, to spare time to
read forty times over, and that with Comments and Glosses; and which Queen
Elizabeth, after her Coronation, being presented with, received with both
hands, and kissing it said, that it had ever been her chiefest delight, and
that it was a book she would often and often read over. To be looking, not so
much to the things which are seen, for they are temporal, but the things not
seen, for they are eternal, and to give them the preeminence; to be thinking
where you shall be thousands of years hence; and after your fluctuating
condition for a few moments here, what must be your standing and eternal estate
for ever hereafter. To judge, that but for the concerns of Gods glory, and your
soul's here, and the fruition of that future good hereafter, it was not worth
the while to have been born. To have the resolves of your hearts continually to
obey God, and their desires to enjoy him; not only to know what is virtuous,
but to be virtuous, the actual possession of one virtue being preferrable to
the bare speculative knowledge of all. The more God honors and does for you,
the more to honor and do for him, and not to be like those great persons and
wits, who unmindful of that 1 Cor. 4. 7. are (as The Honorable Robert Boil.
an Honorable person expresses it) like those ungrateful clouds, that obscure
the Sun that raised them; and so do they the glory of that God, who advanced
them to that height: but to resemble and be like those winged Cherubims in the
Tabernacle, whom (as the same Honorable person expresses it) all the Gold and
Jewels that glittered about, and all the clouds of incense that fumed before
them, could never divert from a fixed posture toward the Ark of the Testimony,
which contained the law and the mercy seat. So to be still eyeing of God, and
to have your whole life nothing else as it were, but a continual attendance
upon him, and a converse with him, and having made him your portion, to devote
all you have, and are, to him and his service; and as you receive more than
others from him, so to work more for him. It was an excellent speech to this
purpose, that of Henry the Great, King of France, and savored much of true
grandeur, and nobleness of spirit indeed: When I was born (says he) there were
thousands of others born besides, what have I done for God more than they? and
so that of King James, in his book dedicated to Prince Henry, that he would
have him remember, that he differed not in stuff, but in use from the rest of
the people, and that by God's ordinance, Kings as well as others were bound to
read the Scriptures. This is (...) 17. 18, 19, 20.
now the true grandeur, and that which exalts great ones indeed, and renders
them the glory and delight of the places where they live; as is said of Titus,
before mentioned, that for his virtues, and his sweet and prudent government,
Deliciae humani generis. Princeps bonus, orbis amor.
he was styled the delight of mankind; and his Motto was, All the world falls
in love with a good Prince. It is said of King Edgar, that he was a man indeed
but of little stature, but his excellent virtues styled him honor and deliciae
Anglorum, honor and rosa Regum, Anglici orbis flos and decus, etc. And the love
and favor of Religion made our Edward the sixth, to be called another Josias,
and occasioned that lugubrous Epicede at his death.

-- Vester corruit omnis honos.
Nam Regum decus, and juvenum, flos spesque bonorum,
Deliciae seculi, and gloria gentis erat.
Dignus Apollineis lachrymis, etc.
Although Gold (as one well observes) comes from the earth, none despises it;
and though dross and rust comes from the Gold, none regards it: the virtuous
coming from mean parentage are honorable, and the vicious from noble, Tota
licet v^^ teres, etc.
are contemptible. The very Heathens had such a notion of virtue, as being the
-- Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Juvenal.
only true Nobility; it is Virtue, not Escutcheons; grace, not race or place,
that truly ennobles: and how much more then piety, called in sacred Writ, the
glory of God, Romans 3. 23. the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. the divine nature, 2
Pet. 1. 4. and what indeed is Godliness, but Godlikeness, a sparkle as it were
of the divine nature, a ray of the very glory of God himself, a sacred and
heavenly impress of God upon the soul, framing it and the whole man to live
according to God. It is the souls application of it self to God, as (...).
its end, and in its actings as its exemplar; a following of God, and bringing
of a man to be after his own heart; and therefore as God is the best of Beings,
piety must needs be the best of blessings: and it is the presence or absence of
this, which, as the main, makes a man indeed something or nothing, great or
mean, honorable or vile, truly happy or miserable. What are glorious garments
Quid prodest esle, quod esse non prodest?
upon a dead carcass, sweet flowers upon a dead corpse? and such are riches and
honors, and learning without religion. And hence it is said of Augustus, that
the name of piety was more esteemed Gratius ei suit nomen pietatis, quam
potestatis. O religio gloriosa, mirabilis, quae men's cogitare? quis intellectus
plene cognoscere, quae lingua sufficienter, and digne extollere te potest? O
Margarita praefulgida, rutilantior auro, splendidior Sole, tu thesaurus super
autum, Angelis and Deo hominem reddens conformem, res nobilissima sub coelo, in
coelo. etc. Bernard.
of him, than the name of power; and this made Bernard to break forth into such
high encomia of piety. O piety, glorious, admirable, what mind can think, what
intellect can understand, what tongue can sufficiently and worthily extol
thee! O shining pearl, more bright than gold, more splendid than the Sun, a
treasure above Gold, rendering man like unto Angels, yea God himself, the
noblest thing under heaven, yea in heaven. And when this shall come to be the
blessing of Nations, and what the Scriptures tend to convince of, great ones
shall come to be convinced of too, and accordingly steer their course, viz.
that we cannot be happy or wise, but by being good, nor avoid the greatest of
miseries, but by avoiding of sin; then shall Nations be advanced, and lift up
in true grandeur indeed, and then we may (as the forementioned Honorable
person expresses it) expect to see indeed the golden Age elsewhere then in
Poets dreams. And now that this may be more and more the blessing of You, and
your family, and that its grandeur and glory, which is the glory of heaven, of
Angels, yea of God himself, and that all your changes, and daily experiences of
your frailty and mortality, may be more and more influenced, to be subservient
to the promoting of that which is the whole and all of man, as also that all
spiritual blessings especially, may be more and more multiplied upon you and
all yours, is and shall be the prayer of him who is

SIR, Your Worships, in all Christian Observance, much obliged R. P.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou have here held forth unto thee the only sovereign way of England's weal,
its proper Salve for all its Sores, and Peccatum vulnus, and poenitentia
medicina. Chrysostom.
proper remedy for all its maladies; and this taken out of the Divine
prescripts of God's own Word, and therefore authentic, yea and experienced as
very effectual, by many proofs and probatum est's that are upon it: and let us
therefore humbly and earnestly, without any further delay, (as the Church and
people of God formerly) solicit the great Physician of Nations to make
application of it, and it will certainly do, it never having yet failed. We
have tried other ways and means, and have found them vain, and inffectual; let
us at length jointly and universally make an assay as to this. Is there (says
the Prophet Jeremy) no balm in Gilead, Jer. 8. 22*
is there no Physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my
people recovered? Gilead was full of balm, and famous for plenty of the best
and most sovereign balsam and ablest Physicians, but what are all if not made
use of? how should a people's hurt be healed, or health recovered, when the
Physician is Conqueritur quod civitas perseveraverit in delicto, nec
poenitentiam recepit, non tamen non deessent sacerdotes and praecepta legis.
Benignus quidem Medicus affert remedia, illi vero quae suggereba^ Medicus,
respuerunt. Theodoret. in locum.
not made to? nor the proper remedies made use of, but slighted, and neglected?
So that England's hurt is not at this day healed, and its health recovered; it
is not that there are not sufficient remedies in the Word of God, or that there
is not a God in Israel, a Physician in Heaven; no, there are remedies in the
Word of God so sovereign, as are able to recover the most decayed state to its
pristine glory; and a God in Israel, a Physician in Heaven, skilful to heal,
mighty to save; but if we would be healed and recovered, we must then apply our
selves to that great Physician, and make use of those remedies, as we are often
invited and called upon to do. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, for thou
have fallen by thine iniquity, etc. and, Hos. 14. 1, 2.
Seek the Lord, and ye shall live: and, Turn you at my reproof: but can we our
selves? the Lord Prove. 1. 23.
has his answer ready, Behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, and that can
and shall enable you, if you duly apply you selves to me; and shall we now
reject this counsel of God against Luk 7. 30.
our selves, as is said of the Pharisees? God forbid. For what an heavy doom
must we then expect, and how sad and woeful must our end then needs be! and
truly, as to happiness or misery, that is the main, and we are chiefly (as to
that) what we are then, and not so much what we are at present: for what we are
then, we are really, exceedingly, transcendently, unchangeably, everlastingly,
and happiness or misery then is so indeed. And hence, that is brought in as the
great happiness of the upright man, that his end is peace, and so, as the great
misery Ps. 37. 37, 38. etc.
of the wicked, that they are at last wholly and utterly cut off, or rooted
out; and hence is the Lord so earnest, that people would be considerate Deuteronomy.
32. 29.
about their latter end, he is most sollicitous about that, and so should we:
And what will ye Jer. 5. 31.
do (says he) in the end thereof? You think your selves, it may be, well enough
at present, but what will your condition be in the conclusion? And this Solomon
urges to deter from whoredom, Prove. 5. 11. etc.
-- and thou mourn at the last, etc. mourning then being mourning indeed,
mourning as Heb. in sire tuo.
we say with a witness, exceeding great and bitter, and therefore the Hebrew
is, and thou roar (...) Et rugias in novissimo tuo. Pisc. Metaphora a iugitu
leonum, vel maris.
at the last; and so the Dutch, and Italian, and others read it, not only
sigh, or cry, but roar, and make a fearful noise or outcry, as a Lion, or the
Sea, for the word properly signifies such a great noise or roaring that beasts,
especially Lions are wont to make, when hungry or in distress, or that the Sea
makes, the roaring whereof is heard afar off, and is very terrible, or that the
Devils make* who are said J^m. 2. 19. (...) horrescunt.
to believe and tremble; or roar or shreek terribly, as the Greek word
signifies, it notes extreme horror. And such is the mourning at last, when Non
gemit tantum, sed ita vocifera^i^ur, ut videatur quodam modo inferorum
vestibulum s^^ut^sse. Car^^^^.
the Adulterer is upon the wrack of an evil conscience, and sees Hell gaping
for him, yea is as it were in the suburbs of it already, and now perceives, how
that for a little brutish pleasure, he has brought upon himself ten thousand
times more sorrow, and nothing now abides him, but his wickedness, and the
reward thereof; and dying impenitently in his sins, his sorrow is not only
fruitless, and unprofitable, but fearful, inutterable, unalterable, and for
ever. And O that this was thought of in time, before it be too late! for as
Abner said to Joab, will it not be bitterness in the end? and will not the
pleasing 1 Samuel 2. 26.
streams of sensual delights, sinners are swimming down now, carry them into
the dead Sea of eternal sorrows? And how great will those sorrows, and that
bitterness be! And therefore such pleasures should be looked at as going, and
not as coming, for they leave horror and terror behind them. And what are
sensual pleasures to an immortal, immaterial soul, the true life and happiness
of which consists in godly actions, and the fruition of God, the chief good?
But the pleasures of sin (says the sinner) are sweet, and so may poison be made
that kills presently, the sweet lusts and sports of sin convey death and hell
in their pleasures, and there must be either a merciful time (as one expresses
it) to find them bitter here, or a terrible time to find them so in hell. Do
the damned find any pleasure in sin? and if drofly filthy lusts do so affect
and please, what might more glorious objects do, if thou were spiritual? It is
a good dilemma, a Reverend Divine gives against the allurements Mr. Robert
^olt^n.
to sin. Either I must repent, and then it will bring more sorrow than the
pleasure did good, though that is a blessed sorrow indeed, or not repent, and
then it is the damnation of my soul. So that there is no dealing with sin
without hurt, no more than there is handling of fire, or treading upon hot
coals without being burnt. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his Clothes
Prove. 6. 27, 28.
not be burnt? can one go upon hot Coals, and his feet not be burnt? It is
observed of the Beaver, that the hair of it is softer than the Down of
Feathers, but it is exceeding dangerous with its teeth; for, as a Naturalist
observes, it will gnaw trees with its teeth, as if they were cut with Axes, and
if it chance to catch hold of any joint in man, it will not leave 'till it has
knapped the bone asunder: and so sin, how delightful soever it may seem to the
sinner, being soft to the touch, and pleasant to the taste, it gnaws the
conscience, and bites the soul as it were to the bone. Look not thou (says
Solomon) upon the Prove. 2^. 31, 32.
wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the cup, when it moves it
self aright. At last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, and
as it is said of the strange woman, her lips Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5.
drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother than oil, but her end is
bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword, her feet go down to death, her
steps take hold of hell. And will ever those lusts compensate thy loss, or get
thee what thou let go? no, thou may keep dross and dung, but losest and
let go Gold, Diamonds, and precious Pearls, etc. what then remains, but
that speedily and forthwith we hearken to God's call and counsel, wherein we
and the Nation are so infinitely concerned, viz. heartily and industriously to
set our selves, and frame our doings to turn to the Lord; else if we shall
still refuse, what can we expect, but that our calamity will not only be
exceeding great, but that the Lord, as he threatens, will laugh at it, and mock
when our fear comes, when our fear Prove. 1. 24, 25. etc.
comes as desolation, and destruction as a whirlwind, when distress and
anguish comes upon us: and that we should call, but the Lord not answer, and
seek him early, but not find him, because we would have none of his counsel,
but despised all his reproof. etc. But Repentance, this, may some say, is a
trite Theme, a common subject, that which every one knows: it is so indeed as
to its notion, and speculation, but how well would it be for England was it so
as to its practice, and putting it in execution, it being the only way of its
weal! And let none here be offended at the plainness of the style, this is no
time for jingling discourses, neither does silken language suit with such days
as call for being clothed with Sackcloth. Conversion to God, which is the
great work, wherein England's weal is at this day so infinitely concerned, is a
serious thing, and requires greatest plainness, in those that offer any thing
as to it; neither is it like to be effected, or carried on by embroidered
language, or fine finical phrases, or elegancies, no, it is the plainest
preaching that God has ever most honored, as to be instrumental to such a
work; and the meaner sort being those, that such a discourse is like to have
the most effect upon, such as offer thereto had need to apply themselves to
their capacity: and whatever is the style or language, know that the remedy it
self here proposed is not mine, but of his making and prescribing, who is the
great Physician, and healer of Nations, and he therefore that rejects or
despises, rejects and despises not man but God; only he 1 These. 4. 8.
has spirited me, and bid and appointed me, as he has some others, to mind
you of it, and to put you speedily upon it, yea and to betake your selves to
him to help and assist you in it, that so the Nation may not perish, and so
sovereign a remedy at hand, for want of being applied and made use of: as unto
which, if any thing here dictated shall prove subservient, or any ways
adjutant, it shall ever be acknowledged as a singular mercy to him, from the
God of mercies, who is, and remains

A studious well-wisher of Thine, and the Nations weal, R. P.

To the Christian Reader.
SAlvation is the most suitable, and the most desirable mercy for sinners, for
sinful persons, for sinful Nations. Salvation, as it imports deliverance from
evil, (and that it imports most properly) is a very great mercy; but as it
implies the gift and enjoyment of good, of the highest good, so it is far
better. Temporal salvation is a signal favor, but how unspeakable a favor is
Eternal! Now, as questionless, salvation, with all the appurtenances, and
consequents of it, is the greatest mercy that can be desired, so the greatest
question that can be asked, is that of the Jaylour, Sirs, what must we do to
Acts 16. 31.
be saved? Reader, the worthy Author of the ensuing Discourse, having, I doubt
not, well weighed, and deeply laid to heart, the doleful condition of many
thousand souls in city and country, who remain in a state of sin, and persist
impenitently in the practice even of the grossest sins, considering also with
himself (possibly with others) the dangerous state of the whole Kingdom, by
reason of those (much to be lamented) overflowings of sin, (he, I say, having
laid to heart, and considered these things) has studied, and in this Treatise
freely held forth a remedy, indeed an unfailing, and the only remedy, whereby
the souls of men may be saved and delivered from wrath and damnation, and the
whole Kingdom from ruin, destruction, and desolation. There needs no more for
the saving either of persons, or Nations, but the Lords effectual turning of
our hearts from sin, by the working of his powerful grace in us, and the sweet
manifestations of his favorable grace toward us, or (as the Authors Text has
it) the causing of his face to shine upon us. A remedy compounded of these two
Gospel-ingredients (both the fruits of Christ's blood and death) for the cure
and help of sin-sick dying souls, and Kingdoms; thou wi^t find ( Christian
Reader) ready at hand, for thine and the Kingdom's benefi^, in the doctrinal
part of this book, if thou have an heart to make use of it. And that thine
heart may be drawn out, to make a right use of it, thou will find it stored
with many clear directions to guide thee; with strong reasons to convince thee,
with many cogent motives to quicken thee, all fetched from, and grounded upon
the holy Scriptures; many Texts whereof are not only (as they all are)
pertinently alleged, but solidly, pithily, and largely paraphrased and
expounded. I commend all to the blessing of God, and thy diligent perusal,
praying that all may turn, not only to thy souls profit, and everlasting
salvation, but to the temporal salvation of these Kingdoms, from those
impending evils of punishment, which our abounding evils of sin threaten us
with, and may quickly bring down upon us, unless the Lord God of hosts
(according to his super abounding goodness) turn us again to himself, and cause
his face to shine upon us; then, and not till then, we shall indeed be saved,
or dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of evil. This (Christian Reader) is the
apprehension, this the daily petition, of

Thy friend, and servant in the Lord, JOSEPH CARYL.

Good Reader,
WE learn from the story of the Fall, that man was first a fugitive from God,
and then an exile; first Adam ran to the bushes, and then God drove him out of
Paradise; and ever since, besides the aversion of man's own heart, there lies a
legal exclusion on Gods part: Man in this condition is become a stranger to God
and his own happiness, and not only a stranger, but an enemy; but though we are
enemies to God, we cannot make good our quarrel against him, the Lord of Hosts
will be too hard for poor worms: Alas! what will our many lusts do against his
mighty Angels? God cannot be overcome, yet such is his Grace, he is ready to be
reconciled; Turn unto me says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you
says the Lord of Hosts. Zech. 1. 3. The same style is used both in the
exhortation and the promise. It Is the Lord of Hosts who inviteth us to turn to
him, by a serious repentance, and the Lord of Hosts who promises to reward us
with all manner of felicity and happiness: If we turn not we find him a
dreadful adversary; but if we have an heart to return to him, we shall find him
as powerful and delightful a friend; Woe to him that striveth with his Maker:
But blessed he that submits to him. We keep off from him out of carnal
liberty, not liking the strictness of his precepts; and also out of legal
bondage, fearing the strokes of his Justice; and we are hardened in our
alienation from God by patching up a sorry happiness in the creature apart from
him; our remedy must be fully correspondent with our disease, therefore our
cure consists in turning from the creature to God, from self to Christ, from
sin to holiness. Do this, and it shall be well with you: sin shall be pardoned,
and everlasting happiness shall be your portion: But who is sufficient for
these things? The legal exclusion is taken off by the merit of the Lord Jesus,
and the straying disposition is cured by the all powerful and converting grace
of his Spirit; and in conversion we find him to be the Lord of Hosts, as well as
in destruction, as he conquereth and subdueth man's heart to himself, for surely
God never made a creature too hard for himself: But his grace must be sought
after by us, in the use of all holy means; Gods complaint against his people
was, that they would not frame their doings to turn unto the Lord; surely, they
do the work of Christianity, who most labor in this very thing, especially in
a time of general defection and corruption of manners, when a people temptingly
and daringly put it to the trial, whether God will be so severe against sinners
as his word represents him to be; in such a time we need cry aloud, both to
God and men; to God, that he may turn us by his preventing grace, and turn to
us by his rewarding grace; to men, that they may speedily recover themselves by
repentance, lest iniquity be their ruin. This is the design of the religious
Author in this useful and savoury Treatise, which is now put into thy hands, as
much of it as my occasions would give me leave to peruse, seemed to be woven
with such a constant texture of solidity and piety, that I could not but
recommend it to thy acceptance, and the Lords Blessing.

Tho. Manton,

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THE general scope, and sum of the words. CHAP. II. The explication
of the words. p. 5. CHAP. III. 1. Doctr. in general. When miseries abide the
people of God, spiritual mercies are especially to be sought. p. 10 Reas. 1.
This the Lord prescribes, 2. thus others have done, 3. of the not doing thereof
the Lord complains, 4. to this the promise is made, 5. else miseries cannot be
removed in mercy, 6 these will support under them. 11. 12 Use 1. of Reproof, 2.
Exhortation. 15. 16
CHAP. IV. 2. Doctr. in general. Spiritual mercies are to be sought with all
earnestness. 18 R. 1. God's precept, 2. others practice, 3. their nature
requires it, 4. this it shows we are in earnest, 5. in a fit capacity to
receive them, 6. because so unworthy of them, 7. because of the dear price paid
for them, 8. this is all that is required for the obtaining of them, 9. the way
to have them, 10. the more to value them. p. 20. to 37 Use 1. How sad not to
seek them at all. 1. It is the badg of wicked men, 2. such are practical
Atheists, 3. as Heathens, 4. have not the Spirit, 5. are dead, 6. lie open to
God's fury. p. 37. etc. Use 2. To be humbled we have sought them no more, 2. to
seek them more earnestly for the future. 1. For our selves, 2. for ours, 3. for
others, especially for Sion. p. 40 to 49
CHAP. V. The more particular points observable. 1. Doctr. We are all by nature
turned away from God. Use 1. It speaks our sin, 2. misery, 3. necessity of
being turned again if saved, etc. p. 49 to 57 2. Doctr. Such as are brought
home to God, are very ready to turn again aside. 1. How this appears, 2. whence
it is. p. 57, 58. Use 1. to bewail it, 2. not to be high-minded, 3. to carry it
meekly, 4. the more to endeavor to cleave to God: several helps propounded. p.
59. to 66 3. Doctr. The Lord is the God of hosts. Use 1. to fear him, 2. not to
provoke him, 3. to trust in him, 4. to be encouraged in our addresses to him,
5. to move us to turn to him, etc. p. 66, 67 4. Doctr. The Lord only can turn
us again to himself. Use 1. It shows the folly of delaying to turn, 2. we
should the more fear turning aside, 3. apply our selves to him to turn us, 4.
give him the glory when turned. 68, 69 5. Doctr. When the Lord turns a people
again, he causes his face to shine. 1. He does cause it to shine, 2. he will,
it being 1. his promise, 2. sin which interposed, being removed. Use 1. Such
then are blessed, 2. It should move the more to get turned. p. 70 to 77
CHAP. VI. The principal point. p. 78 Doctr. 6. The only way for a people to
be saved, it is for God to turn them again, and cause his face to shine. 77.
This illustrated as being 1. the right way, 2. a sure way, 3. a tried way, 4.
the way to be saved in mercy, 5. universally, and that in three respects, 6.
the only way. p. 78. to 88
CHAP. VII. What manner of turn this must be, answered 1. more generally, 2.
more particularly. 1. Such as is of God, 2. joined with humiliation, 3. arising
from faith, 4. accompanied with shame for sin, 5. confession, 6. hatred of sin,
7. such as is even to the Lord, 8. with all the heart, 9. universal, 1. as to
the subject turning, 2. object turned from, 3. object turned to. 10. Constant
and continued. p. 92. to 114 CHAP. VIII. The Reasons of the point. R. 1.
Because this is the way these here take, 2. that others have taken, 3. that the
Lord prescribes, 4. which as so, he has promised, 5. that Christ took, 6. that
his Ministers take, 7* because it presupposes faith, 8. because of what
follows, 1. upon conversion, people being then turned, 1. from what is
destructive, 2. to God, 1. the chief, 2. the ultimate good, 3. they being then
toward salvation, 4. they walk, 5. hold on in the ways of salvation, 6. such
in some sense are saved already. 2. because of what follows upon God's favor,
which 1. is salvation, 2. that which will accomplish all requisite to
salvation, 3. it is it self all, 1. light, 2. life, 3. felicity, 4. safety, 5.
health, 6. strength, 7. joy, 8. glory. 4. It silences all God has against his
people. p. 114. to 139 CHAP. IX. Use 1. of information or inference: if this be
the only way for a people to be saved, 1. There is then a way for a people to
be saved. p. 139 2. England then is in a very unlikely way to be saved. 143 3.
The contrary then is the only way to be destroyed. 148 4. Few then are like to
be saved. 153 5. It gives us to see the reason, why the Lord is so intent upon
this. 155 6. Why his Ministers so much press this. 157 7. Why his people have
been so earnest for this. 159 8. Why such joy in heaven for this. Ib. 9. What a
choice mercy then the Ministry is. 161 10. It speaks highly of conversion, and
divine favor. 167 11. Commends solemn days of fasting and humiliation. 166 12.
Speaks well of afflictions. 168
CHAP. X. Use of Exhortation, 1. earnestly to pray for these. Motives, 1. the
Lord invites to it, 2. it is great kindness that he does so, 3. it is not for
any need he has of us, 4. yea he indents with us to do it, 5. he only can
effect and vouchsafe these, 6. he is able to do it, and 7. willing to do it, 8.
does it of free frace, 9. by his effectual grace, 10. has done it for the
greatest of sinners. P. 171. to 196 CHAP. XI. The second branch of Exhortation,
to add to our Prayers our endeavors, in general, more particularly, 1. to
attend constantly on the ministry of the word, 2. when the spirit moves to
cherish such motions, 3. to break off from evil company, 4. to get into good,
5. to consider our ways, 6. to occasion our hearts that way, 7. to remember God
of his promises, 8. to labor to believe, 9. to cease the practice of gross
sins, 10. what we do to dospeedily. Twelve Considerations to excite thereto. P.
196. to 233 Though we cannot convert our selves, yet not in vain to be exhorted
thereto, showed in several particulars. 234
CHAP. XII. Motives to turn to God. 1. The equity thereof, 2. the excellency,
3. the utility, 4. the necessity, 5. the acceptableness of it to God, 6. the
comfortableness, of it to our selves. P. 236. to 276 CHAP. XIII. Further
motives to turn to God: 'till we do this, 1. we forget our selves, 2. we are
not our selves, 3. these are times of turning, 1. of sinful in regard of men,
2. judicial in regard of God. 4. Nothing less speaks us true Christians. Ten
several things instanced in. 5. This all call for, 6. God counts upon, 7. want
of this God's great complaint, 8. not turning when he smites, puts him upon
greater severities, yea makes him resolve upon final ruin. p. 276. to 303
CHAP. XIV. To encourage one another to turn to God p. 303. etc. CHAP. XV: To
see to it, our turning to God be true and real. 309 CHAP. XVI. To prove God
therewith. 319, etc. CHAP. XVII. Motives to seek God's favor: 331. etc. To
consider 1. how excellent it is, 2. how honorable, 3. how comfortable, 4. how
profitable, 5. how necessary.
CHAP. XVIII. To endeavor the conversion others. 337 1. It being of general
concern, 2. to convert a sinner from the error of his way, it being 1. to
save, 2. a soul, 3. from death, 4. a means to cover multitudes of sins. Fnrther
motives. 1. Jesus Christ dyed to save souls, 2. others seek to destroy them, 3.
This is God's great end of giving his Spirit, 4. It is an high honor, 5. a
point of great wisdom, 6. an evidence of sincere love. 7. Till people are
converted they are unprofitable. 8. Beasts are to be helped in danger. To
manage what we do herein wisely. The Conclusion of the whole.

Some few Errata escaped, are thus to be corrected.
In the Epistle Dedicatory, p. 2. 1. 18. for effectual read subservient, and l.
19. for essential read effectual.

Page

23. marg. for regio, read regno, and for sum r. sum me. 12. for Hosea 12. 4.
r. 14. 70. marg* for Jer. 3. r. 31. 72. l. 5. sor Psalm. 12. r. 11. 73. l. 7.
after the Hebrew, r. is. 95. marg. for ipsae r. ipsos. 110. l. 25. for our r.
one. 114. l. 2. for thins r. things. 166. l. 12. for Acts 14. r. 13. 245. l.
17. for the second toyling r. toying. 247. l. 17. for turn r. turns. 301. l. 4.
before wrought r. first.
ENGLAND'S Sole and Sovereign way of being saved.
PSALM 80. 19. Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts: Cause thy face to shine, and
we shall be saved.
CHAP. I. The general Scope, Sum, and Parts of the words.
IF we consult this Psalm, we shall find, that the Church and people of God,
were here at this time in a sad condition; they were under sore trials, and
afflictions. Those former manifold mercies which the Lord had exhibited to
them, were now changed into miseries and distresses. The Lord fed them with the
bread of tears, and gave them tears to drink in great measure. He made them a
strife unto their neighbors, and their enemies laughed among themselves. v. 6.
7. and being in so sad a condition they do in this Psalm pray for deliverance:
and these words here which I have chose to discourse of, are part of their
prayer, yea a main, chief, and principal part. With this they begin v. 3. and
go on with v. 7. and conclude with v. 19. and a blessed part they are indeed:
and they in their pressures, in their miseries and calamities, thus praying,
pray well, and indeed they could not pray better; for they thus praying, go the
right way, and take the most effectual course, both to be heard Hic versus and
ordine est tertius, and tertio per hunc Psalmum repetitur* quod ob id moneo, ut
intelligamus Prophetam in hac petitione, quod hic versus complectitur,
universam constituisse salut is spem. Musc. in loc.
and to be saved. For 1. we in our suits and supplications, never please God
better, nor are welcomer into his presence, nor likelier to speed, than when we
ask most; I mean, what is best, and of greatest and highest importance. Math.
6. 33. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. And 2. for the Lord God of Hosts, to turn a people
again, and cause his face to shine, is the only way for a people to be saved.
And this they here pray for, yea and this is the only way to have England
saved, to have this Nation saved, Kingdom saved, Church saved, City saved,
Towns saved, Families saved, our selves, and ours, and all saved, for God to
turn us again, and cause his face to shine; and when God does thus, we shall be
saved indeed, saved to purpose, saved in mercy, saved aright: so that a
Discourse of these words must needs be very seasonable, and sovereign; for they
are the very platform of a peoples weal, and do contain in them their only
right way of being saved. I shall not stand at the present to give you any
farther account of the Psalm in general; only take notice, that the words are
the burden, or weight of the Psalm; we have them no less than twice before: as
v. 3. Turn us again, O God, and Versus intercalaris*
cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. They pray v. 1. and 2. Give
ear, O'Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, thou that
dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth. Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and
Manasseh, stir up thy strength, and come and save us. But how would they be
saved? what is that they so much desire and breath after, that they may be
saved? why, Turn us again, say they, O God, and cause thy face to shine, and we
shall be saved: and then again v. 7. Turn us again, etc. They had made before
very sad complaints, v. 4, 5, 6. how that God was angry against their prayer,
and fed them with the bread of tears, etc. But how ill soever it was with them
at present, they beg but this of God, that he would turn them again, and cause
his face to shine, and then they promise to themselves that all shall certainly
be well with them, and they shall be saved: and then again in the 19. v. with
this, namely, the words I have Hic versus principalem continet propositionem*
hinc tertio repetitur, ^oque Psalmus concluditur.
made choice of, they conclude, and shut up all, Turn us again, O Lord God of
Hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. Thus they three times
repeat the same thing, as if they could never pray it enough: and we scarce
find the like in all holy Writ, and therefore is it the more to be looked into,
and observed, Moller^
and seriously weighed, and considered. And these Non inanem battologiam dictat
nobis Dei Spiritus easdem preces ter incuscando, sed ut malis gravati, audacti
nihilominus assurgamus, haec fultura nobis saepius offertur.
their so frequent and earnest requests of the same things, we are not to look
upon them as vain Tautologies, or needless repetitions, but as they do denote
the fervency of their Prayer, so the great importance, excellency, and
necessity of the things prayed for: that they were infinitely concerned in
them, and that the want of them as to their being saved, could not be dispensed
with; namely, God's turning them again to himself, and causing his face to
shine. So that these words are not only the burden, but the very beauty and
blessing of the Psalm. Its very marrow and sweetness consists and is concentred
in them; and hence do they so often repeat them, not knowing how to be denied
what is contained in them, viz. God's turning them again, and causing his face
to shine, but beg them again and again, and make them their fixed petition, and
importunate prayer; in which prayer take notice of these three things. 1. The
person, whom they direct their prayer to, and that is God, to whom alone all
prayer is to be directed; and him they style here the Lord God of Hosts: and so
though their case was dark, and seemed even desperate, yet looking to God's
power, as being the Lord God of Hosts, this gives them light and hope of
relief; for what is or can be too hard for him to do? 2. The subject matter of
their prayer: and that is 1. that God would turn them again, and 2. cause his
face to shine; and then 3. we have here the blessed fruit, and happy effect,
which they promise to themselves, upon audience, and that is, that they shall
be saved. Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts: cause thy face to shine, and we
shall be saved. This prayer is but short, but exceeding sweet; the words few,
but very full. For we have contained in them, 1. The great Gospel-blessing, and
that of Jesus being raised up by his Father, which is the turning of us away
from our iniquities. Act. 3. 26. Unto you first, God having raised up his son
Jesus, sent him to bless you: but how? in turning away every one of you from
his iniquities. 2. We have contained in them man's chief happiness, and his
true and only felicity, viz. God's favor, the light of his countenance, for
God to cause his face to shine. 3. Man's being saved; which is very
comprehensive and does denote, not only freedom from Enemies, and evils of all
sorts, though that most properly, but fruition also of all good.

CHAP. II. The Explication of the Words.
Turn us again, or convert us, i. e. from (...) Converte nos.
our sins, and iniquities to thy self; from our own ways, which have not been
good, to thine, from which we have turned aside, and gone astray.

And well do they begin, and continue so earnest for this; for as all our
misery did at first, and does still come in, by our Apostasy and turnings
aside, and turning away from God, so our happiness cannot be recovered again,
but in our returns to him. Look as that was, and is the very spring and
foundation of all our woe, so this of our weal; and in all our miseries and
calamities, the very first step to our cure and recovery begins here: and hence
is it, that the Church and people of God are here so urgent upon this, again
and again; yea and hence is this held forth as the great business and design of
Christ, in suffering for our sins, that he might bring us to God; for
otherwise, we could never have been brought again to be happy. 1 Pet. 3. 18.
For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, etc. This turning again may refer, either to those of
them that were never as yet turned; or to those, who being once turned, had, in
some measure at least, turned again aside, made some defection: as indeed the
best are very prone to do. Hos. 11. 7. My people are bent to backsliding from
me. and Exodus 32. 8. They have turned aside quickly out of the way, etc. And
thus they here beg of God, to turn them again, and to heal their backslidings;
and though this is, and ought to be our endeavor, yet it being God's work, as
unable to turn themselves, they apply themselves to him: and this turn we ought
to endeavor, and to pray for still, more and more, it being the work and
business of our whole lives, to turn to God more and more; the last step of
repentance being the first step of Glory, and the last step of turning the
first step of triumphing.

Some indeed do render this, turn us again, return us, or restore us, recover
us, i. e. say they, from our Captivity to our former state, etc. And many go
this way; but surely it is more than such a turning, that the Church here is so
importunate for, viz. a spiritual and gracious Kimchi, idem esse dicit quod
dirige corda nostra ad te: and hanc lectionem our rejicere mus non apparu it
^lla ratio. Musc*
turn, a saving conversion, a turning from sin to God, that God would make them
true Penitents, sound converts, new men: they pray for amendment, as the very
essence of repentance: and without this, what would the other signify, or
avail, or what true comfort could it afford to have their outward condition
turned, and hearts unturned? or how, unless they were turned by repentance,
could they ever expect, that the Lord should show them the evidence of his
favor; and besides, as to their recovery from their present miseries and
calamities, that they had prayed for in other verses in this Psalm, and in
praying for these first, they therein take the readiest and most effectual
course for the other: and therefore this turning here again, we are mainly and
chiefly to understand of turning to God by repentance; as we find the same word
elsewhere understood and taken: as Lament. 5. 21. Turn thou us unto thee, O
Lord, etc. and Jer. 31. 18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, etc. and so
frequently elsewhere, the same word is made use of: and thus several Expositors
carry it; and this, says a Learned Interpreter, is the special petition here
insisted upon, that God by giving repentance would reclaim them from their
Apostasy, and grant the evidence of his favor unto them, and so deliver and
save them. So that Repentance, Reconciliation, and Salvation, is that which is
here prayed for, that God would turn their hearts by unfeigned repentance, that
so they might be fit for deliverance.

-- O Lord God of Hosts. Thus they style God, (...) Dominus Deus exercituum.
and under this notion, eye him, and consider him, the more to strengthen their
faith and hope, as concerning the things they prayed for, and for gaining the
more firm assurance of obtaining them. In the 3. v. they pray, O God, in the 7.
O God of Hosts, and then here in this verse, O Lord God of Hosts. Thus by
degrees they rise higher and higher, and get more and more ground, for the
strengthening of their faith. What could not God do, especially the God of
Hosts? and much more the Lord God of Hosts. Thus in our addresles to God we
should so consider of him, as may most strengthen our faith, and encourage our
hopes, as to the obtaining of what we have access unto God for; and thus our
Savior himself has taught us to do, Math. 6. 13. for thine is the Kingdom,
and power, etc.

-- Cause thy face to shine: ie. in a word, Aspice nos vultu sereno ac
benevolo. Pisc.
vouchsafe us thy favor, show thy self gracious and propitious to us in thy
Son, give us the sense of thy love: and because favor and grace much appears
and manifests it self in the face, in the sereneness of the face, in the
pleasantness and lightsomness of the countenance, hence is this phrase both
here, and in many places elsewhere, made use of, to set forth the favor and
grace of God: as Psalm. 31. 16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant. So
Psalm. 67. 1. -- 119. 135, etc. and it is the same with that Psalm 4. 6. lift
thou up upon us the light of thy countenance. And these forms and expressions
seem to be taken from that solemn form of blessing the people, prescribed by
the Lord himself, Numbers 6. 25, 26. The Lord make his face shine upon thee, --
the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee.

-- And we shall be saved: i. e. if thou vouchsafe His rebus fructum and
felicitatem salutis assignat, dicens, Et salvi erimus, vivemus, and regnabimus,
nec ullo bono destituemur, si placatus nos respicias, and conversos ad te,
benignus complectaris. Musc:
but to do these for us, it shall be well with us, we shall be happy, this will
remedy all our evils, and be to us as it were a resurrection from the dead; it
will bring full salvation and deliverance from our miseries here, and eternal
salvation to us hereafter, and upon God's turning them again, and causing his
face to shine, this they certainly and undoubtedly promise to themselves; as
well they might, for what should effect it, if not these? for God to turn them
again, and cause his face to shine.

CHAP. III. The first Doctrine observable as more general.
THE time and season, when it was that they made this prayer, that God would
turn them again, etc. it was a time of trouble, and distress. Whence observe,

Doct. 1. When miseries and calamities do abide the Church and people of God,
that which then more especially and most earnestly they are to pray for, it is
that the Lord would vouchsafe them spiritual mercies:

As that God would turn them again, and cause his face to shine, that he would
lift up upon them the light of his Countenance, vouchsafe them his favor, and
grace, etc. This indeed In omnibus angustiis favor and gratia Dei inprimis
quaerenda, and imploranda est. Ames^in locum.
they are to seek at all times, Psalm. 105. 4. Seek the Lord and his strength,
seek his face evermore, but then more especially, and more than the removal of
outward evils, or the obtaining of other mercies and blessings; because God
then seems to suspend them, and as it was to hide his face, and to withdraw the
sense of his favor: and then they most need them, yea and then the
experiencing of such mercies is most seasonable. Thus the Church and people of
God do here: the Lord fed them with the bread of tears, and gave them tears to
drink in great measure, etc. And what do they now pray and importune for? for
spiritual blessings, Soul-mercies, that God would turn them again, and cause
his face to shine, and thus we are to do

R. 1. Because this is that which the Lord prescribes, and puts his people
upon, and advises them to: As Hosea 14. 1, 27. take with you words, and turn to
the Lord. Say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, etc.
Zeph. 2. 3. Seek ye the Lord, seek righteousness, seek meekness, etc. And how
should we bless the Lord, that gives us this counsel, and advice, to seek
things so excellent, and of such importance, and wherein we are so infinitely
concerned, and the having of which is of such absolute and indispensible
necessity, as that we cannot at any time want them, nor be without them, much
less at such times? who would not seek God's face, divine favors at any time,
but especially at such times?

R. 2. This is that which others have done, as here, so elsewhere: as Psalm. 90.
14. Moses there in a time of great and grievous calamities, prays that the Lord
would return and satisfy them early with his mercy, or loving kindness, for so
the word is rendered elsewhere, as Psalm. (...)
26. 3. the same word; so Psalm. 119. 76. i. e. with thy favor, the sense of
thy love; and v. 17. Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, etc. So
Isaiah 26. 8. Yea in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have* we waited for
thee: the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. v.
9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, with my spirit within me will
I seek thee early, etc. Lament. 5. 21. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, etc. and
so David often, still when he was in any distress, he is seeking for spiritual
mercies, as Psalm 31. 16. make thy face to shine on thy Servant: 35. 5. say to
my soul I am thy Salvation. Psalm. 119. 76. Let I pray thee thy merciful
kindness be for my comfort, v. 77. let thy tender mercies come unto me, etc.

R. 3. Want of this the Lord complains of. Hos. 7. 4. They assemble themselves
for corn and wine, etc. Isa. 9. 13. neither seek they the Lord of Hosts.

R. 4. To this the promise is made of pardon, and healing too. 2 Chronicles. 7. 13.
If (says the Lord) I shut up heaven, that there be no rain, or send pestilence,
etc. v. 14. If my people which are called by my name shall humble themselves,
and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their evil ways, then will I hear
from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.

R. 5. This is the only way to have those miseries and calamities removed in
mercy, so as to be sanctified before their removal, to seek unto God to turn us
again to himself, and to cause his face to shine: and unless the Lord do this,
they cannot be removed in mercy, but we must expect heavier, and sorer, as the
Lord threatens, Is. 9. 13, 14. Amos 4. 11, 12. Levit. 26. 21. etc. for he will
overcome when he judges, but if he vouchsafe those spiritual mercies, though
the other should continue, they could do us no hurt, the evil and sting of them
being removed.

R. 6. If the other should still continue, these will comfort and support under
them, and the joy and comfort of them more than countervail the other; there
being no comparison between them, but the one exceedingly transcending the
other. As the sufferings of this present Romans 8. 18.
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory to be revealed hereafter, so
neither are they to be compared with spiritual mercies here; as for God to turn
us again to himself, to pardon our sins, to cause his face to shine, to
vouchsafe us his favor, and his comforts, and consolations. What sufferings or
afflictions will not these comfort and support under? or what other wants will
they not more than countervail? what are the world's frowns to God's smiles,
the world's troubles to God's peace, the world's sorrows to God's joys, the
world's afflictions to God's consolations, the world's pressures to the
pleasures of God's presence, or its burdens to the rest which that affords?
what are its Bitters to God's Sweets, its Gall and Wormwood to the Wine of his
Love? Cant. 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the Kisses of his mouth, for thy love is
better than wine: and v. 4. -- we will remember thy love more than wine, yea
it is better than life, and in it, even in death it self, there is life. And
hence is it, that the Apostle speaks what is a Paradox to the men of the world,
troubled but not distressed, as sorrowful yet always rejoicing, as having
nothing and yet possessing all things, as dying and yet behold we live, live in
the light of God's countenance, in his sight, as Hosea 6. 2. -- and we shall
live in his sight; where indeed only the Soul truly lives, and there it may
live, even in death, and have light arise to it, even in darkness, and see
light in the greatest obscurity: and this light, I mean the light of God's
countenance, it gives Songs even in the night, as it did to Paul and Silas,
when thrust into the inner prison, and their feet made fast in the Stocks, yet
God's gracious presence did so cheer their spirits, and put such joy into their
hearts, that even at midnight they brake forth in praises to God. Acts 16. 25.
And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises to God, and the
prisoners heard them: they did not only pray, but sing praises, and sung so
loud, that others heard them, the prisoners heard them, they were awakened by
them. And what did they think of them? surely they thought they were not well
in their wits, to sing at such a time, and in such a place, and in such a
condition, who having been beaten, and many stripes laid upon them, were cast
into prison, yea thrust into the inner prison, and their feet made fast in the
stocks, and yet now to sing! O if God cause but his face to shine, if he lift
but up the light of his countenance, it will make a man sing at any time, in
any place, in any condition, it will turn a prison into a Palace, and a
dungeon into a Paradise. This made David to have his Psalms, yea Michtams, i.
his golden Psalms, or (as the Dutch render it) his golden Jewels Aureum
ornamentum, aut insigne, exputissimo auro factum.
; it signifies what is made of the best and finest gold, so called because of
their singular preciousness and excellency) in the saddest places, and in the
saddest outward condition; as when the Philistines took him in Gath, when he
fled from Saul in the Cave, when Saul sent, and they watched the house to kill
him, etc. See Psalm 56, 57, 59, the Titles: Moses, Psalm 90. 14. prays, O
satisfy us early with thy mercy, i. e. with thy loving kindness, vouchsafe us
thy favor, that we may rejoice and be glad all our days. This is enough to
make the people of God rejoice, and be glad all their days, be they never so
dark and gloomy, evil and perilous. As we have received mercy, says the
Apostle, we faint not, 2 Cor. 4. 1. The Lord tells Moses, Exodus 33. 14. My
presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest. Though Moses was to go
through a wearisome wilderness, and amidst a wearisom people, yet the Lord's
presence should give him rest. We may go any where with him, he will be an
hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, as rivers of water
in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. Isa. 32. 2.

Use 1. Of Reproof to those, who when miseries and calamities are upon
themselves, or the Nation, look after the removal of them, but not after
Spiritual mereies; they are very earnest and sollicitous, that God would take
away their ourward plagues, remove his judgments, but not that God would take
away their sins, and turn them again to himself, and cause his face to shine.
But so God will but do the other, free them of their miseries, let the latter
do what they will. Psalm. 4. 6. There be many that say, who will show us any
good? i. e. any outward good, how to compass any earthly worldly gain, or
advantage: O that we might have peace and plenty, or how shall we once get out
of these troubles and afflictions? but few say with David, lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us, and then all shall be well, if thou do but
this. Many when they are in pain, and sick and weak, they cry out indeed, but
for what? for ease, and health, and recovery, not that they may be turned from
their sins, and recover God's favor; as Pharaoh, he calls to have other
plagues taken away, but never begs to have the plague of his own heart taken
away, which was the greatest of all, and far worse than all the other; but this
is the voice only of nature and argues a graceless heart, and that which the
Lord, as I said, complains of, Hos. 6. 14.

Use 2. Of Exhortation. Then when miseries and calamities do abide us, let this
be our Prayer, let us with the Church and people of God here, more especially
and most earnestly beg and implore spiritual mercies, that God would turn us
again, and cause his face to shine, lift up upon us the light of his
countenance, vouchsafe us his grace and favor, bless us in turning us from our
iniquities: let us be importunate for these, ask them again and again, and
whatever outward evils or distresses may abide us, these, as you have heard,
will not only comfort and support us under them, but more than countervail
them. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble, etc? if God be for
us, who can be against us? Romans 8. 31. You know what Philip said to our
Savior, John. 14. 8. Lord show us the father, and it suffices us. So let but
the Father show us himself, shine on us with his face, vouchsafe us his favor,
and it suffices: As the Lord said unto Paul, and says to all his people, 2 Corinthians. 12. 9. my grace is sufficient for thee, though then Paul was in an ill
case, there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet him, etc. v. 7. yet says the Lord to him, my grace is sufficient for
thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Let our condition be what it
will, let it seem never so sad, let our trials and afflictions be never so many
and great, yet God's grace, i. e. his favor, his accepting grace, is
sufficient to comfort us; yea, and his sanctifying, strengthening, and
supporting grace to uphold us. When (says David) I said my foot slippeth, thy
mercy O Lord held me up. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy
comforts delight my Soul. Psalm 94. 18, 19. The Lord alone, and his favor, is
a full complete and more than sufficient counter-comfort to all troubles, and
calamities whatsoever, and the light of his countenance does not only put more
joy and gladness into their hearts, upon whom it is lift up, than in the time
when others Corn and Wine increases, but it puts more joy than the greatest
decrease of them can occasion sorrow. Habuk. 3. 17, 18. Although the Fig Tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, etc. yet I will rejoice
in the Lord, etc. yea it alters the very nature of the evils themselves, that
they are not what they were; that sickness is not sickness, as it were; hence
it is said, Is. 33. 24. And the Inhabitants shall not say I am sick, the people
that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. And hence Matthew. 9. 2. our
Savior there bids the man sick of the Palsy, be of good cheer, his sins being
forgiven, though his sickness was not yet cured; and so had he cause, had it
never been cured: In six, yea in seven troubles this keeps all evil from
touching us. Job 5. 19.

And therefore how earnestly, how importunately, at all times, but more
especially in evil times, should we implore these mercies?

CHAP. IV. The second Doctrine observable, as more general.
LOoking upon these words, as being the burden of the Psalm, and that which the
Church and people of God do so often and earnestly beg and entreat, again and
again, no less than three times v. 3, 7, 19, in this one Psalm; thence we
observe,

Doct. 2. Spiritual blessings, special Ter repetitur haec precatio, ut fieri
solet, quando animus in invocatione ardet. Strigelius.
peculiar mercies, are to be prayed for with all earnestness, not only simply
to be asked, to be sought, but in such a way, and after such a manner, viz.
frequently and fervently, often and earnestly, again and again, with ardency
and ut most importunity.

For thus the Church and people of God seek them here, for God to turn them
again, and cause his face to shine, these were Spiritual blessings, choice,
special, and peculiar mercies, Soul-benefits, and they are earnest and
importunate for them, they beg them once and again, and again, as if they would
not be denied them, and as if they were resolved not to be put off without them.

But what are we to understand by Spiritual blessings, by special peculiar
mercies? By these we are to understand, in a word, such as these here
specified, and such like: as for God to turn us from our sins to himself, to
take away our iniquities, and receive us graciously; for him to be our God, and
for us to be his people, and vouchsafe us his favor, Spirit, grace, his
accepting grace, and his sanctifying and renewing grace, pardon of sin, and
power against sin, the blessings of the Covenant, the sure mercies of David,
such as we find recorded in these and the like places. Jer. 31. 33, 34. -- 32.
38, 39, 40. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, etc. Micah 7. 19. etc. And such blessings,
such mercies, are thus to be prayed for, thus to be sought:

R. 1. Because God thus commands us to seek them; and unless we thus seek them,
we do not seek them as he enjoins. Psalm. 105. 4. Seek the Lord, and his
strength: seek his face evermore. Math. 6. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of
God, and his righteousness, etc. first, not only in regard of order of time,
but earnestness of endeavors: we are commanded to seek these not only before
other things, but more than other things. As these must be first, so chief and
most in our pursuits. So Joh: 6. 27. Labor not for the meat which perishes,
but for the meat which endures to everlasting life, which the son of man shall
give unto you, for him has God the father sealed: not that we are forbidden to
labor for things necessary to this life, for that we are and ought to do; but
the meaning is, that we must mainly and chiefly labor for that meat that
endures to everlasting life, that is, for Christ and his benefits, those things
appointed by God for refreshing and sustaining the soul to eternity. So that
this is to be understood comparatively, rather for the meat, etc. preferring
the one before the other, as when it is said, Matthew. 9. 13. I will have mercy,
and not sacrifice, he excludes not sacrifice, but prefers mercy. So Luke 11.
9. And I say unto you ask, and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you. By these expressions Christ enjoins
earnestness and perseverance in prayer; for it is not a bare simple repetition
of the same thing, but a gradation, and it is meant of things necessary to
salvation; and the whole scope of the place is to stir up to earnestness, Ask,
and Scopus est oportere nos constanter orare, and cum ardore.
do not only ask, but seek, yea and not only seek, but knock. Thus when the
Lord prescribes unto Aaron, and his Sons, to bless the children of Israel,
which was by supplicating his face and favor, this they were to implore again
and again, as in that form, Numbers 6. 25. The Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, and be gracious to thee. v. 26. The Lord lift up his Countenance upon
thee, and give thee peace.

R. 2. Because others have thus sought them, even with all earnestness; as the
Church and people of God here, and so others elsewhere. The Prophet David tells
us, Psalm 119. 58. he entreated the favor of God: but how? with his whole
heart: I entreated thy favor with my whole heart. So how often in the same
Psalm does he beg of God to quicken him, and to teach him his statutes, nine or
ten times the one, and seven or eight times the other. So how importunate is he
for pardon, Psalm 51. 6. -- according to the multitude of thy tender mercies
blot out my trnsgressions. v. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin. v. 7. Purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean, wash
me, etc. v. 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities,
etc. And how importunate was Jacob for the blessing? Genesis 32. 24. And Jacob was
left alone: this was on purpose, and upon choice, to wrestle with God by secret
prayer, and there Voluntary remanserat solus precandi causa.
wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day. This man was the Son
of God, appearing in the shape of a man, called after, and by the Prophet
Hosea, God, and an Angel. Est in his (...): nam de Deo quasi de viro, humanitus
Scriptura loquitur. Pareus.
Hosea 12. 3, 4. And this strife was more spiritual, with prayers and tears,
than corporal; and it is said, v. 26. that the man said, let me go, for the day
breaks, but Jacob said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. Though
Jacob was lamed, and so exceeding hard laid at, yet Etiam luxatus and laesus
non cessat, etc.
he will not let him go without a blessing v 27. And he said unto him, what is
thy name, as if he had said, Thou art such a man, as I have scarce met with the
like, thou deservest a Title of Honor indeed, and thou shall have it, who art
such a Conqueror, who thus not only stirrest up thy self to take hold of me,
but have prevailed over me. v. 28. And he said, thy name shall be called no
more Jacob, or not only, or not so much Jacob, but Israel: for as a Israel, i.
e. A Prince of God, or one having Princely power with God.
Prince have thou power with God, and with men, and have prevailed. See also
Hosea 12. 3, 4. -- he wept, and made supplication to him, etc. So how earnest
was Moses for pardon and forgiveness for the Israelites? Exodus 32. 32. -- yet
now, if thou will forgive their sin: an abrupt manner of speaking, noting the
earnestness of his prayer, we may understand it shall be well; and if not, blot
me I pray thee out of thy book which thou have written: The like we read of
Paul, Romans 9. 3. and both show their zeal for God's glory, and earnestness for
that, which made so much for the weal of those they prayed for. So Numbers 14.
18, 19. Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according to the
greatness of thy mercy: and how earnest was he for God's presence? Exodus 33.
15. If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence; for wherein shall it
be known here, that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? is it not
that thou go with us, etc. Thus our Savior tells us, Math. 11. 12. That from
the days of John the Baptist until then, the Kingdom of Heaven suffered
violence, and the violent took it by force. What blessed days were these?
people then were resolved for heaven, there was an heaven to be had, and an
heaven they would have what ever it cost them; they did not stand saying, shall
we, shall we, as we do in these days, but were firmly set and fixed for heaven.
By the Kingdom of heaven here we are to understand, not only heaven it self,
Media illa per quae regio coeli pervenitur. Tossan.
but what leads to it, and fits for it, as grace, holiness, righteousness, etc.
and such forwardness and zeal was there then for these, that they strove with
greatest earnestness to procure them: they took them by force, as a Castle is
taken by storm; Metaphora sumpta a castris, vel ab arce quapiam, quae
irrumpentibus hostibus diripitur. Beza.
they made a prey or prize of them, nothing less would satisfy them; as it is
said of Luther, that he protested he would not be put off with other things
Protestatus sum nolle sic satiari ab eo.
: and it is said of Father Latimer, that he so plied the Throne of Grace with
this once again, once again, restore the Gospel to England, as if he would have
no nay at God's hands, and he many times continued kneeling and knocking so
long together, that he was not able to rise up without help: and Monica, the
mother of Austin, was so earnest for his conversion, that it was said it was
impossible for a son of so many prayers and tears to perish. And Epaphr as is
said, Coloss. 4. 12. to labor fervently, or to strive, that is, to press with
greatest zeal and earnestness in his prayers for the Colossians, that they
might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. And thus the Citizens
of Sion, the true members of God's Church, are described, Psalm. 24. 6. This is
the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Selah. or
seek the face of Jacob, that is, of the God of Jacob, so some supply; others
say, God is pleased to style himself by the name of Jacob, being the God of
Jacob, and there being such a near union between him and his people, as the
Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. or this is Jacob, these are the true
children of Jacob, and true Israelites indeed, that herein imitate and resemble
Jacob, who so earnestly sought the Blessing. So that the Saints formerly were
so earnest in seeking the Lord, and his face, that from thence they were styled
a generation of Seekers, such, who having found God, seek him yet again, and
seek him more and more, and here there is still more of God to be found, and
therefore more to be sought, till in heaven we come fully to enjoy him. And
these are the true Seekers indeed, far and altogether different from some, who
have so styled themselves in these later days, they being no better indeed, as
one says, than the Jesuits by-blows, though they are not yet so wise as to
know their own Father, and an evil and an adulterous generation. But these
true members of the Church indeed, they were such as still sought the Lord, and
his face, with their whole hearts, and greatest earnestness of desire. Here are
two distinct words in the Original, and both denote (...) significat quaerere
diligenter, et cum cura, etc. Includit curam, sollicitudinem, and diligentiam.
LXX reddiderunt verbo (...) studiose quaesivit, conatu et studio, etc.
more than ordinary seeking; the first signifies a very diligent search, a
laborious enquiry, a strong desire to find what we seek, and a kind of
unquietness or restlesness, till we find it: As Psalm 132. 4. And the other
word signifies also, to seek studiously, etc. So that they sought, and they
sought earnestly, and there was nothing that they sought nor desired more than
God and his favor, than communion with him, and conformity to him. And should
not we seek them now, as others have done formerly? are they not as precious,
and have we not as much need of them now as ever? nay by how much there are now
clearer discoveries of them, by so much the more earnestly should we seek them.

R. 3. Because the nature of them requires it, and may command it; they being
things which are so precious, and of so great importance, and so absolutely and
indispensably necessary, that what should be sought with earnestness, if not
these? as God, and his face and favor, and grace, and pardon. It is reported
of the Macedonians, that Alexander being displeased with them, they not only
laid by their Arms, and put on mourning apparel, and came running in Troops to
his Tent, but that there they remained almost for three days together,
beseeching his pardon, which at last they obtained. How much more should we
implore God's pardon? But to instance only in these two in my Text, as 1. for
God to turn us again to himself; what an excellent thing is this, to be turned
from darkness to light, from Satan to God, from sin to grace and holiness, from
evil to good, from misery to felicity, from hell to heaven? Who would not be
thus turned? And then of such absolute and indispensable necessity is it, that
we be turned, that we dye else, we are undone, and perish else, either we must
be converted or destroyed; and then for God to cause his face to shine, how
precious, how excellent is his favor? Psalm 36. 7. How excellent is thy loving
kindness, O God, etc. therein is life, yea it is better than life. Psalm 30. 5.
-- 63. 3. and so necessary, that though many live, no soul truly lives, but in
the enjoyment of it. Deuteronomy. 32. 20. God said there, he would hide his face from
that people, he would see what their end should be. But O how sad must their
end be, that he hides his face from, that he takes no pleasure in? Psalm 30. 7.
Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. Job 34. 29. When he gives
quietness, who then can make trouble, and when he hides his face, who then can
behold him, whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only? And
things of such excellency, and such necessity, do not they require, and may
they not command importunity? I remember a story, that one relates of a poor
woman in Essex, that being condemned to dye, she fell a crying and scrieching,
as if she meant to pierce the heavens; and the Judge, and those on the Bench
bidding her hold her peace, she cries, O my Lord it is for my life, I beg, I
beseech you, it is for my life: So when thou go to God to beg for such
mercies, it is for thy life, yea for what is better than thy life, it is for
the life of thy life, the life of thy soul, for that without which thou losest
thy soul, and dyest eternally, perishest everlastingly, and wilt not be earnest
for this? and as blind Bartimeus, cry out, and the Mark 10. 46, 47, 48, etc.
more others bid thee hold thy peace, cry the more a great deal. Prove. 2. 3.
Yea if thou criest after wisdom, and liftest up thy voice for understanding,
etc. And what should we cry after, or lift up our voice for, if not for such
mercies?

R. 4. Because this shows that we are earnest for them, and that our desires
are real, and not indifferent, when we are importunate for them, and are
resolved not to go away without them, as the Prophet David was for mercy. Psalm
57. 1. Be merciful to me O God, be merciful to me, etc. So for pardon, Psalm
51. Wash me, cleanse me, purge me, and again wash me. Genes, 30. 1.
So Rachel for children, Give me children, or else I dye. So that woman of
Canaan for her Math. 15. 21, 22, 23, etc.
daughter, she would not be said nay; and Paul, that the thorn in the flesh
might depart, 2 Cor. 12. 8. for this thing I besought the Lord thrice. And when
we are thus earnest and importunate, we manifest and make appear our desires
are real, and that we pray in truth, and such the Lord is nigh unto. Psalm 145.
18.

R. 5. Because this shows us to be in a fit posture and capacity to receive
them. For this declares, 1. that we need them, that we want them, I mean that
we have a due sense of our want of them, when we are importunate for them, and
will not be said without them. For take a beggar that comes to your door for an
Alms, if he be soon said, and presently goes his way, what do you say? surely
he had no great need, for if he had, he would not so soon have taken an answer.
2. This declares that we value them, and set an high price, and esteem on them,
when we are importunate for them; and these two bring us into a fit posture and
capacity for to receive them, but else we show no great need that we see of
them, and withal a kind of slighting of them. As if a man was to ask some
great matter, and he should ask it frigidly, coldly, carelessly, what would he
say, that he asked it of? what is it no more worth than so? O when you go to
seek spiritual mercies, you go to seek what is of great worth, of more worth
than a whole world, and if ever you have them, God will have them valued, and
have you see your want of them, and so be brought into a capacity for them.

R. 6. Because we are so unworthy of them, of so great things, and therefore we
must the more earnestly and importunately ask them, and seek them, by how much
the more unworthy we are of them. Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man cried unto the
Lord. Truly we are all of us such poor and unworthy creatures, that we had need
not only pray, but cry. Thus that poor woman of Canaan being in her own sense
Math. 15. 21, 22. etc.
and apprehension so unworthy, but a mere dog as it were, how earnest is she?
why, as Jacob said, so may we say more truly, we are not worthy of the least of
all God's mercies, or we are Genes. 32. 10.
less than the least of all God's mercies. We partake indeed of many mercies,
as we have whole bundles of them, but if we search into them, we can find none
so little, so small, but we are less our selves; and if we are not worthy of
the least, how much more unworthy of so great? and therefore when we that are
so unworthy of any the least mercies, go to God for so great, is there not
cause we should be earnest and importunate? and so the sight and sense of our
so great unworthiness, should so much the more stir up and increase our
earnestness, as it has done in others. So great matters, begged of so great a
Majesty, and by such as are so mean, and unworthy, had need be begged with all
importunity and earnestness. Majesty and greatness, considered with our
weakness, and unworthiness, should much excite earnestness. Jesus Christ
himself, though so worthy, and without sin, yet how earnest was he in prayer?
Hebr. 5. 7. it is said, he offered up prayers and supplications, with strong
crying and tears, etc. how much more we, who are involved in sin, etc.

R. 7. Because the great price which has been given to purchase and procure
them, no less than the precious blood of Christ, the precious life of Christ,
John 6. 51. -- and the bread that I will give is my flesh, that I will give for
the life of the world. 1 These. 5. 10. -- who died for us, that whether we wake
or sleep, we should live together with him, the life of grace here, and the
life of glory hereafter. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins. Math. 26. 28. This is my blood which is shed
for many for the remission of sins: and Hebr. 9. 22. -- and without shedding of
blood is no remission. So we read of being justified by his blood, and
reconciled by Romans 5. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3. 18.
his death, and of his suffering for our sins, that he might bring us unto God.
And shall not we cry for what Jesus Christ was pleased todye? shall not we
earnestly beg for what he bled? shall not we lay out our strength for what he
laid down his life, and lift up our voice for what he yielded up the Ghost? O
how unworthy then should we show our selves of them?

R. 8. Because this is all that the Lord requires of us, for the obtaining of
them; that we should ask them, seek them, beg them, entreat them, and should
not we do this to purpose, earnestly, and with all our might, when he requires
no more: as Math. 7. 7. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall he opened unto you. v. 8. For every one that asks
receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be
opened. So in Ezekiel. 36. when God had made there those exceeding great and
precious promises of blessings and mercies, more worth than many worlds; as v.
25. that he would sprinkle clean water upon them, etc. and v. 26. give them a
new heart, and put within them a new spirit, and take away the stony heart out
of their flesh, and give them an heart of flesh: and v. 27. put his spirit
within them, which is more than many worlds without them, and cause them to
walk in his statutes, and keep his judgments and do them: and v. 28. and they
should be his people, and he their God, etc. Now after all, hear what the Lord
says, v. 37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the
house of Israel, to do it for them, or be sought to; and is this all? and
should not this be done earnestly? Surely, he that cannot find in his heart to
do this for such mercies, deserves to go without them. O consider, God required
a great deal more of his Son, that we might partake of them. What could he
indeed require more? he requires of him, that he should come down John 6. 38.
from Heaven to Earth, from the Throne to the Footstool, and become man, be
made flesh, yea in the likeness of sinful flesh, that though he was in the form
of God, and thought it not robbery to be equal with God: yet that he should
make himself of no reputation, and take upon him the form of a Servant, and be
made in the likeness of Philip. 5. 6, 7, 8.
men, and being found in fashion as a man, should humble himself, and become
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, that he should lay down his
life, shed his precious blood, one drop of whose blood is more worth than ten
thousand thousand worlds, and than all the blood of all the men that ever lived
upon the face of the Earth; yea, that he should be made a curse,
undergo his wrath, make his very Soul an offering for sin, and be for a while
as it was forsaken of his Father; and all this, and infinitely more than can be
conceived, much less expressed, that we might obtain such mercies; yea, and Jesus
Christ willingly and readily obeyed his father in all these. Hebr. 10. 7. Then
said I, lo I come to do thy will, O God: and I delight to do thy will, and --
as the Father gave me Psalm 40. 8.
commandment, so I do: though to do that, did John 14, 31.
as it was amaze him, and make his soul exceeding sorrowful, even unto death,
and brought Mark 14. 33, 34. Math. 26. 38.
him into such an agony, that his sweat was as it were great drops of blood
falling down to the Luke 22. 44. Math. 26. 39. and Mark 14. 35, 36, 39.
ground. So that as man, he could not but recoile as it were, and pray, and
that three times, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,
that is, this bitter passion; but if it may not pass, but I must drink it, or
otherwise such choice mercies, such inestimable benefits cannot be procured for
poor sinners, but they must come swimming to them in my blood, and be purchased
by my undergoing of thy wrath, thy will be done, seeing thou will have it so,
that I must undergo all this to procure them, I am willing, I am content,
rather than poor sinners should go without them, I am willing to purchase them
at any rate. This now God requires of his Son, that we might partake of these
mercies, and all this his Son obeyed him in; but to us, that we might obtain
them, he says only, ask, seek, knock, and let me be enquired of by you: and
should not we do this, and do it to purpose? surely else it must needs argue
fearful ingratitude, and strange disingenuity, and we deserve to go without
them. You know what Naaman's servant said to him, 2 Kings 5. 13. My Father, if
the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it?
how much rather then, when he says unto thee, wash and be clean? So what could
God have said unto us, do, for such mercies, (more worth than many worlds) but
we should have been ready and willing to have done it? how much more then, when
he says only ask, and it shall be given you; seek and ye shall find: and Rom*
10. 13. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved: and seek
the Lord, and ye shall live, Amos 5. 6. But Jesus Christ dies that we may live,
1 These. 5. 9, 10. and shall not we cry, that we may live? Was a malefactor
condemned to dye, and was there procured for him (upon some great price paid by
another) a pardon of his Prince, which he should have upon asking and begging;
O how importunately would he beg it, and ask it? When God said to David, Seek
ye my face, O how readily does David's heart echo back Psalm. 27. 8.
again, thy face Lord will I seek! Lord, thy face, thy favor, makes heaven,
and may I have that for seeking, for asking, which Jesus Christ procured by
dying? Lord, I will seek it, and seek it to purpose, entreat it, as he says
elsewhere, with my whole heart. Ps. 119. 58. And truly we had never had them
for seeking, if Jesus had not purchased them by suffering; never for begging,
if he had not purchased them by bleeding; nor for crying, if he had not
purchased them by dying.

R. 9. Because this is the way to have them, thus to seek them, I mean with all
earnestness, with all our might, with our whole hearts. Thus Jacob obtained the
blessing* Genesis 32. 29. -- and he blessed him there; Moses, pardon, and God's
presence; David clensing, and the recovery of God's face and favor; thus the
woman of Canaan obtained the casting of the Devil out of her daughter; thus
Monica obtained the conversion of her son Austin, etc. The ears of the Lord are
open to the cry of the righteous, Psalm 34. 15. and James 5. 16. The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. That Is the prayer that
prevails, that carries it, the effectual fervent prayer. There (...)
is but one word in the Original, but it is so sublime, and Emphatical, that
Translations cannot reach the height of it. The Greek properly signifies the
working prayer, and it signifies such a working as notes the earnestest and
liveliest activity that can be, the greatest force and vehemence of an earnest
spirit and affection. Excusso stupore and torpore, ardenter, instanter, cum
fiducia, c^elum pulsemus, and compleamus clamoribus, and tum certo confidemus
descensuram ad nos domini miserationem. Winckelman in Luc. 11.
Such a prayer that sets the whole man a work, and all the graces a work, heart
a work, and affections a work, and faith a work, and repentance a work, and
love a work, etc. that strongly presses and enforces as it were upon God, and
is not so much the labor of the lips, but the travel of the heart. These are
the prayers that prevail, when there is an heat and warmth in our spirits, and
our affections are fired by the holy Ghost, and with gracious ascents flame up
toward God: when we pray a prayer, not only say a prayer, and the holy Ghost
makes intercession for Romans 8. 26.
us, with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered. The promise is made to such
prayer, Jerem. 29. 13. And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search
for me with all your heart. Hosea 6. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know the Lord, etc. Prove. 2. 3. Yea if thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest
up thy voice for understanding. v. 4. If thou seek her as silver, and searchest
for her as for hid treasures. v. 5. Then thou shall understand the fear of the
Lord, and find the knowledge of God. Psalm. 81. 10. -- open thy mouth wide, and
I will fill it.

Thus it is wrestling in prayer that prevails, when there is such an holy
impudency, as it were, as to take no denial; this is a token for good indeed,
and to such God has not said, seek ye me in vain: Luk 11. 8. I say unto you,
though he will not rise, and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of
his importunity, he will rise, and give him as many as he needs. That which
we translate, Importunity, is in the Original, Impudence, and so the Dutch read
it; nevertheless (...).
for his impudence sake, because of his immodest persistance, taking no denial.
It seems to be a Metaphor, taken from a sort of Beggars, that when they come to
your doors, will not be said without an Alms, you cannot get them gone do what
you can, speak them fair or foul, all is one, they will weary you out but they
will have it, and so at length get it: and if an importunate impudent beggar
gets from man how much more shall an humble, daily, importunate petitioner
obtain from God, to whom importunity is so acceptable, and at no time
unseasonable, as yet it is to man? v. 7. And he from within shall answer and
say, trouble me not, the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed,
etc. as if he should say, Is there no time to come but now, or is this a time
to come?

Luther was exceeding frequent and ferven^ in prayer: one writes of him, No day
passes wherein Luther spends not three hours at leas^ in prayer; and once it
fell out, says he, that ^ heard him: good God, what a spirit, what a
confidence was in his very expressions, etc. And would to God (says Luther) I
could always Utinam eodem ardore orare possem, etc.
pray with a like ardour, for then I had alway^ this answer, Be it unto thee as
thou will. Thus to prevail in prayer, the way is to be earnest, and Fiat quod
velis.
ardent in prayer; it is ardency, not eloquenc^ that carries it here. Matthew.
11. 12. -- and the violent take it by force, i. e. they who with great
earnestness and zeal, seek after salvation, they obtain it, and only they.

R. 10. Because when we thus seek them, and obtain them, we shall the more
value them, and with the more carefulness retain them, by how much the more
wrestlings we acquired them: but lightly come, lightly go. When the Spouse
Cant. 3. was at a loss for her beloved, and she after earnest pursuits found
him, O how did she prize him and value him, and how carefully retain him, and
would not let him go! etc. v. 4. I held him, and would not let him go: and so
Mary her Master, John 20. 16.

O this is a mercy, says the Soul, that cost me many a sigh, and many a groan,
and many a tear, and much tugging and wrestling, and therefore how singularly
dear and precious is it to me, and I can by no means part with it! etc.

Use 1. Are spiritual mercies thus to be sought with such earnestness,
fervently, and frequently? what shall we think of those then, that in stead of
seeking them thus, scarce seek them at all? O how many prayerless families and
persons are there, who call not on the name of the Lord! and how sad is the
state of such, it cannot be expressed? For,

1. This is made the very badg and character of wicked men, yea and of the very
worst of wicked men. Psalm. 10. 4. The wicked through the pride of his
countenance will not seek after God, God is not in all his thoughts. Psalm 14.
4. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as they
eat bread, and call not upon the Lord! Thus it was said of her that was filthy
and polluted, the oppressing city: Zeph. 3. 1^.
she drew not near to her God.

2. Such are practical Atheists, they live without God in the world, yea they
say in effect, Psalm. 14. 1.
there is no God: for if there be a God, why do they not own and acknowledge
him, and their dependence on him, by calling upon him, which not doing they
practically deny him? and how sad is this not to own or acknowledge God? Isaiah
1. 3. The Ox knows his owner, etc. we are bid in all our ways to acknowledge
him, Prove. 3. 6. and in none of their ways to acknowledge him, but to live
without him, as if they had no need of him, how sad must that needs be? as John
1. 10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew
him not. For God to make the world, and when he has made it to be in it,
taking care of, and providing for those he has made in it, and they not know
him! As if any of us should build an house for another, and then inhabit with
him in that house, and take care of him, and there daily provide for him, and
he not know us, nor own us, would it be endured?

3. Such are set and reckoned among Heathens: God can afford them no better
place, however they call themselves Christians. Jer. 10. 25. Heathens and
families that call not on Gods name, are put together. Amos 9. 7. Are ye not as
children of the Ethiopians unto me?

4. Such have none of God's Spirit, for in whomsoever the Spirit is, it is in
them a Spirit of Supplication. Zach. 12. 10. Romans 8. 26. Gal. 4. 6. And how sad
is it not to have the Spirit? for Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his: and whose is he then? and 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know ye not
your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, (that is, by his Spirit)
except ye be Reprobates?

5. Such are spiritually dead, there is no spiritual life in them at all; for as
where natural life is, there is breath, so where ever there is spiritual life,
there is prayer, it being as it were the breathing thereof. Thus it is said of
Saul, that as soon as ever he was made spiritually alive, behold he prays,
Acts 9. 11.

6. Such lie open to Gods wrath, yea to the pouring out of his fury, and the
fierceness of his wrath. Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that
know thee not, and the families that call not on thy name. The least drop of
God's anger, much more of his fury, is sad; but what then are the floods, and
the pourings out thereof? the pourings out indeed of God's spirit, of his
grace, of his mercies, and blessings, are sweet, but of his fury how dreadful!
and therefore Consider this ye who forget God, and live without God in the
world, lest he tear you in pieces, and Psalm 50. 22.
there be none to deliver: and O how sad is it! That there should be such
mercies and blessings to be had, that are not only so excellent, but of such
absolute and indispensable necessity, that without them you certainly perish,
and yet not ask them, nor seek them? For a man that must starve if he have not
bread, and yet not ask it? and dye, if he have not a pardon, and yet not
petition for it! But I cannot pray: go then to God to teach thee, and beg his
Spirit, that that may be in thee a spirit of grace, and then a spirit of
supplication; that thou may own that God, in whose hand thy breath is, and
whose are all thy ways: want of which was God's great charge against that
heathenish Monarch Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 23.

Use 2. Let us be all humbled then, even the best of us, that we have no more
thus sought them. We have sought them, it may be, but not with that earnestness
that we should have done, but coldly, carelessly, as if we were indifferent,
whether we had them or no; prayed, as if we prayed not, not cried to him with
our hearts, as the Lord complains Hos. 7. 14. not stirred up our Isaiah 64. 7.
selves to take hold of God; nor wrestled as Jacob of old; but with the Spouse,
Cant. 3. 1. sought our beloved, it may be, on our beds, sleepily, drowsily,
negligently; and no wonder then though we have mist of him, who will be
otherwise sought, if ever he be found.

Use 3. Let us be excited to seek them more earnestly for the future, as these
here,

1. For our selves. Let us wrestle, as Jacob did, for the blessing, weep and
make supplication, pray without ceasing, continue instant in prayer, not give
out, nor over, but remember what Jesus Christ has said for our encouragement
herein, Luke 11. 5, 6, 7, 8, etc and Luke 18. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Let us resolve
with David, evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, says he, and not
only pray, but cry aloud. That of Father Latimer to good Ridley is seasonable
here, Pray, pray, said he, O pray, pray. For should things of such excellency
and necessity be asked frigidly, what was this but to debase them, and to betray
a kind of slighting of them, and to make as if there was not that worth in
them, nor that absolute and indispensable necessity of them, as indeed there
is; whereas they are such things as we cannot want, nor be without, as God and
his favor, and grace, sound conversion; as a poor soul under desertion, cried
out once in my hearing, Want God? says she, O I cannot want him, nor be
without him: and this she uttered with tears. No, we cannot be without God, and
his favor, and grace. Rachel cries, give me children, or else I dye, Genesis 30.
1. but we must have these, or our souls dye, and that eternally. O when we go
to God for these, for grace, and that he would shine on us with his face, and
turn us again to himself, do we know or consider what we go to him for? do we
not go for that which is more worth than a world? a whole world? yea that
amounts to more than many worlds, that is, more than heaven and earth it self.
And should we not be earnest and Qui frigide rogat, docet negare.
importunate for these? for what then, or how else can we show that we value
them, or what do we do else but teach God to deny us them?

2. For ours: as for our children, and relations, those that are near and dear
to us. For how else (as Esther said in another case, as concerning her people
and kindred, chap. 8. 6.) can we endure to see the evil that will come upon
them, and how can we endure to see their destruction? there being such absolute
and indispensable necessity of them, that ours must needs certainly and
unavoidably perish without them: and shall the children of our own bowels be in
danger of perishing for want of them, and shall we not be earnest for them? as
Solomon's mother said, Prove. 31. 2. what my Son? and what the son of my womb?
and what the son of my vows? and not be earnest? not wrestle? It is an abrupt
kind of speech, and imports abundance of tender affection, and earnest desire
of her son's welfare, more than she could utter or express; and therefore she
several times repeats the same thing. O he was her Son, her most dear Son, and
therefore the Son of her vows, the son of many prayers, and probably tears. Cum
filium votorum nominet, oftendit se non tantum cum filio, de pia ejus
educatione egisse, sed Deo (sine cujus auxilio irritus fuisset reliquus labor)
in precibus commendasse, etc. Cartwritus in locum.
O let us pray for ours, as Abraham did for his son Ishmael, Genesis 17. 18. And
Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee, not only live,
but live before thee, or live in thy sight, live in thy face, so it is in the
Hebrew, that (...) in conspectu tuo, vel in facie tua.
is, in the shinings of thy face, in the light of thy countenance, i. e. live
and enjoy thy love, thy favor, find grace in thy eyes: O that his soul may
live, that he may live not only a natural, a temporal, but a spiritual and
eternal life, a blessed and happy life, the life of grace, and a life in thy
favor here, and then the life of glory hereafter. And Abraham was very earnest
and sollicitous for this: O, says he, or, O if, i. e. I (...) Utinam, Quaeso,
vocula optantis.
earnestly wish, or I beseech thee, I earnestly pray and entreat thee: it is
the voice of one wishing and earnestly desiring a thing; O that Ishmael might
live before thee. And this Abraham speaks, 1. not as slighting or rejecting
Gods Videtur Abraham risu and intercessione sua pro Ismaele, in quem valde fuit
intentus, quasi abrupisse Dei orationem, quam igitur v. 19. continuat, etc.
promise, concerning a son of Sarah; as if he had said, Having Ishmael, I
desire no more, nor 2. as despairing of the promise; as if he had said, I
should have but little hope, if I had not more hope in Ishmael already born,
than the promised son yet to be born, or how is it possible we should have a
son at this age? and therefore, O that Ishmael might live, etc. It was not, I
say, from hence, nor upon these grounds, that Abraham thus speaks; for when the
Lord had made that promise to him, it is said, v. 17. that Abraham fell upon
his face, he bowed himself; and this he did, not only as expressing reverence,
Abraham audiens promissionem de semine ex Sara orituro, eamque firmissima fide
amplectens, toto pectore laetatur, and haec non esse dubitantis, sed
certissimae fidei verba, Paulus clare testatur Romans 4. Chytraeus in Genesis 17. 17.
but showing his thankfulness, which was an evidence that he believed, and
highly valued, and heartily embraced what God had promised; and whereas it is
said, he laughed, it was not from doubting, or staggering at the promise,
through unbelief, ( Romans 4. 20.) but as admiring the goodness of God in it; not
as judging it impossible, or thinking it a fable, but as overjoyed and even
amazed at such welcome tidings: it was not from distrust in God's power, but out
of admiration at God's favor. And therefore this earnest wish of Abraham, as
concerning his son Ishmael, that he might live in his sight, it proceeded from
Abraham's dear and fatherly affection toward Ishmael, and his earnest desire of
his weal, so that his affections being suddenly moved with the thought of
Ishmael, they make him as it were forget other things, to beg for him; or, as
if he had said, though I cannot well conceive how this should be, that at this
age I Bonus pater audita promissione de filio novo, sollicitus est etiam de
Ismaelis salute; metuens forte ne totus abjiciatur: vitam ei precatur non modo
naturalem, sed potius felicem, etc. Pareus in locum.
should have a son, yet I believe and gladly embrace the promise; but however,
O that Ishmael might live before thee* let not him, O Lord, be cast off, nor be
abandoned by thee, but let him live in thy favor; though I have a promise
indeed of another Son, yet I pray thee let it be well with this son also, bind
up his soul in the bundle of life, let him live in thy love, let him be an heir
of grace here, and an heir of glory hereafter. Thus, though Abraham did yield
to the promise, yet he thus speaks, as being very sollicitous for Ishmael; that
God would set his eyes In promisla felicitate fratri conjungatur. Junius.
and his heart upon him for good, for the chief good, for spiritual good,
eternal good, for thus Interpreters generally carry it. Though God promised
more seed to him, yea that his seed should be as the stars of heaven for
number, chapter 15. 5. yet this does not remove nor take off his affection from one
he had already, but still his heart and endeared affections are toward him;
Quasi dicat, peto et ejus haberi rationem, ne abjiciatur, vel pereat. Pareus.
he knew not how to have any one of his abandoned of God, but as if he had
said, Lord take care of him also, that he be not cast off, or perish. Thus the
affections and desires of this holy Patriarch were carried forth, not in
gathering riches, or heaping up treasures for his son, Affectus hic pii
parentis in filium, docet praecipuam parentum curam hanc esse debere pro
liberis, non ut colligant eis thesauros, sed ut conservent and commendent eos
Deo pus precibus, etc. Pareus.
but in earnest prayers to God for his eternal good. And this blessed example
of his we should follow, we should imitate, so as to be very earnest, and
importunately sollicitous for the great concerns of our children, for spiritual
blessings for them, special peculiar favors, tender mercies, bowels of mercy,
the blessings of the covenant, the sure mercies of David, that their souls may
live, that they may live in his sight, in his face, in the light of his
countenance, that as he has granted them life, so he would vouchsafe them his
favor, which is the life of our lives, as Job speaks, Job 10. 12. that he
would turn them again, and cause his face to shine on them, and so they may be
saved; we should wrestle with the Lord, that he would thus bless them, and
resolve with Jacob, not to let him go, till he so bless them, and bless them
all, every one, both small and great, that so while some are taken, Luke 17.
34, 35.
others may not be left, but that those whom one house has held, one heaven
may hold, and that being all heirs of grace together here, they may come to be
all heirs of glory together hereafter, that so hell may never be the fuller for
any of ours; for which of ours can we endure to have lost, or spare to be left
to ruin?

3. For others, but more especially for Sion, for Jerusalem, for the Church and
people of God; we should for such mercies be very importunate, as these here,
and the Prophets and people of God elsewhere: as the Prophet Isaiah, 62. 1. For
Sions sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake will I not rest,
until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation
thereof as a Lamp that burns. Here the Prophet professes his serious purpose
of an unwearied constant solicitation of God for his Church, of which Sion was
a type; and it is, till its righteousness go forth; etc. And thus earnest,
zealous, and importunate should we be for the Church and people of God; we
should not only propound our desires, but press and enforce them, as it is
said afterward of the watchmen, upon the walls of Jerusalem, v. 6. I have set
watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day
nor night; and then it follows, ye that make mention of the Lord, or, nearer
the Hebrew, Rememorantes Dominum, vel qui reminiscimini Domini.
Ye that are the Lord's remembrancers, or ye that mind the Lord, to wit, of his
Church, whose office it is to be still minding and soliciting him in its
behalf: it is a term borrowed from the manner of Princes, who have certain
Officers called their Remembrancers, to mind them of such matters, as concern
the public weal and welfare; and what an honor and privilege is it to be
remembrancers to the King of Heaven? and this honor have not only his
Ministers, but all his people: not that God is subject to forgetfulness, or can
forget his Church, and the things that concern its weal, but for his own glory,
and his peoples greater comfort, God will have it be thus, viz. that he be
earnestly solicited, and sought to: and these now are bid to give him no rest,
till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth, i. e. they
must continue instant and constant in prayer, be urgent and importunate with
God, until he hear, and put his Church into such a condition, that all may
praise her, or for which she may become famous throughout the whole world. And
thus let us both Ministers and people resolve to do, not to hold our peace day
nor night, nor keep silence, nor give the Lord rest, till he establish, and
till he make our Jerusalem a praise to the Earth. Let us not only call upon
his name, but stir up our selves to take hold of him: let us put forth all our
strength, put out our selves to the utmost, yet to stay him with us; for woe to
us if he depart from us. Want of this the Prophet Isaiah complains of, and
acknowledges as a great sin. Is. 64. 6. And we all, says he, do fade as a leaf,
and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away, and yet there is none (v.
7.) that calls upon thy name, that addresseth himself unto thee, at least
aright, or but very few, so few, as that they were not as it were seen, nor did
appear, but were hid in the multitude: or if more did call upon his name, yet
they did not stir up themselves to take hold of God, to stay him with them,
though he threatened, Emphasis est in verbo tenendi, sumpta metaphora a patre
irato, and manum ad ferulam expediente, cujus manum apprehensam alius teneat
conhibeatque, ne feriat filium. Arular. in locum.
and was upon his departure from them, or they took not hold of his hand to
stay him from striking them in his anger, for thou have hid thy face from us,
and have consumed us, because of our iniquities. And so the particle is used
elsewhere, or as some, when thou did hide thy face from us, etc. and so it is
an heavy aggravation of their stupidity, sluggishness, and security, that
though the Lord did manifest his displeasure against them, by the withdrawing
the light of his countenance from them, and consumed them because of their
iniquities, as he has done us, yet such was their stupor and sluggishness,
that notwithstanding they did not stir up themselves to take hold of him,
though he seemed to be a going: and truly not to stir up our selves at such a
time, does stir up the Lord the more against us; such neglects do much provoke,
for at such times we should be more than ordinary zealous, earnest, and
importunate sollicitors for Sion, not only proposing our desires, but
enforcing and pressing the same with all fervency. And such let us be, O let
every prayer be a pleading, a wrestling, with strong resolution, not to let him
go, till he return in mercy unto Sion, and with a smiling and favorable
countenance, look upon it. How earnest and sollicitous was Daniel for Jerusalem
in that prayer of his, Dan. 9. 3. And I set my face to the Lord God, this shows
his earnestness, setting all other things aside, to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes; and v. 17. Now
therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications.
Supplication differs from prayer, as being a further degree of enforcing our
petitions, either by redoubling our suits, or pressing them with arguments. And
cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, for the Lord's sake: i. e. show thy
grace and favor by the effects thereof, in restoring thy public worship to
the people: and v. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken, and defer
not for thine own sake, O my God, for thy city, and thy people are called by
thy name: here is further fervency, earnestness, and holy zeal in prayer,
uttering strong cries. So, David, Psalm. 14. 7. O that the salvation of Israel
were come out of Sion! or, who will give the salvation of Israel, etc. or O
that some would give: it is a Non tam privatim de se cogitat, quam de communi
Ecclesiae salute sollicitus.
form and phrase of earnest wishing, usual with the Hebrews, and often used in
Scripture elsewhere, and it gives us to see how sollicitous David was for
Israel's salvation; he forgot himself, as it were, for to remember that, and so
should we.

CHAP. V. The several points of Doctrine observable from the words, as more
particular, and as being implied.
Doctr. 1. We are all by nature turned aside, and gone away from God. Else what
needed this being turned again? and this is observable from the words, as they
respect those who were never yet turned, and therefore are here prayed for,
that they may be turned or converted. Indeed, as God at first made us, he was
with us, and we with him, and our faces were unto him; but now having sinned,
our backs are upon him, and we are gone away from him, and by going on in sin,
we go away still further from him, and this the Scripture every Psalm. 14. 3.
-- 58. 3. Romans 3. 12. Isa. 53. 6.
where holds forth; and hence by nature we are said to be without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2. 12. and Christ is said to suffer for sins upon this account,
to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. yea, and this the Scripture holds forth as
the great Luke 1. 17. Acts 26. 18, 19, 20.
work of his Ministers, to turn people to him. And now briefly by way of
Application.

Use 1. This it speaks our sin, that we are, and do still turn aside, and go
away from God, forsake him, thou have forsaken me, says the Lord, thou art
gone backward, etc. they have Jr. 15. 16. 2. 27. Is. 1. 4.
turned their back unto me, and not their face. And what a slighting is this of
God? and what scorn and contempt does it put upon him? for it is an action of
scorn and disdain among men, to turn the back upon one, and to offer scorn and
contempt to God? for a poor vile creature to turn the back upon him, whom the
Angels adore, Daniel 7. 10. Matthew. 18. 10.
and to behold whose face it is their highest honor and felicity? Our
sinfulness and great iniquity herein will the better appear, if we do but
consider these three things:

1. What a God it is, that we have and do thus forsake, and turn aside and go
away from:

As 1. the living God. Jer. 10. 10. etc. yea the fountain of living waters,
Jer. 2. 13. the very spring, and sole and sovereign Author, and original of all
true happiness, help, comfort, and support here, and of eternal life and
felicity hereafter: and this is such an evil, as the Lord calls the very
Heavens to be astonished at, Jerem. 2. 12. (...) horrere, horrescere hor^^re.
Be agonish'd, O ye heavens at this, and be horribly afraid: properly, let the
hair stand straight up, that is, be horribly afraid, or terribly afrighted with
horror, and great fear; because in extremity of horror the hair does show it,
by standing as it were straight up, through great fear. And if the heavens are
called upon to be thus horribly affrighted, because of this, how much more
should sinners be so, who have done, and do this? it follows, and be ye
desolate, says the Lord, that is, by withdrawing, or by the loss of your
Heavenly light; and why all this? v. 13. for my people have committed two
evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out
cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.

2. A great God, yea and a great King, above Psalm. 95. 3. and 145. 3.
all Gods, whose greatness is unsearchable: and for him to be turned aside
from, and to turn our backs upon, and so to be despised, how sad must this
needs be? I am small, says David, and despised, Psalm 119. 141. and Matthew. 18.
10. Take heed, says our Savior, ye despise not one of these little ones; but
for such as we, to despise a God so infinitely great, O how sinful is it!

3. A glorious God, yea the God of Glory, the father of glory, one who is
clothed with Majesty and glory, Psalm. 104. 1. he whom the Angels adore, and
before whom the Devils are forced to tremble; and such a God to be forsaken?

4. A good God, abundant, yea infinite in goodness, for how great is his
goodness, and how great is his beauty? Zach. 9. 17. Yea goodness it self, and
good to all, having made them preserving them, and continually providing for
them, and so the God to whom they are so infinirely and so many ways engaged,
and obliged.

5. The blessed God, yea blessed for ever. Romans 1. 25. (...) Shaddai is as much
as who is sufficient, or all-sufficient, having in himself, and for others an
abundant sufficiency.


6. An all sufficient God; as he told Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. The Lord appeared to
Abraham, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God, or God All-sufficient, walk
before me, and be thou perfect, that is, upright, sincere. The word in the
Hebrew, which we render Almighty, signifies not only one that has great
power, yea all power, but also one that has an allsufficiency in himself, and
that both for himself Qui sibi suffici., nullius indigens, and omnibus
creaturis, omnis boni existens fons, and sufficientia. Pareus.
and others: and thus the Lord is such a God, as does everlastingly,
independently* and unchangeably possess an infinite all sufficiency in himself,
and for himself, and a full and overflowing all sufficiency for the creature.
So that there is no need, nor any cause to go from him, for any good; no, there
is more need to go from the Sea for water, from the Sun for light, from the Sea
shore for sand, from the fire for heat: Psalm 84. 11. For the Lord God is a
Sun, and shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly. And God is able to make all grace
abound toward you, that ye always having all-suffficiency in all things, may
abound to every good work, 2 Cor. 9. 8. Some derive the Hebrew Shaddai from
Shad, a dug, or breast, it being he indeed that suckles, feeds and provides for
all creatures, etc. And O how easily and quickly can that full Ocean fill such
poor empty, scanty vessels as we are? and now to forsake and turn aside, and
depart from such a God, how evil a thing is it, and how sad must it needs be?
Paul complains of the turning away of some from him, and forsaking him, 2 Timothy
1. 15. -- 4. 10, 16. but what is it then to turn away and forsake God, and such
a God? we may well cry out with the Prophet Jeremy, 17. 13. O Lord the hope of
Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed and they that depart from thee
shall be written in the earth; because they have forsaken the Lord, the
fountain of living waters.

2. The sinfulness of this will the more appear, if we do but consider, that
this forsaking of God, and turning aside, and going away from him, is without
cause, and without all color of true reason or ground, as the Scripture does
most pathetically express it: as Jer. 2. 5. What iniquity (says the Lord) have
your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after
vanity, and are become vain? As if the Lord had said, What cause or ground have
I given you, or what color of reason can ye pretend, that you should thus go
away from me? if you have any, alledg it, produce it. And v. 31. -- Have I
(says the Lord) been a wilderness to Israel, a land of Darkness? etc. No, what
he was to them, and did for them, he tells them v. 6, 7. so Micah 6. 3. O my
people, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? testify
against me, etc. Surely darkness may sooner proceed from the Sun, than any
iniquity or obliquity proceed from God: -- a God of truth, and without
iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32. 4.

3. The sin and great iniquity of this yet further appears, if we do but
consider, while we have and do forsake, and turn aside, and go away from God,
who or what it is that we have and do turn aside to, and go away after. And
Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Pet. 2. 10. 2 Pet. 3. 3. Jude 18. Jonah 2. 8.
this is that which heaven and earth may be astonished at, for it is after sin,
after the flesh, after our vile lusts and leasing, and lying vanities, yea
after Satan, after the Devil. 1 Timothy 1. 15. For some are already turned aside
after Satan, and so after hell, death, perdition, and destruction, and at best
it is but after the creature, after 1 Samuel 12. 21. Prove. 25. 4, 5.
vain things which cannot profit, nor deliver, things that are not, that are
vanity, yea vanity of vanities, i. e. vainest vanity, as Solomon long since,
Quid ost impemtentis vita, quam periculosa a Deo alienatio, Angelorum offensio,
and servitus Diabolica. etc.
upon the utmost proof and experiment of them, has left upon record, and that
again and again, Eccles. 1. 2. 14. -- 2. 17. -- 12. 8. etc. And what an evil
and bitter thing is this? and what iniquity and sin is there in it? that God,
and such a God, God blessed for ever, a God of all and infinite perfections,
should be turned aside, and gone away from, and the back turned upon, Quid
magis horrendum posset excogitari, quam praeponererem adeo vilem Deo creatori.
Granatensis.
and in the mean time sin, and the flesh, and the vile lusts thereof, yea the
Devil himself, and death, and hell turned to, and gone after! what, for God to
be left for the creature? All Sufficiency it self forsaken for vanity? Fullness
for emptiness and indigency? Yea sin and Satan, and a man's vile lusts
preferred before the Lord of life and glory! O well may the heavens be
astonished at this, and be horribly afraid, yea be very desolate; and so shall
the sinner too, such despisers shall behold another day, and wonder and perish.

Use 2. This it speaks our misery, that we are all by nature turned aside, and
gone away from God, and such a God as you have heard but now described; yea
that God, whose face and Psalm. 73. ^5.
presence makes heaven, and is the heaven of heaven, for heaven is not God's
happiness, but God is heavens happiness, whom have I in heaven but -- 30. 5. --
63. 3.
thee? that God, with whom is the fountain of life, in whose favor is life,
yea whose favor is better than life, and who is alone the sole, sovereign,
suitable, all-sufficient, and eternal good of the soul. And that which further
advances and adds to this misery, is this, that we being turned aside, and gone
away from God* he also is departed and gone away from us, so that now by nature
we are said to be without God in the world, and to be estranged and far from
him. I mean in regard of his special and gracious presence, and what
inspeakable, yea unconceivable misery does this speak? there is a woe with an
Emphasis put upon this, -- yea woe also to Hosea 9. 11. 12.
them, when I depart from them: this is last brought in as the sorest and
heaviest evil, and even perfection of their miseries, and which indeed in the
perfect completion thereof will be the very hell of hell, that there must be a
departure from God, and a being punished with everlasting Matthew. 25. 41. 2
These. 1. 9. Ps. 73. 28.
destruction from the presence of the Lord, etc. -- for lo, they that are far
from thee shall perish, etc. Certainly the world is not so sad without the Sun,
the earth without rain, the body without the soul, as the soul without God, who
is more the life of the soul, than the Soul is the life of the body. Saul spoke
truly as to that, when he said, I am sore distressed, the Philistines making
war against him, and God being departed from him, 1 Samuel 28. 15. Job 34. 29.
When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hides his
face, who then can behold him? etc. And when God goes away, all good must needs
also go away with him, and all evils break in, as the Lord threatens that
people upon their forsaking him, and breaking that covenant he had made with
them, Deuteronomy. 31. 17. Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day,
and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them: and what then? and
there shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them, etc. And
how can it be otherwise, when their defense is departed from them?

Use 3. This shows the absolute and indispensable necessity of being turned
again, if ever we be saved, if ever we enter into heaven, and enjoy God for
ever. Why? because by nature we are all turned aside, and turned away from
these, and have our backs upon them, and how can we, unless we be turned again,
ever come to partake of them? Can a man, unless he turn, ever come to a place
that he has his back upon, and is going away from? as can he come to a place
in the East, that has his back upon it, and is going a quite contrary way to a
place in the West? And can a man, unless he turn again, and be converted, ever
come to heaven, that has his back upon heaven, and is going as fast as he can
in the ways that lead to hell, in a quite opposite and contrary way and course?
it cannot be. And therefore this shows the absolute and indispensable necessity
of being turned again, of being converted, if ever we go to heaven, if ever we
be saved, and come to enjoy God for ever: and hence, says our Savior, Matthew.
18. 3. Except you be converted and become as little children, (for it is a
change not of place, but of disposition, that is required here) ye shall not
enter into the Kingdom of heaven; and indeed ye cannot, for till ye are
converted, your backs are upon it, and ye are going on in a quite opposite way
to it. Can any go to heaven with their backs upon heaven? No: except ye repent,
says Christ, ye shall all likewise perish; and -- turn ye, turn ye, says the
Lord, Luke 13. 3, 5. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
from your evil ways, for why will ye dye, O house of Israel? As if the Lord
should have said, How can ye live, unless ye turn, that have your backs upon
life, and are going on in the ways that lead unto death? And therefore this
being our condition by nature, that we are all turned aside and turned away
from God, and our sin and misery being so great by reason thereof, O let us
never rest, 'till we come to be turned again; there being nothing that we are
more concerned in than this: and though we cannot turn our selves, yet let us
set upon it, and earnestly beg of God to do it, as these here do, Turn us
again, etc.

Doctr. 2. Such as are already turned to God, and brought home to him, are yet
very prone to turn again aside from him.

And this is observable from the words, as they refer to those who had been
turned to God, but had in some measure declined and made defection, and
therefore they pray that God would turn them again: which shows, that this is
that which the people of God themselves are very subject to. Hos. 11. 7. My
people are bent to backsliding from me, etc. Exodus 32. 8. They have turned
aside quickly out of the way. I have Ps. 119. 176.
gone astray, says David, like a lost sheep, seek thy servant, etc. Indeed such
as are truly and really turned again to God, and brought home to him, such
never do nor can totally nor finally fall away from him, because his seed
remains in them, 1 John 3. 9.
and he has by an everlasting covenant, which he has made with them,
undertaken for the contrary. I will put my fear in their hearts, that Jer. 32.
40.
they shall not depart from me, etc. But they may in some measure, and for a
season, they may fall foully, though not finally, partially though not totally.
It is that they are prone and of themselves inclined to, as appears, 1. From
our own sad experience: Have we not all too too sad experience of this? that we
have all revolting hearts, that though we are through grace turned to God, and
brought home to him, yet we are very ready to decline again. 2. It appears from
the examples of some of the most eminent of Saints: as David, a man after God's
own heart, Solomon, Peter, and others. 3. From those many caveats and
admonitions in Scripture given to Psalm. 85. 8.
the contrary. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak
peace unto his people, and to his Saints, but let them not turn again to Heb.
3. 12.
folly. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of -- 4. 14. -- 10. 23.
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God: and let us
hold fast our profession, etc. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these 2
Pet. 3, 17.
things before, beware, lest ye also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. And how often does our Savior himself
call upon his Disciples to take heed? and so his Apostles after him call upon
others; but whence is it? it is 1. from the remainers of inbred corruption, and
a deceitful heart yet within, and 2. from a subtle Devil without, and 3. an
enticing deceitful world. James 1. 14. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his Is. 44. 20. Jer. 17. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians. 6, 11.
own lusts, and enticed. -- A deceived heart has turned him aside: and the
heart is deceitful above all things, etc. And the Devil is all for turning us
aside, and perverting our ways, he is full of his wiles and devices to this
purpose. And 4. the world, either by its smiles or its frowns, is furthering of
this. 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present world,
etc.

Use 1. Let us then bewail, and be exceedingly humbled in the sight and sense
of this: O that there should be yet such a principle within us of Apostasy from
God, and such a God, the living God, and our God and father in Jesus Christ! O
how should we bewail this?

2. Let us not then be high-minded, but fear, with a godly fear, opposed to
pride, as the Apostle exhorts, Romans 11. 20. Well, because of unbelief they were
broken off, and thou stand by faith, be not high minded but fear. For thou
also art inclined to unbelief, and it is not for any worth, nor from any
strength of thy own, that thou stand, and therefore be not high minded; this
is a notable help against Apostasy: for 1. In honor qui demissus est, non ideo
indignum se honor praebet, quia ea ratio solaest alendorum honorum, honor
mediocriter uti, temperanter omnia, nihil fastuose agere.
God has a great deal of respect for such, Ps. 138. 6. 2. Dwells with such,
Isaiah 57. 15. 3. Guides such, Ps. 25. 9. 4. Saves such, Job. 22. 29. 5. Hears
such, Psalm 10. 17. and 6. Gives grace to such, more grace, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Prove.
3. 34. A man's pride (says Solomon) shall bring him low, but honor shall
uphold the humble in spirit, Prove. 29. 23. that is, that which is his grace,
and honor, and ornament, shall uphold him. The Dutch read it, the humble in
spirit shall hold honor fast, that is, he shall surely get and retain it in
the sight of God and good Nonvult timere nos eo timore, qui contrarius fidei,
sed piae sollicitudinis, nos ad perseverantiam, ad preces, and ad reverentiam
Dei stimulante. Tossan.
men, and he is likeliest to hold God fast, and Religion fast, and his
profession fast, and his ways fast. And let us therefore fear (says the
Apostle) Hebr. 4. 1. lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest,
any of you should seem to come short of it: with a fear of care, not of
diffidence; of caution, not of vexation; with a fear opposed to presumption,
high-mindedness, and hardness of heart, not to consolation and courage of
heart, and this is a holy and blessed fear indeed; and happy is the man that
thus fears always, but he that hardens his heart, shall fall into mischief,
Prove. 28. 14.

Use 3. Let us make that use hereof, that the Apostle puts us upon, Gal. 6. 1.
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiriritual, restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness, why? considering thy self, lest thou also
be tempted.

Use 4. Being so prone and ready to turn again aside from God, let us so much
the more labor and endeavor to keep with him; and to help us herein, let me
propound these five or six things. As 1. let us press upon our hearts these
following considerations.

1. The near and dear relation that we stand in to God, I mean of us as are
true believers indeed; and let that prevail with us the more to keep with him,
and not to turn away from him: why? because he is our God, and Father, and
husband, and friend etc. we are as it were espoused and married to him. And
should a people go from their God, children from their father, Is. 54. 5. Jer.
31. 32. Prove. 27. 10.
the wife from her husband, a man forsake his friend? Thine own friend, and thy
fathers friend forsake not, etc.

2. That there is no just cause nor ground, why we should go from him. 1. There
being no iniquity in him, nor ever any injury done unto us by him. -- What
iniquity have your fathers Jer. 2. 5. Micah 6. 3.
found in me. O my people what have I done unto thee? wherein have I wearied
thee? etc. 2. There being no want of any good in him, so that there is no need
to go from him, he being all-sufficient: hence the Lord reasons the case with
David, when he had revolted, and tells him, I did so and so for thee, and I gave
such and such things to thee, and if that had been too little, 2 Samuel 12. 7.
says the Lord, I would moreover have given thee such and such things, and
wherefore then have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, etc. what cause
or ground was there for it? what have thou to say, or what can thou allege?
So we find that the children of Israel disobeying the voice of the Lord, the
Angel of the Lord, that is, the Son of God, he pleads with them; I have done so
and so for you, why then Judges 2. 4.
have ye done this? and there being no true cause nor ground for it, they
answer with tears, for it is said, that they lift up their voice and wept.

3. Can we mend or better our selves? and who would change but for the better?
But to be sure, if we go from God, it will be for the worse. When many that
professed themselves the disciples of Christ, went back, and Christ said to John
6. 68.
the twelve, Will ye also go away? you know what Simon Peter answered the Lord,
To whom should we go, thou have the words of eternal life? As if he had said,
Lord, where can we mend our selves, to whom shall we go to be better? This was
the Argument that Samuel made use of, to keep the people from turning aside, to
follow the Lord. And turn ye not aside, for then should you go after 1 Samuel 12.
21.
vain things which cannot profit, nor deliver, for they are vain. It is as if a
man for warmth should go from the Sun to the shade, or for water from the
fountain to the broken cistern, or from the spring to the puddle; or as if a
man for fresh air should leave the open field, and sweet refreshing gales in a
garden, to go to a smoaky cottage: But my people have changed their glory for
that which does not profit, and they Jer. 2. 11.
are gone far from me, and walked after vanity. Will a man leave the pleasant
cooling snow of Jer. 18. 14.
mount Lebanon, for a dry bare rock of of the field, or shall the cool flowing
waters be forsaken?

4. Let Us consider what respect God has for such as abide with him, and turn
not aside from him. Noah was upright in his generation, and Genesis 6. 8.
walked with God, when all flesh had corrupted their way, and it is said, Noah
found grace in the eyes of the Lord. So, my servant Caleb; because Numb. 14. 24*
he had another spirit with him, and has followed me fully, him will I bring
into the Land, etc. And ye are they (says Christ) which have continued Luke 22.
28, 29.
with me in my temptations, and I appoint unto you a kingdom, etc. Rev. 3. 5.


5. What a comfort will this be in the evil day, and at the hour of death, if
we have not turned back from God, as it has been to the people of God formerly?
Ps. 44. 17, 18, 19. Job 23. 11, 12. and Is. 38. 3. etc.

6. The Lord does not turn away our prayers, nor himself, nor his mercy from
us, and why Psalm. 66. 20. Jer. 32. 40.
should we turn away from him? yea he has made an everlasting covenant with
us, that he will not turn away from us to do us good, etc.

7. If ever he do turn away from us for a time, it is not till we first turn
away from him. He is first in coming, but last in going, he is ever with us,
while we are with him, as the Prophet told Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. but if we
forsake him, and turn away from him, he will turn away from us, yea against us,
as the Church complains, Lam. 3. 3. Surely against me is he turned, he turns
his hand against me all the day.

2. Let us be 1. vigilant; and very circumspect: else if we be careless,
negligent, and secure, we shall be in great danger to miscarry, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. None are
likelier to fall than such as are most self confident, and secure, and
therefore let us carry a holy jealousy continually over our selves: how many
caveats have we in Scripture to this purpose? Matthew. 26. 41. Luke 21. 36. Heb.
3. 12. etc.

3. Let us be much in prayer, that the Lord would keep us; for if he leave us,
we shall soon Jude 24.
leave him. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, etc. he alone
is able, and therefore we must watch and pray both, etc.

4. Let us remember and urge the Lord with his promise, viz. that he will put
his fear in our Jer. 32. 40. -- 3. 19.
hearts, that we shall not depart from him, and that we shall not turn away
from him.

5. Let us exhort one another daily, etc. This the Apostle prescribes as a good
help, to keep us from departing from God. Take heed brethren, Hebr. 3. 12, 13.
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the
living God: but exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: and Heb. 10. 25. Not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, -- but exhorting one another,
etc.

6. Let us in the strength of Christ, and begging help of God, take up strong,
settled, and sincere resolutions of heart to cleave to the Lord, and to
continue and abide with him, who ever turn aside from him; as Joshua, but as
for me and my house we will serve the Lord: this, that Joshua 24. 15.
good man Barnabas exhorted those to, that believed and turned to the Lord,
that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. And when Acts 11.
23.
at any time we have, or do turn aside, as we are very prone to do, let us
never rest till we return again; as these here, how earnest are they upon this?
they thrice importune, Turn us again, etc. O should not a people return to
their God, the spouse to her husband, children to their father? The Prodigal,
as soon as ever he came to himself, Luke 15. 17* 18.
he resolves, I will arise, and go to my father. Turn, O backsliding children,
says the Lord; Jer. 3. 14.
why? for I am married unto you. And it can never be well with us indeed, till
we do this, he being the rest, and true and proper center, and, Ps. 116. 7.
chief good of the Soul: Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, etc. he is our utmost
and ultimate good, so that the soul has no further to go, when once it is come
to him, but is as the stone when it is come to the earth, which is its center.
But as for all else, there is still something beyond them, but nothing beyond
God, and therefore it was well thought of, of those, that resolved to go and
return to their first husband, for then Hosea 2. 7.
was it better with them than now: and if we return to him, he has promised to
heal our backslidings. Return ye backsliding children, and I Jer. 2* 27.
will heal your backslidings, pardon the backslidings past, and prevent them
for the future* And who would not say as they? behold we come come unto thee,
for thou art the Lord our God.

Doctr. 3. The Lord is the God of hosts. All creatures are (as it were) his
hosts, his armies, under his power, and at his command and absolute dispose, to
employ as he pleases, as soldiers under their General; and the Lord has his
hosts above, and his hosts beneath, and all at his beck, and this is a title
often given to God: we have it four times in this Psalm, yea Zach. 1. 3. thrice
in one verse, Thus says the Lord of hosts, turn ye unto me, says the Lord of
Hosts, and I will turn unto you says the Lord of hosts, and it is an
attribute, that sets forth God's allmighty power, sovereignty, and greatness.

Use 1. Let us then fear him, Let all the earth fear him, let all the
inhabitants of the world stand Psalm 33 8.
in awe of him: why? he is the Lord of hosts. The charets of God are twenty
thousand, even -- 68. 17.
thousands of Angels the Lord is among them, etc. Who would not fear thee, O
King of Nations? for to thee does it appertain, etc. And fear ye not me, says
the Lord? O thou even thou art Jerem. 10. 7-5. 22.
to be feared, etc. Psalm 76. 7.

Use 2. Take we heed then how we provoke him, we are no match for him. Do we
provoke 1 Cor. 10. 22.
the Lord, says the Apostle, are we stronger than he? can we wage war with him,
or carry it against him? What King, says our Savior, going to make war against
another King, sits (...) ^. 31.
not down first, and consulteth, whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet
him that comes against him with twenty thousand, etc. In the 2 Chronicles. 14. 9.
we 'read there of a very great host, an host of a thousand thousand, and three
hundred charets; but how great is God's host, whose are all the hosts in heaven
and earth, and whose charets are twenty thousand, etc. and therefore Ps. 4. 4.
stand in awe, and sin not; provoke him not, or if we do, let us not stand it
out, but presently Ezekiel. 22. 14.
submit, for can thine heart (says God) endure, or can thy hands be strong, in
the day that I shall deal with thee?

Use 3. See here the way to have the creatures Tranquillus Deus tranquillat
omnia.
at peace with us; it is to have the Lord, whose hosts and armies they are, and
who is their General, at peace with us.

Use 4. Let his people then trust in him. Ps. 84. 120. O Lord of Hosts, blessed
is the man that trusts in thee, etc.

Use 5. Let this, in their addresses unto him, strengthen their faith, and
encourage their hope, as to what they go to him for, as it did theirs here: O
what cannot the Lord God of hosts do, and effect for his people! etc.

Use 6. Let this prevail with us all to repent and turn to him, because he is
the Lord of hosts, because of his Almighty power* Sovereignty, and greatness.
And this he himself makes use of, as Zach. 1. 3.
an argument thereunto. Therefore say unto them, Quod toties repetit Propheta
nomen Dei, emphaticum est, ut scilicet doctrina acri^s pungat. Calvin.
thus says the Lord of hosts, turn ye unto me says the Lord of Hosts, and I
will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hosts. Surely there is much in this, to
back and enforce this duty, that the Lord makes use of it thrice in one verse.
Shall we not turn, when such a God commands? who being the Lord of hosts, is so
able to save us, and succor us, and do us good, if we do repent and turn to
him, or to punish and destroy us if we do not. Lo, it is he that forms the
mountains, Amos 4. 13.
that creates the wind, etc. the Lord, the God of hosts is his name.

Doctr. 4. The Lord God of hosts is he, and he alone, that can turn a people
again unto himself.

That can turn them at first, and turn them again being turned aside; and
therefore to him, and him alone, do these here address themselves, both for
turning those that were never yet turned, as also for turning of those again
Deus converte nos: aversi enim sumus a te, and nisi in convertas, non
convertemur. August. in locum.
that were turned, but had gone aside. Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts. Thus
they pray, as being sensible of their own and others utter disability for to
turn them without the Lord, and therefore they apply themselves to him,
conversion being no less than the work of an Allmighty power, of an omnipotent
God, even of him who stretches forth the heavens, and lays the foundations
of the earth, whose name is the Lord God of Hosts. He must first turn to us, as
the Church prays, O turn thy self to us again* Psalm 60. 1.
before we can turn to him; he must first turn to us by his grace, and powerful
operation of his Spirit, before we can turn to him by repentance. We can easily
indeed, and of our selves, turn away from God, we are bent and prone to this;
and sin, and Satan, and the world, and every vanity can easily do this, but the
Lord God of hosts can only turn us again. This indeed is the great work and
business of us who are Ministers, to endeavor this, but we can never effect
this without the Lord. 2 Kings 6. 27. As that King of Israel, answered the
woman that cried to him for help: if the Lord do not help, whence shall I help
thee? 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if
God peradventure will give them repentance. We return and repent, but grace,
power, and ability to do it is from God. Acts 11. 21. And the hand of the Lord
was with them, and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. Paul
showed unto them of Damascus, and at all places where he came, that they should
repent, and turn to God, but it was God enabled them thereto, Acts 26. 20.
Hence says Ephraim, Surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that
I was instructed, I smote on my thigh, etc. Jer. 31. 19. So Lam. 5. 21. Turn
thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned, etc.

Use 1. See what folly then it is to procrastinate, and put off repentance, as
if it was in our own power to repent and turn when we pleased, whereas it is in
God's power alone; and therefore as the holy Ghost says, to day if you Heb. ^.
7, 8.
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, etc.

Use 2. Let this make us the more careful how we turn aside from God, because
though we of our selves can turn away from him, he only can turn us again to
him.

Use 3. As ever then we would that our selves, or ours, should be turned again,
let us apply our selves to him, as these do here, turn us again, O Lord God of
Hosts. I have gone astray, says Ps. 119. 176.
David, like a lost sheep, seek thy servant, etc. We can lose our selves, but
we must have recourse to God to reduce us, and fetch us home. O Lord I know the
way of man is not in himself, it is not Jer. 10. 23.
in man that walks to direct his steps, and therefore let us cry with
Ephraim, -- Turn thou me, O Jer. 3. 18.
Lord, and I shall be turned, etc.

Use 4. Then when we are turned again, see here to whom to ascribe it, and to
whom to give the praise and glory of it, even to the Lord God of hosts: It is
his work, he has done it, and none else, but he could do it, and therefore let
him have the glory of it alone.

Doctr. 5. When the Lord turns a people again to himself, he causes his face to
shine.

He manifests his favor, and shows himself gracious, and propitious: for these
two are here joined together, Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, cause thy
face to shine. And this latter may be considered, either as the efficient, or
as that which as an effect, follows upon the former, or as both. So that when
the Lord turns a people or a person to himself, 1. he does cause his face to
shine, and 2. when he has turned a people again to himself, he will cause his
face to shine, that is, he will more and more cause it to shine, more and more
manifest his favor; and to both these I shall speak something briefly.

1. He then does cause his face to shine, when he turns them again to himself,
he then remembers them with the favor that he bears Cum convertit faciem suam
Deus ad nos, and nos respici^, tum ad eum convertimur.
to his people, and lifts up upon them the light of his countenance, saving
conversion being a blessed effect, and happy fruit thereof, and it being his
special favor and grace that puts him upon it. I will heal (says the Lord)
their backslidings: Hosea 14. 4.
and whence will he do it, what puts him Poenitentia est effectus gratiae,
fluentis a dilectione Dei, in filio Dei fundata. Pareus in locum.
upon it? his love; I will love them freely, for his anger is turned away from
him. We are bid to seek God's face, to seek his favor, and such have found it,
and the Lord has dealt very graciously with them: but it is not thus as to the
things of the world, they in their very quintessence, and though in their
greatest confluence, do not simply of themselves speak God's love and favor,
no, but for all them, though in never so great abundance, men may be under
God's frowns, and have none of his favor, but hatred and abhorrence; for God's
heart here does not always go along with his hand, God's giving hand and his
gracious favorable accepting hand are two distinct things, and so is his
permissive and his promissive approving Providence. Men Ex largitate, non ex
promisso.
may have Quails, and wrath; the daintiest viands, and vengeance; coin, and the
curse; heap Number. 11. 33. Psalm 33. 7.
up wealth and worldly treasures, have more than heart could wish, and yet be
under God's sorest Zach. 1. 15.
displeasure. I am very sore displeased with the Ira magna irascor.
heathen that are at ease. God's bringing these things abundantly into men's
hands, is no argument nor intimation of the love of his heart: The tabernacles
of Robbers prosper, and they that Job 12. 6.
provoke God are secure, into whose hand God brings abundantly. Ps. 73. 12.
Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the world, they increase in riches,
etc. and yet such, whom God hates and abhors. Psalm 12. 5. -- But the wicked,
and him that loves violence, his soul hates: and Psalm 5. 5. -- Thou hate
all workers of iniquity, and -- God is angry with the wicked every day, Ps. 7.
11. So that these things are no sign of God's favor, neither in any or all of
them does his face shine, or is the light of his countenance lift up: but now
saving conversion, and God's turning of a man again to himself, this ever
speaks God's favor, and the shine of his face, and the lifting up upon him the
light of his countenance; and though such a one may have but little of these
things in his hand, this is a sure intimation to him of the love of God's
heart, and this makes the little (though it be never so little) that such a one
has, better than Boni nunquam in statu malo, nam illis vel ipsa mala vertuntur
in bonum; mali contra nunquam in statu bono, quia iis vel ipsa bona vertuntur
in malum* Gry^^ous.
the riches of many wicked. Ps. 37. 16. for better (says Solomon) is a dinner
of herbs where love is, than a stalled Ox and hatred therewith. Prove. 15. 17.
And this makes it that it can never be ill with a godly man, how little soever
he have of these things, because he has still God's love; and that it can never
be well with a wikced man, how much soever he has of these things, because he
has ever God's hatred therewith, and the evil things of the one being turned
into good, and the good things of the other being turned into evil. Ps. 25. 10.
Romans 8. 28. Ps. 69. 22. Pro. 1. 32.

2. The Lord will cause his face to shine, yea more and more to shine on a
people or person that he turns again to himself. For 1. it is his promise so to
do, to be gracious and to manifest his favor to such. Job 33. 23. If there be
a messenger with him, an interpreter one of a thousand to show unto man his
uprightness, the Hebrew, his rectitude, that is, what is right and straight,
viz. to repent and turn to God: Dutch read it, to declare unto man his right
duty, as indeed conversion and true turning to God it is our duty, and it is a
right, just, and equal duty, and it brings us into a right state, into a right
frame, sets us at rights, and till then our state is wretched, crooked, and
wrong, nothing is at rights; for how should things be right with us, whiles our
hearts and ways are not right with God? but when that which is so right is
shown to man, and shown powerfully and effectually, so as to embrace and do
what is made known and shown. Then it follows, v. 26. He shall pray unto God,
and he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy, etc.
The Lord is very gracious, and of a very kind nature and disposition, he has
always in himself a rich storehouse of kindness and mercy, and then he gives it
forth, Come and let us return unto the Lord, Hosea 6. 1. and then v. 2. we
shall live in his fight, or in or before his face, live and enjoy his love and
favor, the life of our lives. He looks upon men, and if any say I have
sinned, and perverted that which was Job 23. 27, 28.
right, and it profited me not; that is, if any truly repent, what then? his
life shall see the light, he shall live in the light of God's countenance. Thus
the Lord waits to be gracious, he waits for our repentings and turnings to him,
that he may be gracious, and while we retard our repentings and turnings to
him, we retard his grace and favor from our selves. There is indeed a previous
preventing grace and favor of God, a first shining of God's face, and breaking
forth of Gratiam qui invenit apud Deum, ab ea primum inventus est, quia eam
nemo quaerit; quem ea prius non quaesierit, and admiserit. Rivet. Conditio ad
gratiam recipiendam requisita, nonponitur in nobis, nisi per gratia^
praevenientem. Pareus.
the light of his countenance, as in the conversion of a sinner, which I hinted
before, when God puts a stop to a poor sinner, and gives him to repent and turn
to him; then is a time of love, and then God causes his face to shine, when he
says to the sinner even in his blood, live: but then after this previous
preventing favor and grace, there is more grace, second Acts, as it were, and
renewed manifestations; we upon our repenting and turning to God being put into
such an estate, as in which he owns us, and delights in us, and is gracious to
us. How gracious was the Lord to Peter? upon his repenting and turning again,
he was gracious to him before, Luke 22. 61. And the Lord turned and looked upon
Peter, etc. and how gracious after? Mark 16. 7. -- tell his disciples and
Peter, etc. And so to Ephraim, upon repenting and turning, how abundantly did
God manifest his grace and favor, how lovingly, and meltingly, and tenderly
does he speak of him? Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. Is Ephraim my dear son, etc. My
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him. And so the
Prodigal upon his returning, how does the father meet him, and falls on his
neck* and kisses him!

2. Then that is removed which interposes between us and God's favor, and
hinders the Luke 15. 17, 18, 19, 20, etc.
shinings of his face, I mean our sins, for they and only they do this. Is.
59. 2. But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
sins have hid his face from you, and therefore when we are turned again from
our sins to God, his face must needs shine. What should hinder? when the clouds
are dispelled and scattered, the Sun appears, and its light breaks forth.

Use 1. Blessed and thrice happy are they then, whom the Lord has turned again
to himself; for unto them he has, and will more and more be gracious, and
manifest his favor, and cause his face to shine: Blessed is the man whom thou
choosest, and causelt to approach to thee, etc. Ps. 65. 4. For he shares in
that, and partakes of that which is man's happiness, and renders him blessed;
as appears in that form, which the Lord prescribes of blessing the children of
Israel, Numb. 6. 22, 23, etc. and this makes his present state and condition so
comfortable: one day of a repenting sinner, and so of a sinner that is
reconciled to God, and to whom he vouchsases his favor, being more comfortable
than a thousand years of another man that is in continual fear of death and
judgment.

Use 2. As ever then we would make it out indeed to our own souls, that we have
any clear evidence or comfortable demonstration of God's favor, of his love,
and the light of his countenance, let us never rest, 'till we find our selves
to be indeed such, that the Lord has turned again to himself; and then he has
and will cause his face to shine. David prays, Ps. 86. 17. Show me a token for
good, and here is a token for good indeed, for the chief good, the greatest
good, God's favor, which is life, yea better than life. Saving conversion, is
ever a sure sign of divine affection, and of a work of grace upon the heart, of
a souls having found favor in God's eyes; our being turned unto God clearly
evidences his Si conversi fuerimus per poenitentiam, ille omnium placatissimus,
and benignissimus; convertentes ad se, recipiet. Musc.
having in favor turned to us, and that he will more and more so turn to us.
And therefore how earnest and sollicitous should we be for that, which gives us
so clear an evidence, and sure demonstration of so great a good, even of the
favor of God? but never let any bear themselves up with what is consistent
with God's hatred, and with wrath, and eternal death, as the honors, and
profits, and pleasures of the world are, which men may wallow in the fullness
of, and yet be under divine frowns, and which for the most part are cast upon
the worst and vilest of men, and upon those whom God's soul abhors, which made
the very heathens contemn them In hoc coenum, in has sordes. Seneca.
being cast upon such dunghils. But saving conversion is ever an effect of, and
followed with divine smiles, and on such the Lord God of hosts has and will
more and more cause his face to shine.

CHAP. V. The main, chief, and principal point of Doctrine observable from the
words.
DOctr. 6. The only way for a people to be saved, it is for God to turn them
again, and cause his face to shine: That is, as has been opened and explained,
for God to convert them from their sins to himself, and his ways, and to
vouchsafe them his favor, to be gracious, and propitious to them in his son:
this is the only way of a peoples weal, it consists in their sound conversion
to God, and in their finding grace and favor with God; in their being turned
again unto him, and in his turning unto them, as the Lord expresses it. Thus
says Zach. 1. 3.
the Lord of Hosts, turn ye unto me, -- and I will turn unto you. For them to
turn to him repentingly, and for him to turn to them graciously, these two do
the work as to their weal, they turn all evil away from them, and set all good
a coming toward them; the sanctifying grace of God renewing, and his accepting
grace graciously receiving; the sincerity of a peoples repentance, and the
serenity of God's countenance; the effectual working of God's grace, and the
favorable shining of his face; this is the very way for a people to be saved;
and this I shall illustrate in several particulars.

1. This is the right way, the true and proper way for a people to be saved. It
is said of Ezra 8. 21.
Ezra, that he proclaimed a fast, etc. to seek of the Lord a right way for
them, and their little ones, and all their substance; and here is that right way
indeed, for us, and ours, and others, for all, for our little ones, and all our
substance, for all we have or enjoy, and if the Lord delight in us, (as Joshua
and Caleb said of the Land of Numb. 14. 8.
Canaan,) he will bring us into this way, which he who is just and right, yea
the most upright, prescribes: and surely were we our selves, and in our right
minds, we would betake our selves to this, as the only right way of all our
weal and happiness.

2. It is a sure sovereign way, a prevalent way, an effectual way, it never
fails nor falls short, and that let a peoples present state and condition be
what it will, seem it never so sad and desperate, yet if the Lord do but turn
them again, and cause his face to shine, they shall be saved, yea they cannot
but be saved, as these undoubtedly here do promise to themselves.

3. It is an experienced way, a well proved and tried way, a way that has many
probatum est's upon it: for never was there people, or person, that God did
indeed turn to himself, and cause his face to shine upon, but they were saved.
Niniveh that great city was within 40 days to have been destroyed; But God
seeing their works, Jonah 3. 3. ^^.
that they turned from their evil way, he repented of the evil that he had said
he would do unto them, and he did it not: and although the children of Israel
forsaking the Lord, and serving other Gods, the Lord tells them, that he would
deliver them no more, but bids them go and cry unto the Gods that they had
chosen, etc. yet they Judge. 10. 13, 14, 15, 16.
putting away the strange Gods from among them and serving the Lord, his soul
was grieved for their misery. And what an ill case do we find Israel to be in?
2 Chronicles. 15. 3. it is said, that for a long season they had been without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law: and yet v. 4. when
they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord, and sought him, he was found of
them. So God hearing Ephraim to bemoan himself, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. 21.
and to repent, his bowels are troubled for him, or earns toward him, as the
mothers toward her child; and now I will surely, says the Lord, have mercy on
him, and now he must think of, and prepare for his return. Set thee up
way-marks, etc. So in Hosea 14. the Lord there bids Israel take with them
words, and turn Hosea 14. 1, 2,
to the Lord, and say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, and then they resolve, so will we render the calves of our lips,
that is, the spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving: and such indeed
shall have cause, for it cannot but be well with them. Thus whatever proofs,
whatever assays have been made in this kind, whether formerly or lately, they
have done, they have been found effectual, as to a peoples being saved; and
never was it yet known, that ever a people or a person, truly turning again
unto God, and being graciously received of him, did miscarry; let any produce
an instance if they can. Look, as he being wise in heart, and mighty in
strength, none ever hardened Job 9. 4.
themselves against him and prosper'd; so he being great in kindness, and rich
in mercy, none ever turned to him but were saved.

4. This is the way to be saved in mercy, so to be saved as to be blessed with
Salvation, as the Lord promises to his people as concerning peace, Psalm 29. 11.
that he will bless them therewith. It is one thing to have peace, and
salvation, and deliverance, and mercies, and another thing to be blessed with
them, and to have them in mercy, and as mercies; and this latter is the
greater, many have these, but few are blessed with these: but when God so saves a
people as to turn them again, and cause his face to shine, then they are saved
in mercy, so as to be blessed with their being saved, (I speak now of temporal
salvation,) then in love to their souls God delivers them, as it is said of
Hezekiah. Is. 38. 17.
And they are not so saved, as afterward to be destroyed, as it is said of the
people that the Jude 4.
Lord saved out of the land of Egypt, that afterward he destroyed them that
believed not.

5. This is the way to be saved universally, and that in a threesold respect:
1. which way soever we take or understand being saved. For this word saved is
very comprehensive, and of large extent, denoting not only the privative part
of happiness, (though that most properly, as freedom from enemies, and evils of
all sorts) but the positive also, as the fruition of all good: and hence is it
here variously read, and rendered; we read it, we shall be saved, others,
blessed, happy, or it shall be well with us, and all things Servabimur, salvi
erimus, beati, vere felices, omnia nobis feliciter cedent, vivemus, and
regnabimus, nec ullo bono destitueemur.
shall happily succeed to us, or we shall be safe and secure, and in a good
case and condition; we shall live, and reign, and want no good thing. And now
which way soever we take or understand it, or which way soever we read or
render it, this here reaches and takes in all, and all follow upon this; God's
turning us again, and causing his face to shine, and when he is pleased to do
this, to vouchsafe these, we may write under it what ever we will, that tends
indeed to our weal, and makes for our good. 2. This is the way to have all
saved, Kingdom saved, Nation saved, Church saved, Court saved, City saved,
Country saved, Towns, Families, persons, our selves, ours, others, our
relations, our little ones; to have bodies saved, souls, religion, lives,
liberties, estates, gospel, or whatever else is near or dear to us. 3. This is
the way to be saved, with all manner and kinds of salvation, and from all sorts
and kinds of evils, whether temporal, spiritual, or eternal. As 1. from our
sins, from their guilt, to have them pardoned and forgiven. If my people, says
the Lord, shall humble themselves, and pray, and 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I pardon their sins,
etc. and repent ye, Acts 3. 19.
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc. 2. From our
sufferings, miseries, and calamities, the mischievous fruits and effects of
sin. Thus the Lord promises, upon his peoples turning to him, not only to
pardon their sins, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
but also to heal their land, that is, remove those judgments, which were as
the sores and wounds of it. So Hos. 6. 1. Come, say they, and let us return
unto the Lord, and what then? why then, he that has torn, will heal us; and he
that has smitten us, will bind us up: and v. 2. After two days will he revive
us, etc. 3. As from these here, so from hell, and wrath, and eternal death
hereafter. And hence repentance is said to be Acts 11. 18. 2 Cor. 7. 10.
repentance unto life, and repentance unto salvation, and repent and turn your
selves (says God) from your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your
ruin. Thus God's turning us again, and causing his face to shine, it remedies
all peoples evils and miseries here, and brings to them full salvation
hereafter.

6. This is the only way for a people to be saved indeed, to be saved to
purpose, and in mercy, as you have heard, so as in being saved to be blessed,
and happy, and to have it well with them. Thus, this it is the only way for a
people to be saved, and no other way will do, or will or can prove sovereign,
or effectual, either for a people or a person, either for our selves or the
nation; no, whatever other ways we take, or other attempts or experiments we
make, without this, they will all prove but abortive, and to no purpose, nor
avail any thing, but we shall perish notwithstanding. And this I propose as the
only way, in opposition to all worldly carnal ways, and means, and shifts, and
devices, that men make use of, and betake themselves to, to save and secure
themselves by, with neglect of this; but in vain and to no purpose do they do
it: and yet this is that to which men are very prone, to run to other means and
helps, with neglect of this; as the Scripture declares, and the Lord complains:
when Ephraim saw his sickness and Judah his wound, then went Ephraim to the
Hosea 5. 13. and 7. 11, 12, 13.
Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of
your wound. Ephraim also is like a silly Dove without heart, that is, simple,
foolish, without judgment and understanding; why? it follows, they call to
Egypt, they go to Assyria, to aid and relieve them, and neglect the only way
of their help, which was to return to the Lord their God, and seek him. This
spoke them foolish and silly indeed, for what says God? When they shall go, I
will spread my net upon them, I will bring them down as the fowls of the
heaven, that is, I will blast their projects and designs, and make the issue of
them to be their own ruin and confusion. They thought to mount and soar on
high, but I will make them come down with a witness; and hence says God, Woe
unto them, for they have fled from me; destruction unto them, for they have
transgressed against me, that is, gone on to rebel against me still, in stead
of turning unto me. And what could betide such, but ruin and destruction? So
in Isaiah 22. how sedulous and exact are the Jews there in their carnal
policies, and worldly contrivances, to secure themselves? but with a neglect of
God, and the true way of their safety, which was their return to him: And he
discovered the covering of Judah. Some Is. 22. 8, 9, 10, 11.
by this Covering understand the city it self, whither the people repaired for
shelter; others, the Temple, or Sanctuary, and the vain confidence they put
therein; others, their strong holds, armories, or storehouses, where their
arms and ammunition were bestowed, or what ever else it was, wherein their
power, preparations, or provisions, for the safeguarding themselves and their
city did consist, as it follows, and thou did look in that day to the Armor
of the house of the Forest, that is, as is conceived, the Magazine of the
Kingdom; ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David, that they are
many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool. And ye have
numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify
the wall. Ye made also a ditch between the two walls, for the water of the old
pool: but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had respect to him
that fashioned it long ago. Thus as to worldly carnal means and helps, they are
very sedulous and exact, very precise in every punctilio, they neither spare
for pains nor cost; but they neglecting the main, which was to repent, and turn
to God, and which God then in a more special manner did call for, v. 12. all
the other availed them nothing, neither did they or could they save or secure
them. And hence the Lord expostulates the case with them, as concerning their
folly and vanity therein: Jer. 2. 36. Why gaddest* thou about so much to change
thy way? running for help sometimes to one party one way, and sometimes another
way: or to change thy way, that is, the way I have prescribed thee, and should
be thy way; as if the Lord had said, thou know well enough the way of thy
weal, thy way to be saved, and why then do thou gad up and down to find out
new ways, and to try other ways? why, they shall avail thee nothing, thou also
shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria: as if the Lord had
said, they shall all serve thee alike, as thou have been deceived and been
befooled by the one, so shall thou also be by the other; yea v. 37. Thou shall
go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head, (i. e. with sorrow, shame,
and disgrace, whereof this was a sign, as it is said of Tamar, when ravished 2 Samuel 13. 19.
by her Brother Amnon, that she laid her hand on her head, and went on crying,)
for the Lord has rejected thy confidences, that is all thy vain refuges and
ways, which thou seek and betakest thy self to, out of God's way, the Lord
has rejected them, or as some, despised them, scorned them, and as it were
derided them, and thy folly in imagining to save and secure thy self by them.
And thou shall not prosper in them, for Ezekiel. 24. 12.
they are but lies, as the Lord tells Jerusalem elsewhere, she has wearied her
self with lies, that is, with other ways and means then of my appointing;
instead of repenting and turning to me, the only true way of her weal, and
means of her cure, and which I have so often called for, and invited her to,
with much patience and forbearance, by my Prophets, she has betaken her self
to other ways and means, run to carnal helps, and all manner of worldly shifts
and devices; and here she has been very industrious, taken a great deal of
pains, so as even to weary her self, running up and down, one while this way,
and another while another way, and all to underprop her ruinous condition, and
to keep off the threatened destruction, but in vain, for they are all but lies
and vanities, and so she shall experience them. And why? it follows, because
her scum went not out of her, that is, her sin and wickedness, so called for
its vileness and filthiness, she still retained that, and therefore she and her
scum shall be in the fire, that is, she neglecting the only true way of her
weal, and means of her deliverance, which was true repentance and conversion,
all her other worldly and carnal ways and means, which she had with so much
care and toil sought out, shall all prove false and unfaithful to her, and
deceive her. And hence does the Lord so earnestly and pathetically, as being
very desirous and sollicitous of Jerusalems weal, invite her to the right way
thereof, and to avert that heavy destruction threatened against her, and coming
upon her. O Jerusalem, Jer. 4. 14.
wash thine heart from wickedness, that Officii nostri est, poenitentiam agere
ut servemur, qui quidem poenitentiae fructus est. Pisc.
thou may be saved, that is, repent and turn from thy wickedness, reform thy
heart and life. There is indeed the washing of justification from the guilt of
sin, by the blood of Christ; and of sanctification from the filth of sin, by
the Spirit of Christ: but by this washing here, we are to understand that of
true, serious and sound repentance, and conversion, and reformation of heart
and life from wickedness, when the heart is turned from it, and engaged against
it. And of this washing we read elsewhere, and it is called, Isaiah 1. 16.
James 4. 8.
v. 1. returning to the Lord, and putting away their abominations out of Gods
sight; v. 3. Jer. 4. 1.
breaking up their fallow-ground; v. 4. circumcising themselves to the Lord,
and taking away the foreskins of their hearts; and it is the same with that, in
Acts 8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, etc. And this the Lord
here invites Jerusalem to, as her only way of being saved: O Jerusalem, wash
thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. As if the Lord had
said, thou cryest indeed, woe unto us, for we are spoiled, v. 13. but yet there
is a way of thy being saved, and it is the only way, and therefore if yet at
last thou have any mind to be saved, and to have it well with thee, as I have,
and to prevent that utter ruin that is coming upon thee, betake thy self to
it, wash thine heart from wickedness, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? Thus the Lord calls all their thoughts and hopes of safety
elsewhere, and from other means, as foreign forces, and the like, vain; such,
as however they fed themselves with them, should never effect their weal, nor
be able to relieve them, but in relying on them, they relied but upon vanity
and falsehood. And hence it is, that the Church and people of God here are so
intent upon this, and so earnest for this, they importune it no less than three
times, as if they would have no denial, because they knew full well as this was
the right way, and a sure way, for their weal; so it was the only way, and
there was no other, and God must do this, or they could not be saved, neither
could it be well with them, whatever else they betook themselves to.

CHAP. VII.
NOw in the further prosecution of this point, of so great importance, and
infinite concern, as to our own and the Nations weal, I shall do these three
things in general.

1. I shall show you what kind, and what manner of turn that is, and must be,
that is thus effectual as to a peoples being saved: for it is not every turn
that does, or can effect this. 2. I shall give you the reasons of the point. 3.
I shall apply it, and endeavor several ways to improve it.
As concerning the first, truly there are so many excellent Treatises already
extant, and that both formerly, and of late, and that by more able pens, that
it might seem needless to add more; and indeed for substance what more almost
can be written, that is not written already? Yet because variety of gifts may
please, and I hope, profit, as to the promoting of so blessed a work, wherein
not only our own, but the whole Nations weal is so infinitely concerned; and
that I may not seem to build without a foundation, somewhat I shall say, but be
the briefer, at least as to some things; and as concerning this Turn, you must
1. know in general, that there are several sorts of Turns, or Changes. As 1. in
substance, which is called generation. 2. In place, called local mutation. 3.
In quality, called alteration, when things are turned and changed from one
quality, and one manner and fashion to another; when the present property,
frame, and disposition of a thing is quite turned and altered from what it was
before; and of this latter, we are to understand this turn, or mutation here.
For 1. there is no In resipiscentia, homines adeo immutantur, ut quales antea
fuerant, tales esse desinant, non tamen in mole and substantia corporis, sed in
animi inclinationibus, and appetitionibus, etc. Dent. d^ resipisc.
turn or change in substance, the person sinning and turning being still the
same in substance, body and soul the same, and all the parts, powers, and
faculties of both, the same: thus, in this sense, Manasseh, Mary Magdalene,
Paul, etc. were the same before and after their conversion. Nor 2. in place;
for the sinner is, or may be still in the same place where he was before, or if
he do change his place, it does not avail any thing here; for sin (as one well
observes) like a man's sickness, is carried with him where ever he goes, and
change of place, no more than change of beds, does free him, or make him whole.
No, it is not change of place, but an effectual work of grace that turns the
heart. Cain was the same in the land of Nod, as he was where he dwelt before;
and the Israelites, which came evil out of Egypt, remained the same in the
wilderness. Thus Moses tells them, They provoked the Lord their God to wrath in
the Deuteronomy. 9. 7, 8, 22, 23, 24.
wilderness, yea from the day that they did depart out of the land of Ehypt,
until they came to that place they had been rebellious against the Lord. Also
in Horeb ye provoked the Lord to wrath: and at Taberah, and at Massah, and at
Kibroth Hattavah: And when the Lord sent them from Kadesh-Barnea, saying, go up
and possess the land which I have given you, then they rebelled, yea (says
Moses) you have been rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you.
In the 33. of Numb. Moses there reckons up no less than two and forty journeys
that they made, as from Rameses to Succoth, from Succoth to Etham, from Etham
to Pihahiroth, etc. and yet all these changes of place made no change as to
their manners, and dispositions, but still they carried their sins along with
them: and the holy Ghost Quidam ex Hebraeo, vertunt juxta mare, in mari rubro,
ut sensus sit, illos non solum in littore, sed etiam dum ipsum mare pedibus
transmitterent, de Deo conquestos esse. etc. Flaminius in locum. Vix dum
egressi ex Egypto, in ipso maris transitu contra suum redemptorem proterve
insurrexerint. Calvin. in locum.
calls the whole time of their journeying in the wilderness, where they removed
and changed place so often, the provocation, Harden not your hearts as in the
provocation, that is, in the time when ye sinned, and walked forwardly,
offending me, and provoking me against you, breaking my laws, vexing and
grieving my Spirit, and forty years long was I grieved with this generation,
etc. How often in that time did they change their places, and yet still the
same? yea; it is said Psalm 106. 7. They provoked him at the Sea, even at the
red Sea, there they sinned against him, yea in the red Sea, not only whiles
they were on the bank, but even while they were passing through, the Lord by a
wonderful miracle, having made it to them as dry land to walk upon; and one
would have thought such a place might have made some change in them, but it did
not, there they still continue their murmurings and their mutinings; and thus
some read it, they provoked him in the Sea, even when they saw that glorious
work, and there lies the Emphasis, that they provoked him even in that Sea
which God carried them through. There was a turn and change indeed in the Sea
that goes back, and becomes dry land, and in the waters they are divided, and
are a wall on the right hand and on the left, but none Jerem. 24.
in them. And thus the figs which were so very evil in Jerusalem, continued
evil still in Babylon. And how many in this great and populous city, who (upon
occasion of the late dreadful, and never to be forgotten Fire) changed their
places, still retained their sins, and the change of their places, have made no
change of their conditions, but still retain their old frames and dispositions,
their old pride and luxury, and vanity, etc. and though many have of late
changed again their places, are they not still the same, and though they have
new houses, changed them, have they not still their old hearts? and therefore
this turn, and change here, is not of places but of Quantum homo a suis
consuetis vitiis recesserit, tantum in resipiscentiae usu and exercitio
processit, sed qui idem est manetque qualis fuit, sane nunquam resipuit,
ideoque est damnationi proximus.
quality, when one and the same man, is quite turned from what he was before: I
mean in the present frame, state, and disposition of the whole man, both body
and soul, and all the parts, powers, and faculties, both of the one and the
other, as from sin to holiness, from iniquity to righteousness, from Satan to
God, from hell to heaven, and that I say in the whole man, and whole
conversation. Thus old things are past away, and all are in quality and
disposition become new. There are new hearts and new spirits, etc. as the Lord
promises, not as to their essence, or substance, or powers, or faculties, but
gracious new qualities and inclinations. The instrument is still the same, and
so are the strings, but the tune is changed and mended; the waters are the
same, but they are healed: so that in some sense the man is now quite altered,
and turned, from what he was before, and he is not the same, but there is a
strange spiritual metamorphosis in, and upon him, and he has another spirit, as
is said of Caleb, but my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit, that is,
an excellent Numb. 14. 24.
spirit: and 2 Cor. 3. 18. -- we are changed into the same image from glory to
glory, etc.

Thus in general, but now more particularly and distinctly. This turn,

1. It must be such as is of God, as the Lord Peccatoris conversio est opus
quod creatae naturae vires excedit.
God of Hosts himself works, and is the author of; as is his gift, and wrought
by his Spirit, and not merely of man, or from our selves, which is yet all the
turn of many, and cannot therefore be right, it being neither wholly to God,
nor from God; Turn thou me, says Ephraim, and I Jer. 31. 18.
shall be turned, then we are turned indeed, and not till then.

2. Such as is joined with kindly contrition and humiliation, and this
occasioned, by a through and sound conviction of sin, which the Holy Ghost is
the Author and efficient of, Joh. 16. 8. and this contrition and humiliation is
as it were, the foundation, and conversion the superstructure, and both
together contrition and conversion, humiliation and reformation, are the two
main essential parts of repentance; a kindly brokenness of heart for sin, and a
breaking off from sin, when we grieve, and are deeply humbled for it, and
depart from it, are sorry for it and forsake it: and hence we read of
repentance of sin, or for sin, and repentance from sin, and the former of these
is called in Scripture godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 10. For Godly sorrow works
repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, that is, we feeling indeed the
bitterness of our sins, and being truly touched in conscience for them, that we
have offended so great and holy a God, and so gracious and loving a father, we
come by the help of God's Spirit, to alter and change the purpose and
resolution of our hearts, before set on sin, and turn them to the Lord, and now
avoid, forsake, and abandon sin, and this is called godly sorrow, or, as it is
in the Original, sorrow 2 Cor. 7. 10* Qui secundum Deum tristis est, eo dolor
qui a Dei Spiritu manat, de peccatis suis dolet, idque non poenae formidine
territus, sed hoc ipsum aegerrime ferens, quod Deum clementissimum patrem
offenderit, etc. Beza.
according to God; that is, 1. which proceeds and comes from God, which the
Spirit of God is the Author of, Zach. 12. 10. Ps. 147. 18. -- he causes his
wind to blow, and the waters flow: so true penitential tears are they which
flow, upon the breathing of God's Spirit. 2. Which is mainly, chiefly, and
principally for God, I mean for the offense done to him, that so great and so
good a God, and merciful a father should be provoked to wrath by our sin: it is
not so much the bitterness for sin, but the bitterness in sin, as it refers to
God himself, that troubles here. Ps. 51. 4. Luke. 15. 18. Ezekiel. 6. 9. 3. Which
brings the sinner to God: as Hos. 6. 1. Luke 15. 18. and that which encourages
to this, is the hope of pardon through the merits of Christ, which also is
accompanied with a firm purpose of avoiding sin for the future, and this is
sorrow according to God, according to 2 Cor. 7. 11.
his own mind and heart, that is, acceptable to God, and well pleasing to him,
and the Holy Ghost in the very next verse sets down seven several fruits or
signs of this godly sorrow, seven several effects which manifest themselves in
the practice and exercise thereof, which because they are of so great concern,
I shall give a brief hint of: For behold this self same thing, that ye sorrowed
after a godly sort, 1. what carefulness it wrought in you; that is, to obtain
pardon and reconciliation, and to leave and abandon all sin, especially that
lately fallen into, and in all things for the future to please God, and to
perform conscionably all holy duties required of him, etc. 2. what clearing of
your selves, that is, not by defending or excusing your sins, or your selves
for your sins, but rather by confessing and acknowledging of them, and judging
and condemning your selves for them, and so by earnest seeking unto God, and
pleading Christ's satisfaction, getting your Consciences cleared of the guilt
and defilement of them; yea, 3. what indignation, that is, against your sins,
and your selves for your sins, being exceedingly angry with your selves for
your offenses; oh! that you should be so foolish and sottish, that such madness
should possess you, to provoke so great a God, and to offend so good a God, and
so gracious and merciful a Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
Father, Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he
thy Father, etc. Micah 6. 3.
O my people what have I done unto thee, etc. O Psalm 73. 22*
that for what is so momentany, worthless, yea many times vile, I should
forfeit that which is of such worth, as to break my peace, impair my joy,
estrange my God, and his favor, wherein is life, yea which is better than
life, etc. yea 4. what fear, that is, lest ye should relapse and sall into
former sins again, or into other; which fear arises from the sense of our own
weakness, and experience of the strength of corruption, and Satan's temptations,
as also of our own woe and misery formerly sustein'd, etc. yea 5. what vehement
desire, that is, to be freed more and more from sin, and for strength and
assistance against sin for the future, for farther supplies of the Spirit,
greater degrees of holiness, fuller enjoyments of God, and more and more of his
presence, etc. yea 6. what zeal in the performing of all good duties, and these
more especially that are contrary to your special sins, so to honor God, to
love him, fear him, serve him, obey him, enjoy him, to do all the good ye can
to others, overlooking difficulties, and breaking through all discouragements,
zeal being as it were the transportation Conspicuum et speciale resipiscentiae
indicium est, nosmet ipsae in iis rebus in quibus maxim peccavimus corrigere
and emendare.
of the soul, and an extreme heat or high strein and measure of all the
affections, for and toward God, and against whatever is contrary, etc. yea 7.
what revenge, that is, of your selves for your former offenses, in laboring to
mortify the corruption of your natures, and subdue sin, especially that you
have most delighted in, and been addicted to, as also in subduing the body,
that it may not be an instrument of sin, and in restraining your selves even in
things lawful, etc. thus all is set a work in manifesting the fruits of this
godly sorrow: And then our turning to God again, our conversion is right, when
it is founded in humiliation, and kindly remorse; and thus the Scripture sets
it forth. If my people, which are called by 2 Chro. 7. 14.
my name, shall humble themselves, and turn from their wicked ways, etc. I have
surely heard Ephraim Jer. 31. 18. 19.
bemoaning himself: and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, etc. --
If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and Levit. 26. 41.
they accept of the punishment of their iniquity, etc. and so in many other
places. Ahab humbling himself, but not reforming, and Herod seemingly
reforming, but* not humbling himself, neither of their turning^ proved right.

3. It must be such a turning, as arises from, Sine fide in Christum nulla vera
resipiscentia esse potest. Zanch. in Hos. 14. 1.
and is grounded upon some measure at least of faith. Some apprehensions and
persuasions of mercy, and remission in and through Christ. For whiles a sinner
apprehends in God nothing but rigor, and severity, how should he relent Vera
conversio fit ad Jehovam, praeeunte ejus bonitatis cognitione.
toward him, or come in and submit to him? What was it made Benhadad humbly to
apply himself to the King of Israel? it was his having heard that the Kings of
Israel were merciful Kings, and let us therefore (say his servants) put 1 Kings
20 31.
sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out to the King of
Israel, peradventure he will save thy life. So who can tell, (said the King of
Niniveh, if God will turn, and repent, Jonah 3. 9.
and turn from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Nemo ad Deum redire vel
audet, vel potest, nisi spe veniae concepta. Spes remissionis, incentivum
poenitentiae. Ambros.
Thus true faith, at least in some measure, must go before repentance, I mean
sound Evangelical repentance, and such as is acceptable to God, and that as the
root thereof: for when a sinner comes to apprehend and believe mercy, and
remission of sin, then does he repent indeed, then does he sorrow and mourn for
sin, and turn unto God from what is displeasing unto him. In time indeed faith
and repentance may be said to be both together, but in order of nature faith is
first. And hence we find in Scripture, that the exhortations to repent, and
turn to God, are commonly grounded upon the goodness and mercy of God, which
the sinner must apprehend, and be in some measure persuaded of, if ever he
kindly repent and turn to him. Return thou Jer. 3. 12, 22.
backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall
upon you, for I am merciful says the Lord, and return and I will heal your
backslidings. So -- Turn to the Lord your Joel 2. 13, 14.
God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
and who knows if he will return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him,
etc. And, Let the wicked forsake his way, Isaiah 55. 7, 8.
and the unrighteous his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy on Nemo se curandum praebeat, qui contemptui, non compassioni,
se medico suo putat futurum.
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon, for my thoughts are not
your thoughts, etc. And so in many places besides; and also in the New
Testament, the promise of grace, and pardon, and salvation, is propounded as
the great motive, and means, and cause of Repentance, i. e. as apprehended and
received; and how can that be but by faith? Repent ye, for the Kingdom of
heaven is at hand: and Repent ye, and be converted, Matthew. 3. 2. -- 4. 17.
that your* sins may be blotted out, etc. And hence true repentance may be thus
described, that it is An Evangelical or Gospel-saving grace, whereby a
believing sinner, or a sinner upon the apprehension and persuasion of the mercy
of Acts 3. 19.
God in Christ, to such as are penitent, so grieves* and humbles himself for
his sins, as that he turns from them to the Lord: for where there are nothing
but apprehensions of wrath and displeasure, there can be no true saving
Evangelical conversion.

4. It must be such a turning, as has joined with it shame, and even confusion
of face, for what the sinner turns from, for what he has been, and done, for
the sins he has committed. And thus it was with Ephraim, when he repented and
turned to God indeed, as himself acknowledges. Surely after that I was turned,
I repented, that Jer. 31. 19.
is, God working in me by a spirit of conversion, I also cooperated by and with
his grace, having a lively sorrow for my sin, and a striving after newness of
life, and now my heart was in another frame, and my life in another way then
before. And after I was instructed, saw and understood, and considered, how it
was with me, what I had been, and what I had done, I smote upon my thigh, I was
much moov'd, troubled, and grieved, and not only so, but I was ashamed, yea
confounded. Thus it was, when he was turned, and repented indeed, because (says
he) I did bear the reproach of my youth, of those sins and excesses, and
miscarriages of my youth: these much dear'd me, and exceedingly shamed me, as
they will do others, when they come to repent indeed. O that sin and Satan, and
the world and vanity, should have the prime and flower of their age, and the
best and first of their days, and that in their very strength and vigor, when
they were best able to do him service, they should do him least, nay be
unserviceable and serve the Devil, and their lusts! And what a shameful thing
is this, and how can the sinner but blush, when he comes to be sensible of it?
Pudor est affectus qui nascitur ob aliquam turpitudinem, etc. P. Martyr.
Shame and confusion of face is that which arises from doing shameful things,
from doing what is unworthy, unseemly, vile, even against common principles; so
from doing that of which comes no fruit or benefit, but hurt rather, as also
from having hopes frustrated, etc. and all these fall in with sin. What a vile
and unworthy thing is it, that God should be left for the creature, the
fountain of living waters for broken cisterns that can hold no water? that
happiness it self should be forsaken for misery, all* sufficiency for indigency
and vanity, and the Lord of life and glory for vile lusts and leasing, etc.
There is a natural affection of shame which appears in the countenance by
blushing, when any thing is done amiss, and is to be cherisht especially in
young ones, so as to be as a bridle to keep off from what is matter of shame,
so it grow not to excess; but then there is a holy* and gracious shame, which
is a concomitant of Repentance, and conversion, causing trouble and grief, and
debasing of the soul before God, and this has been still found among true
Converts. Thus Ezra 9. 6.
Ezra, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God, etc. So the
Lord tells Jerusalem, Then shall thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed, Ezekiel.
16. 61. -- 36. 31.
etc. And ye shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities,
etc. And this Sancti viri semper dolent and erubescunt de admissis peccatis.
Pet. Martyr.
has such an affinity with repentance, that it is sometimes put for
Repentance. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed,
that is, whereof ye now repent, and from which ye are converted, for the end of
those things is death: and therefore well might they be ashamed of such things,
in which not only there was no profit, but which tended to so much hurt, even
to their own ruin and destruction. And thus it is with all true converts,
however before they bore themselves up, and set a good face on their sins; yet
now being enlightened, and come to themselves, and their right minds, they are
ashamed. And if this be to repent, and be converted, how few Converts are there
in these days, and how far are such from it, who go on in their sins without
shame, which is an heavy aggravation of them? It is best not to do what is
matter of shame, but having done it, not to be ashamed, doubles it; and it is
that the Lord much complains of. Thou had a whores forehead, thou refusedst
to he ashamed. And, Jerem. 3. 3. -- 6. 15.
were they ashamed when they had committed abominatoon? nay they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush; they would not blush, and at length they
were so hardened, they could not blush. This the Lord complains of again, Jer.
8. 12. and again in Isaiah 3. 9. The show of their countenance does witness
against them, and they declare their sin, as Sodom, they hide it not: they are
bold, brazen-faced, impudent, Illum ego periisse dico, cui periit pudor. Salust.
they care not who sees or knows their sin, they glory even in their shame. And
this is too too much the guise of England this day, which does so much
aggravate our sin, and augment our guilt, and is exceeding sad, and bodes
exceeding ill. Our filthiness, as was said of Jerusalem, Lament. 1. 9.
is in our skirts, it is not hid, but open, obvious, apparent; and I have not
found it (says the Jerem. 2. 34.
Lord) by secret search, or by digging, no it is so manifest, that there is no
need of that. The Apostle tells us, that in his days, they that were drunken,
were drunken in the night: sin, it 1 These. 5. 7.
seems, was more modest then, but now they can reel up and down by day. Now I
will not say, that these that are thus past shame, are past grace, for grace
may and has wrought upon the shamelessest sinners, as upon Manasseh, and Mary
Magdalene; but this I will say, that at present they are void of grace, and
very far from conversion: an impudent sinner is ever an hardened and impenitent
sinner, and such as are not and will not be ashamed of sin penitentially here,
shall be ashamed and confounded everlastingly hereafter.

5. It must be such a turning from sin, as is with confession of sin. As we see
in David, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity Psalm. 32. 5.
have I not hid, I said I will confess my trangressions unto the Lord, etc. And
it is not every confession neither, for Saul confessed his sin, but was proud,
honor me before the people; and 1 Samuel 15. 30.
Judas, but despaired. It must therefore be humble, Voluntaria confessio cum
fide conjuncta est. Calvin.
free, full, fiducial, and with a forsaking of it; and this is so coincident to
repentance, that it is sometimes put for it, and so necessary, that without it
there is no remission nor finding mercy. 1 John 1. 9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our sins, etc. but
if we will not confess them, he will not forgive them. He that covers Prove.
28. 13.
his sins, shall not prosper, but who so confesses and forsakes them, shall
have mercy, etc. But this I do but mention.

6. It must be such a turning from sin, as is with hatred and detestation of
it, and an aversation from it; which arises from a sight and sense not only of
the danger, but of the filthiness and odiousness of sin, of the loathsomness
thereof, as it defiles and makes abominable. They are altogether become filthy,
and a wicked man is loathsome, Psalm. 14. 3. Prove. 13. 5. Ezekiel. 6. 9. etc.
etc. and they shall loath themselves for the evils which they have committed
in all their abominations. It respects sin, not only as it burns, but as it
blacks, and is contrary to the holy nature, and holy and righteous law of God.
And this is an infallible character of true conversion, when there is not only
some kind of leaving of sin, but a loathing of sin, and of our selves by reason
of sin; when our hands do not only shut themselves of it, but our hearts rise
up against it: as is said of Job, that he eschewed evil; he did Job 1. 1, (...)
Recessit, declinavit, a-vertit se.
not only not commit it, but with reluctance and abhorrency turned from it,
and with regret shunned it, and declined it, as a man would do his enemy, or a
Serpent in his way or poison in his food; so much the Hebrew word imports, a
reluctance of his spirit. Thus David, hated Psalm 101. 3. -- 119. 113. -- 128.
the work of them that turned aside, and vain thoughts, yea every false way.
And this has still been the frame of true converts, and the very life,
strength, and Spirituality of holiness lies here. A godly man may do evil, but
yet he hates evil; but what I hate, says Paul, that do Romans 715.
1. There is a great deal of difference between not doing sometimes evil, and
hating evil, as between doing and loving what is good, and this latter speaks
most what a man is. It is made the character of a wicked man: he sets himself
in a Psalm 36. 4.
way that is not good, he abhors not evil. He hates not the evil he does not,
nor loves the good he does; whereas a godly man hates the evil he does, and
loves the good he does not. And this hatred, if it be right, is universal,
against all evil, as David hated every false way, hatred and enmity being
against the whole kind, as a man hates the whole kind of Serpents and Toads,
and so the Lamb of Wolves. 2 The nearer it is, the more we abhor it, it
affecting more, as in our selves, and ours. 3. It is irreconcilable, so as
never to make any new league with sin. Yea 4. it seeks the utter ruin and
destruction of it. But if this be the character of true converts, and that
which accompanies saving conversion, how few have we, and how rare is it? we
have many indeed that are haters of God, and of those, Romans 1. 30. Amos 5. 10.
Titus 3. 3. etc.
and of that which is good, as the Scripture expresses it, that hate Gods
Prophets, and him that rebukes in the gate, and speaks uprightly, that hate one
another, and that hate the light, and knowledge, and reproof, and instruction,
yea their own souls, but few that hate sin, that abhor that which is evil: no,
they rather love it and like it, and delight and rejoice in it. They have
chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in Prove. 2. 14. Isa. 66. 3.
Job 20. 12, 13, 14.
their abominations. Wickedness is sweet in their mouths, they hide it under
their tongues, they spare it, and forsake it not, etc. But this which they so
spare, and is as their meat, will not spare them, but be turned in their
bowels, which they would not turn from, and be as the gall of Asps within them,
etc. But if ever God turn us again indeed, it will be otherwise with us, it
will be with us as it was with Ephraim, we shall say as he said, and do as he
did, as in reference to our sins. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any Hos.
14. 8. Hoc ex animo dicere, testimonium est verae resipiscentiae. Zanch. in
locum.
more with Idols? Thus he shall say heartily, and with utmost indignation and
aversation, with greatest heat of anger, and height of hatred, What have I any
more to do with you? I have had too much to do with you already. Thus Ephraim
upon his conversion should abominate those Idols his heart had formerly been
glewed to, and he should cast them away with detestation, yea, as it is said
elsewhere, as a menstruous Isa. 30. 22.
cloth, and say unto them, get ye hence. And O that God would bring England to
this, that it might be said of us, as in reference to our sins, what is said of
Amnon, in reference to his sister 2 Samuel 13. 15.
Tamar, that the hatred wherewith we now hate sin, and hate our evil ways, is
greater than the love wherewith we loved them. O how would God then hear us and
observe us, as he did Ephraim, Hos. 14. 8.
he would have a gracious eye upon us, and manifest his special favor toward
us.

7. It must be such a turning from sin, as is Vera conversio est ad Deum
reditio. Pareus.
even unto the Lord, not only toward him, or half way to him, but quite unto
him; nor to something else beside him, or below him, but to himself. The Lord
complains of Ephraim, Hos. 7. 16.
They return, but not to the most high: he called upon them to return, and they
were ready to say, so they did, but not to the most high, but turned and tackt
about to something else besides him, or below him; it may be from one sin to
another, or from more gross and open sins to more secret, or it may be from
profaneness to some outward shows and semblances of piety, or formal duties
and performances, and outward exercises of repentance, as some were much in
fastings, and outward humiliations, and exercises of religion; or they returned
to their former sins again, but not to the most high; he himself was not the
end nor center of their motion, but though they seemed to make toward him, yet
came they short of him. Jehu, he seemed to reform indeed, and to reduce the
people to the true worship of God, in taking away Baal, but he still retained
the Calves. They are like (says the Lord) a deceitful bow, which seems to
direct the arrow to such a mark, but through its obliquity turns it aside
another way. So they promised and made shows of amendment, and of returning to
God as their only scope, but Fingunt se velle redire and volare ad Deum, sed
mox animus ipsorum, retro agitur; and per flexuosas ambages vagantur, and
nunquam ad Deum accedunt. Arcus obliquus est cor, etc. Zanch.
through the crookedness and deceitfulness of their hearts they were carried
aside to something else. Here, as a Learned Interpreter observes, the deceitful
Bow is the Heart, the Arrows the thoughts, and seeming desires of repentance.
And this is all the change and turn of many; they seem to return, but not to
the most high, but take up in something else, as in being merely moral, or
civil, or in some outward forms and superstitious ways of worship, or it may be
they are not now profane: but what are they? mere Scepticks in Religion and
wholly taken up in disputations about the same; they run roving here and there,
sometimes of this opinion,
and sometimes of that, but never fix on God, nor Religion indeed. And truly
this is too too much the guise of the turns of these times, but that turn which
the Lord calls for, is, even unto him, Therefore also now, says the Lord, turn
ye even to me, and not to other things Usque ad me.
besides me, or below me, or a this side me, but altogether as far, and quite
through unto me. So the Lord again bespeaks Israel, If thou will return, O
Israel, return unto me, etc. as if the Jer. 4. 1.
Lord had said, Thou make shows, and do pretend, as if thou would
return, thou make offers of returning; but if thou art minded and resolved to
return indeed, and to purpose, let it be unto me, do this, or it is nothing all
thou do, and this is the right turning indeed, when we give God the whole
turn, and not the half only, so as to be half-converts, or almost Christians,
but altogether so as to go through with the work, and not to set only a little
upon repenting and turning, and then to give over; as many who came out of
Egypt, but never quite came into Canaan.

8. It much be such a turning, as is with all the heart, and so true and
sincere. Joel 2. 12. Turn ye even to me with all your heart, with the heart,
and with all the heart, in opposition to a divided heart, and a double heart, a
heart and an heart, there must be here no halting, nor halving with God, he
will have all or none: as Samuel told 1 Samuel 7. 3.
Israel, if ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts, etc. And for the
want of this the Lord taxes Judah, And yet for all this, her treacherous Jer.
3. 10.
sister Judah has not turned to me with her whole heart, but feignedly, says
the Lord, that is, deceitfully, hypocritically, and therefore feignedly,
because not with her whole heart. So we read Psalm 78. 34. of the Israelites,
that when he slew them, then they sought him and they returned; but it was all
but flattering of him, and v. 37.
lying to him: why? because their heart was not right with him, as Peter told
Simon, Thy Acts 8. 21.
heart is not right in the sight of God, and this turning can never be right
and sincere, where Pro. 23. 26.
the heart is not right. My son (says God) give me thy heart, the heart in
conversion must be given up to God, and then our eyes observe his Psalm 95. 10.
ways. It is a people that do err in their hearts, their hearts were still
straying and wandering; it may be they pretended fair with their lips, but God
had not their hearts, and therefore he swear in his wrath they should not enter
into his rest.

9. It must be universal, total: I as to the Subject turning or turned; all
must be turned, the whole man. Old things must pass away, and all things
become new. 1 These. 5. 23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, etc.
Look as the whole man, every part and faculty of body and soul is by nature,
and much more by sinful practice, averse to God, and turned away from God; so
all in conversion must be turned again to God, both in body and soul, every
part of one, and faculty of the other, mind, will, affections; and else it is
but partial conversion, half-conversion, and so not true nor sincere, because
not universal. In true conversion there is not only a conversion of the mind
from error, and heresy, to assent to the true faith and doctrine of Christ;
but also of the will, heart, and affections, to submit to, and willingly obey
the holy laws and commands of Christ. That Is no true conversion, when men
assent to the truth, and yet love the world, and their lusts still, and are
ungodly in their lives: but in true conversion there is a turning here also,
and this is the main and chief, and all in all, and this is hard and rare; but
the other, which is partial, is frequent, and often in Scripture condemned.
Ezekiel. 33. 31. with their mouth (says God) they show much love, but their heart
goes after their covetousness: and Math. 15. 8. This people draws nigh unto
me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far
from me, that is not turned, but in true conversion all is turned. Hence James
1. 26. If any man among you (says the Apostle) seems to be religious, and
bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is
vain. For if he was truly religious, Religion would manifest it self in and
from his tongue also, though not only, as well as be in his heart; that also
would be turned from the evils thereof, as railing, reviling, foolish and idle
and much speaking, censuring, which many that seem to be religious are very
free in, and make no great matter of: but however such may seem to others, or
themselves to be religious, by the practice of some outward duties, and by
attending on God's worship, etc. They do but deceive their own souls, and
pretend Religion to no purpose, for where conversion is true, it is so
operative and effectual, as that it turns all, mind, will, heart, affections,
eyes, ears, hands, feet, lips, life: the mind that is turned, from its vanity,
ignorance, and blindness, vain thoughts, and unbelieving imaginations; the will
from its obstinacy, rebellion, and disobedience; the heart from its hardness,
and both it and the affections from those unlawful objects they were placed
upon, and that excess and violence, and immoderacy, that they formerly ran out
into; and so the members of the body from the evils of them, as from being any
longer instruments and tools for the execution of sin. To. 6. 13. etc.

2. As to the object turned from, viz. every sin, all evil, the least as well
as the greatest, yea and the most beloved, at least as to approving of it, or
lying or living any longer in it, and as to the dominion of it. Thus all must
be turned from, as none in confession are to be dissembled, so none in
conversion are to be reserved; that Vera penitentia, est and animi, and morum,
ab omni impietate, ad pietatem mutatio.
man can never turn to God in truth, that holds fast any known sin. There are
some indeed darling sins, that may more properly be called our own, we being by
nature more especially inclined to them, and these men would fain have spared,
but all must be abandoned, if ever we would have our conversion sincere. As we
would have all taken away, as to the guilt of them, so all must be turned from,
as to the love of them, and going on in them; as all as to their being
remitted, so as to their being mortified. We could be willing indeed to have
all pardoned, that none might hurt us, but we are unwilling to part withal,
especially such as are Mat. 5. 29, 30.
as our right eye, or our right hand; but those must be cast from us here, or
we must be cast into hell hereafter, one sin loved, and lien in, undoes, for at
that our breach, death and damnation will enter, and that very sin (as one
expresses it) will be as a millstone about the neck, and sink the soul forever.
The Prophet David expresses thus his uprightness, -- I hate every 119 Psalm.
128. 113. -- 18. 23. -- 101. 3.
false way; and -- I kept my self from mine iniquity; and I have refrained my
feet from every evil way; and I will set no evil thing before mine eyes, etc.
Such as still go on in any known sin with allowance, be it never so close, are
yet but in a state of nature, and never were yet effectually turned to God. But
that sin is in the room of God, whatever it be, whether Covetousness, or
Luxury, or Pride, etc. -- And Coloss. 3. 5. Philip. 3. 19.
Covetousness, which is Idolatry. -- Whose God is their Belly. People may do
much, as pray and hear the Word, yea with some joy receive it, and do many
things, as Herod did, go far in the Profession of Religion, and yet having
still some Herodias, some secret beloved sin that they hug in their bosom, and
will not part with, be still in the very gall of bitterness, and in the Acts 8.
23.
bond of iniquity. And Jesus Christ will never lodge in any such heart, where
ever any such enemy is yet harbored. It is treason to entertain and harbor
any one Traitor, as well as many; and the grounds and reasons for turning from
sin, if they be spiritual, and sincere, they hold in every sin, as its
contrariety to an holy God, its crossing his will, and opposing his holy, just,
and righteous Law; dishonouring his Majesty, and grieving his Spirit,
crucifying his son, defacing his Image, defiling the Soul, and stripping it of
its beauty and excellency, etc. And this now more or less is in every sin; and
therefore to leave and part with some sins, and to spare and hold fast others,
is but hypocrisy, and no sound conversion. And besides are not all our Jer. 16.
17. Psalm. 119. 168. and 139. 3. etc.
ways before the Lord, in his view? and if therefore we take heed to any of our
ways, why not to all? and does not one sin being indulged separate from God, as
well as many, and expose to ruin? As one leak in a Ship may sink it, one
breach in a Castle betray it, one knife at the heart pierce it, as well as
many. And therefore there must be here a turning away, and an utterly breaking
off from all sin, be it never so sweet, or bring it in never so much pleasure
or profit, yet it must be abandoned and forsaken, if we would approve our
conversion sincere. 3. As to the object turned to, viz unto God, and all that
is good, and holy, and just, and righteous, to all God's commandments; for
there must be no bawking of any, but an universal sincere respect to all, to
one as well as another, the least as well as the greatest, the difficultest as
well as the easiest. As God says of David, -- Who shall fulfill all my will, --
and all his judgments Acts 13. 22. Psalm 18. 22. -- 119. 128. -- v. 6.
were before me; and I esteem all his precepts concerning all things to be
right: and then (says he) shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all
thy commandments. Thus as there must be an abstaining from all evil, so a
doing of all the contrary good; a fulfilling all righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15.
a sincere purpose, desire, and endeavor at least, to conform to all God has
instituted Col. 4. 12.
and commanded, and to stand complete in his whole will: as it is said of
Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6.
that they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blameless.

10. It must be a constant continued turning: as there must be a forsaking of
all evil, and a practicing of all the contrary good, so this must be
constantly, continually, and for ever. It must be such a turning, as is without
returning to our sins again. Hence some have defined it, the constant turning
of a man in his whole life, from all sin, unto God, etc. For as it is the work
of the whole man, so of the whole life, and we are more and more to turn, none
being so far turned from sin to God, but have need still to turn more. There is
an initial, or first repentance, which is at our first calling, and bringing
home to God; and then there is an after, or progressive, which is the
continuation, and going on forward in the first, throughout the whole course of
our lives: and where this after does not succeed, the first was never, sincere.
Indeed at our first conversion we are turned to God, but by our continuing the
same, we are turned more and more, till we return to that state in which 2 Cor.
3. 18.
we once were, and that is not till death; and therefore this turning is a
continued act, and daily exercise all this life. And there is indeed matter
enough to hold our repentance work all our lives, both in regard of the sin of
our natures, hearts, and lives, our daily infirmities, which as we daily renew,
so are we to renew our repentance, and to persevere and continue therein to the
end, so as not to turn aside again from God and his ways, to the crooked ways
of sin, nor from the holy commandment; for it had 2 Pet. 2. 20. 21, 22.
been better for such not to have known the way of righteousness, than after
they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered to them, and
the latter end with them is worse than the beginning. Not but that the best
Converts have their slips, and falls, their deviations, and wanderings here,
for in many thins we offend all, James 3. 2. Galath. 6. 1.
and are sometimes overtaken in a fault, etc. but it is not habitual; though
they may fall, and go astray, they get up again, and turn into the way: the
highway of the upright is to depart from evil. A Sheep may fall into the mire,
but Prove. 16. 17.
does not as a Swine wallow therein; an ordinary habitual customary turning
away, or turning aside from God, to the crooked ways of sin, is inconsistent
with true conversion, and such as do so, God says, his soul shall have no
pleasure in Hebr. 10. 38. Psalm. 125. 5.
them, but he will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity.

And thus I have now shown you more particularly what kind and manner of
turning that is, which is so effectual as to a peoples being saved. And now I
shall proceed to the second thing I propounded to do, which is, to give you the
Reasons, why for God so to turn a people again, and cause his face to shine, is
the only way of their being saved.

CHAP. VIII. The Reasons and Grounds of the point.
THat for God to turn a people again, and cause his face to shine, is their
only way to be saved, appears,

R. 1. Because this is the way, which the Church and people of God here betake
themselves to. They earnestly desire to be saved, that though it was ill with
them at present, that yet it might be well with them for the future. And what
do they do? what way do they go, what course do they take to effect this? why,
this they do, they earnestly entreat again and again, that the Lord God of
Hosts would turn them again, and cause his face to shine. Surely had there been
any other more effectual way of their weal, they would have made use of it, but
they as inspired by God, betaking themselves to this, and being so importunate
for this, this must needs be the only sovereign, and most effectual way
thereof.

R. 2. Because this is the way which others also have betaken themselves to: as
the Church in the very close of the Lamentations, Turn thou us Lam. 5. 21.
unto thee, O Lord, (say they) and we shall be turned, renew our days as of
old, that is, vouchsafe us thy favor again, and so by doing these for us,
change our present sad condition, into that happy state our fathers formerly
enjoyed. Thus in this way they seek their weal, and so elsewhere. Turn us, O
God of our salvation, and Psalm 85. 4. and 67. 1.
cause thine anger toward us to cease; and God be merciful to us, and bless
us: but how would they be blessed? and cause thy face to shine upon us. Wherein
they plainly allude to the manner of blessing prescribed by God himself to
Aaron. Numb. 6. 23. Jerem. 31. 18.
So Ephraim, Turn thou me, etc. And thus Moses sought the weal of Israel, Psalm.
90. 13. Return O Lord; how long? etc. and v. 14. O satisfy us dearly with thy
mercy, (that is, thy favor, thy loving kindness, for so the same word is
rendered elsewhere: as 63. 3. Because Benignitate tua. (...)
thy loving kindness is better than life, etc.) that we may rejoice and be glad
all our days: and v. 17. Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, or
loveliness, some read, the pleasantness, or Jucunditas Domini.
pleasing look, that is, his amiable favor and grace: let the Lord our God
love us, and delight in us, let that beauty be upon us which shines in his
favor. The face is the seat of beauty, and love shining in God's face, is his
beauty upon us. By this expression (says Calvin upon the place) we may gather,
how incomparable a thing the love and favor of God is. David was often under
sore trials and afflictions, and what does he still crave, for his succor and
relief, and that he might be saved? it was God's favor, Psalm 4. 6. -- 31. 16.
-- 119. 132, 135. etc.
that he would make his face to shine upon him, and lift up upon him the light
of his countenance.

R. 3. Because this is the way which the Lord himself (who knows best what
tends to his peoples weal) prescribes, and invites them to, as the only
sovereign way thereof. As in that known place, Hos. 14. 1, 2. which contains in
it the very way and platform of a peoples weal, and being saved. O Israel,
return unto the Lord Hosea 14.
thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. The Lord here minds Israel,
how ill his iniquities had dealt with him, how they had even overthrown him,
and laid him low, made his condition exceeding sad, this is all he got by them;
and yet the Lord would have it well with him again, and that it might be so,
what does he advise him? it is to return unto him, as Continet haec supplicatio
unicam consequendae salutis viam, viz. si Deus auferat peccata, etc. Pareus.
the fountain of all his happiness and welfare, and bids them, as it follows v.
2. Take with you words and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously, etc. This the Lord prescribes himself, as
the only way of their weal; as if the Lord had said, It is ill indeed with you
at present, but if you would have it well with you, then do thus, and say this,
turn to the Lord, and say unto him, and say it not only with your lips, but
with the ferventest Non ore tantum, sed intimo cordis affectu.
and entirest affection of your hearts, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, vouchsafe the removal of our sin, and favorable and gracious
acceptance with thy self, that sins guilt may be pardoned, its power subdued,
its pollution purged, and thy grace obtained, that is in effect, that God would
turn them again, and cause his face to shine. So that what his people seek
elsewhere, that the Lord prescribes here, and prescribes it as the only way of
their weal. And so in many other places, as Jer. 4. 14. that Jerusalem there
might be saved from those evils and miseries, which else would certainly and
unavoidably come upon her to her utter ruin, he prescribes and invites her
seriously and unfeignedly to repent of her wickedness. O Jerusalem, wash thine
heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved, how long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee? Those vain thoughts of help and succor by other
ways and means, with neglect of the main. And how often, that poor sinners
might live, does the Lord (who swears he had no pleasure in their death) invite
them to turn from their way, Turn ye, turn ye Ezekiel. 33. 11. -- 18. 3.
from your evil ways, and repent, and turn from all your transgressions, cast
them away from you, and Jer. 3. 22. -- 4. 1. etc.
put your abominations out of my sight, etc. and so much does our happiness and
good, our being blessed depend upon, and consist in the face and favor of God,
that when God would have his people blessed, this he prescribes and directs as
the very way, and means, and platform thereof. And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying, speak Numb. 6. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
unto Aaron, and unto his sons, saying on this wise, ye shall bless the
children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the
Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up
his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. What goodness and kindness is
it in God, that as he is most blessed himself, so he will have his people
blessed also, and not be blessed alone: and that they may be so, he prescribes
this as the very form thereof, and in these phrases the Priests and Levites
were to bless Israel, that is, to wish them all good, all happiness and
salvation, all being Benedicere est fausta et salutaria precari: To pray for
and wish all happiness and good.
summed up in the love of God, in the manifestations of his favor; and
therefore because this, and only this was their blessedness, therefore in
different phrases it is prescribed again and again, to be supplicated for them.

R. 4. Because when the Lord has purposed to make a people happy, and to have
it well with them indeed, this he has still promised, as the only effectual
way and means thereof. As to Israel: I will heal their backsliding, I will
love Hosea 14. 4, 5.
them freely, for mine anger is turned away from them. It is very observable,
that what the Lord had before prescribed, as the only way of their weal, v. 2.
that he here promises v. 4. for to S^nare defectiones idem est, quod et omnem
tollere iniquitatem, si^ut saep^us precati sunt Israelitae. Zanch in locum.
heal their backsliding, and love them freely, and turn away from them his
anger, it is to take away all iniquity, and receive them graciously. Their sins
were their sicknesses, and the Lord the great Physician, that they might
recover, promises to heal them, that is, not only not to impute, but pardon
what was past, so by his grace to prevent the same for the future: And I will
be as the dew to Israel, etc. My favor and grace shall be to them as dew to
the grass, etc. Thus when the Lord promises happiness and welfare to those that
were carried captive, he tells them, he will acknowledge them, and set his Jer.
24. 5, 6, 7.
eyes on them for good, that is, manifest to them his favor, and they shall
(says he) return unto me with their whole heart. See also Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26.
etc. Micah 7. 19. Z^char. 12. 10. etc.

R. 5. Because Jesus Christ himself, the eternal Son of God, was sent, and came
into the world to procure our happiness and weal, and our being saved this way
by calling us to repentance, and saving us from our sins, and by bringing us to
God, and procuring for us his favor and gracious acceptance. As he himself,
who best knew what was his errand, and what he had in commission, has told us,
I am come to call sinners to repentance, and this the Angel witnessed of him,
that his name should be called Jesus, for he should save Matthew 9* 13.
his people from their sins: and so his Apostles Acts 3. 26.
after, Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, but how? in what way, and by what means? in turning away every one of you
from his iniquities, and for this purpose was the son of God manifested, that
he might destroy the works of the Devil: and he is 1 John 3. 8. -- 4. 10.
said to send his Son to be the propitiation for our Romans 5. 2.
sins, and by him we have access into the grace wherein we stand. And the
Apostle Peter gives us this account of Christ's sufferings, that they were to
bring us to God, to recover us into his favor 1 Pet. 3. 18.
and friendship again, as our only happiness and felicity.

R. 6. Because the Lord has* and does still send his Ministers to be
instrumental of peoples happiness and weal this way; as by opening their eyes,
and turning them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
that they Acts 26. 18.
may receive forgiveness of sins, and so be reconciled to God, and brought
again into his favor, and hence their ministry is called the ministry of
reconciliation. And hence that great Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 20
knowing no better nor more effectual way of peoples weal, it is said, Acts 26.
20. that he showed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and
throughout all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should
repent and turn to God, etc. yea, and he makes preaching repentance toward
God, and faith toward our 2 Cor. 5. 18, 20
Lord Jesus Christ, the very sum of his preaching, and that in preaching
these he had kept Acts 20. 20, 21, 27.
nothing back that was profitable to them, but had declared to them all the
counsel of God. And what way were the Prophets of old sent to prevent peoples
ruin, and to bring it to be well with them? was it not by calling and inviting
them to return to the Lord, to turn from their evil ways unto him. I might give
you multitudes of places to this purpose, but that it is needless, they being
every where obvious. So John the Baptist, Christ's harbinger and forerunner,
and afterward Jesus Christ himself, whose great business in their preachings
was no other, then that sinners might be saved, and that it might be well with
them: what did they preach? it was Repentance. And so when he sent forth the
twelve, it is said, they went out and Matthew. 3. 2. -- 4. 17.
preached, and what did they preach? why that Mark 6. 12.
men should repent. Now had there been any more effectual way or course to have
been taken for furthering the good of these they went, or were sent to preach
to, surely they would have taken it; but they taking this course, and going
this way, clearly demonstrates that this is indeed the way.

R. 7. Because true repentance, sound Evangelical conversion, does presuppose
faith, yea and Poenitentia ad desperationem trahit, nisi fulciatur vera fide de
remissione peccati, ut est videre in Caino, Juda, Saul, etc. Aretius.
is a happy fruit and effect thereof: faith being that which dissolves and
melts the heart into kindly sorrow and grief for former sins and rebellions,
whereby so good a God has been grieved, and makes the soul to hate and
abominate, and resolve against them for the future. And now true faith is every
where held forth as saving. He that believes shall be saved: and Mark 16. 16.
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall Acts 16. 31. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Heb. 10. 39. 1 Pet. 1. 9.
be saved: and we are of them that believe to the saving of the Soul: so
receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls, etc. And now
true conversion must needs be the only effectual way for a people to be saved,
because where this is, faith is, yea in order of nature, as I said before,
faith precedes it, as the ground and root thereof. Indeed in order of time they
are both together, and so neither of them is one before the other, but in the
manifestation of them Repentance is first. As the Thunder and Lightning are
both at one and the same time, yet is one discerned before the other; and so is
repentance both to a man's self, and also to others, sooner discerned and
discovered than faith; one as the sap lying hid within, but the other as the
bud springing forth, and showing it self without: but in order of nature faith
is first: for 1. God's favor is first apprehended, and remission of sins upon
repentance believed, and then upon that comes repentance, and conversion, and
alteration of heart and life. And 2. true repentance being a grace, and being
repentance unto life, Zach. 12. 10.
whence should it be had but from the fountain thereof? and how should it be
had thence but by faith? union being the ground of communion, and interest of
influence. So that Jesus Christ must first be received himself, before saving
conversion, or any grace can be received: hence our Savior tells us, without
him we can John 15. 5.
do nothing, or severed from him, much less so great a thing as to repent and
turn to God. Some preparations to repentance, and preparatory Fides nisi
praeluceat, nulla vera (...) esse potest, licet adsit (...), qualis fuit in
Juda. Tossanus.
beginnings and introductions there are indeed before faith, as Legal fears and
terrors, but no true Evangelical repentance: for 3. that is pleasing and
acceptable to God, and therefore cannot be without faith, for without faith it
is impossible to please God, or that any work should please him that does not
arise thence. And besides Sine fide omnis poenitentia non solum ociosa est, sed
expeditum iter ad desperationem. Mentzerus.
4. without faith we are spiritually dead, for the just do live by faith, Heb.
2. 4. and repentance is the work of the living. But if repentance be after
faith, how is it, may some say, that we find repentance put before it? as Mark
1. 15. -- Repent ye and believe the Gospel, and Acts 20. 21. To this I answer,
that the placing of things in Scripture is not always according to Credendo in
Christum convertuntur, quia fides est praevia conversionis, nec ulla est vera
conversio sine fide. Tossanus in locum.
the order of nature, but sometimes the cause is placed after the effect, to
show how we should obtain the effect; as 1. repent, and then that ye may
repent, believe. Again 2. in other places we find it put after faith, as Acts
12. 21. And a great number believed, and turned to the Lord. Thus the goodness
of God, and remission of sins by Jesus Christ, being apprehended and embraced
by faith, this brings on conversion. And His duobus summa doctrinae Evangelicae
comprehendi solet. Non hic praeponitur poenitentia fidei quasi prior dignitate,
vel tempore.
hence these two are made the sum of the Gospel and of Christian doctrine,
and the Apostles preaching. Acts 20. 20. And how I kept back nothing that was
profitable unto you. v. 21. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the
Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: and this
he calls v. 27. the whole counsel of God, viz. which God has revealed and
manifested as concerning our salvation, and how we may come to obtain it. And
this by the way may comfort all true converts, as concerning their having had
some tastes and particular apprehensions of the mercy of God in Christ, and so
some measure of faith, this being an evident sign thereof, and an happy effect
which flows therefrom; and therefore this must needs be the sovereign way for a
people to be saved, for God to turn them again, it presupposing always this
true saving faith.

R. 8. That this is the only way for a people to be saved, for God to turn
them again, and cause his face to shine, appears from the nature, excellency,
and happy effects, of these, and from what follows upon these. As 1. as to
conversion, and being turned again, this must needs be the way to be saved, yea
everlastingly saved. For 1. such as are indeed* turned again, are turned from
that which is, and indeed only is destructive, which alone does and can indeed
destroy, and that is sin and iniquity; and being turned from that which is
alone destructive, they must needs be in the way to be saved: he indeed that
pursues Prove. 11. 16.
evil, pursues it to his own death, to his own eternal ruin; but now the true
convert he turns from it, and forsakes it, and how then should it be his ruin?
And hence says the Lord God to Ezekiel. 18. 30.
the house of Israel, repent, and turn your selves from all your
transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. For you are now turned
from that which else would, and indeed only could have been your ruin, there
being nothing ruining and destructive but sin; and therefore a people being
turned from that which alone is destructive, they must needs be safe, for what
should destroy them, sin being alone that which does destroy? 2. They are
turned to him who is 1. the sole and sovereign fountain of all happiness and
good, an universal and all-sufficient good, infinitely good, yea the very ocean
of good, where all the several streams and channels of good meet and concentre
together; and being turned to him who is all good, and in whom all good
resides, who is the God of Salvations, how Bonum in quo omnia bona, and sine
quo nihil bonum. Deus meus, and omnia mea.
can such want salvation, or any other good? 2. The ultimate good, the utmost
good, that rests and satisfies the soul, to whom when the soul is once come, it
has no further to go, except it be still further and nearer to him to whom it
is come, he being the true and proper center of it, where it does acquiesce,
and where it is come to it is journeys end, there being nothing beyond him, nor
in comparison besides him, he is first, Psalm 73. 25.
and next, and last. And therefore how well must it needs be with the soul,
when once it is come to him? but till it is come to him, it is as it were in a
maze, and restless motions, and fruitless travels, seeking rest and
satisfaction, but finding none, it turns this way indeed, and moves that way
and the other way, to this sin, to that creature, to that vanity, but finds
nothing but emptiness, and disappointment; it snatches on the right hand, but
is hungry; and catches on the left, but is not satisfied, for there Isaiah 9.
20.
is not it is rest, no that is only in God, for whom it was made, and in whom
alone it can meet with Fecisti nos propter te, Domine, and inquietum est cor
nostrum, donec requiescat inte.
that repose it makes after. Rest in the Lord, Psalm 37. 7. there is no resting
but in him. We (says the Apostle) who have believed, do enter into rest; and so
such as do indeed turn to God, there it is the weary soul is at rest, and the
Hebr. 4. 3.
longing soul is satisfied, and may say with Jacob, I have enough, or I have
all, for God that is sufficient for himself, must needs be so for the creature:
and therefore God being such a good, and a people when turned again, being
turned to him, how can it but be well with them? the soul being then turned to
his true and proper center, where it should be, where it was made to be, and
'till where it be it can never be well, why else is it restless till it come
there? Of all else we may say, Arise ye, and depart, for this Micah 2. 10.
Isaiah 28. 14.
is not your rest, etc. And the bed is shorter then that a man can stretch
himself on it, and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it.
As concerning true rest, all the creatures say, as sometimes concerning wisdom,
One Job 28. 14.
says it is not in me, and another it is not in me, etc. no, it is only in
God. and yet why do men pursue this or that, but to find satisfaction? and yet
they cannot; no, whiles a deceived heart turns them aside, they feed but as it
were upon ashes, upon husks, and walk through dry Is. 44. 20. Matthew. 12. 43.
places, seeking rest but finding none, as is said of Satan. For all his days
are sorrows, and his travel grief, yea his heart takes not rest in the Eccles.
2. 23.
night, etc. It is said of Judah, she dwells among the heathen, she finds no
rest, and our necks are under persecution, or hard bondage, we labor and Lam.
1. 3. -- 5. 5.
have no rest, and how should such have rest that dwell still among sins, and
lusts, and leasing, that lie in wickedness, that dwell and abide still among
vanities, enemies, devils, murderers, that are still under the heavy servitude
of sin, and Satan, that have turned their backs upon their rest, and are far
from it, that have gone from mountain to hill, and forgotten their resting
place, to whom Is. 28. 12.
God has often said as concerning himself, this is the rest wherein you may
cause your weary souls Is. 50. 11.
to rest, etc. but they would not hear, and therefore are restless and
unsatisfied, and lie down in sorrow. 3. Being turned from sin, salvation is
that they are now toward, and going on unto; before conversion indeed their
backs were upon it, and they were hastening on in a quite contrary way unto it,
but now being turned again, their backs are upon sin, and hell, and death, and
their faces are toward, and they are going on to heaven, and life, and
salvation. 4. They walk now in the paths of life, and in the ways of salvation,
that lead and bring unto it, and therefore must needs be in the way to be
saved. And these ways are Gods ways, the ways of his precepts, which such walk
now in. They also do no iniquity, Psalm 119. 3. -- 18. 21.
they walk in his ways; and I have kept the ways of the Lord. Hence David being
a stranger in the earth, he begs of God, that he would not hide -- 119. 19.
his Commandments from him, they being indeed his way to heaven, his way home,
the way everlasting, which leads to life everlasting. 5. Such being truly
converted, shall hold on and persevere in those ways, and never totally nor
finally fall away, but go from strength to Psalm 84. 7.
strength, till they come and appear before God in that heavenly Sion. The
righteous, that is, who is truly turned to righteousness, shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands, shall Job 17. 9.
be stronger and stronger. Thus such as being turned again, are brought into
the right way, they continue therein, yet not so, but that they have their
slips and falls as I said before, and their deviations out of the way; but they
rise, and get up again, and return into the way, and never finally fall away,
for the Lord upholds them with his hand, and they are kept by his Psalm 37. 23,
24.
power through faith unto salvation. Such therefore, who habitually turn aside
to the crooked 1 Pet. 1. 5.
ways of sin, were never yet truly turned again, and therefore will the Lord
lead them forth with Psalm 125. 5.
the workers of iniquity. They went out from us, because they were not of us,
for if they had been 1 John 2. 19.
of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, etc. But such as are truly
turned again, they holding out to the end, must needs be saved, as our Savior
has declared, But he that shall endure Matthew. 24. 13.
to the end the same shall be saved. 6. Though the consummation and perfect
completion of salvation be not till hereafter, yet in some sense such are saved
already: as 1. From the guilt of Ephesians. 2. 8.
sin. 2. From the power and dominion of sin, and so from hell and death, and
wrath to come, they repenting and being converted. 3. From the curse and
condemnation due unto sin, their sins are pardoned, and their iniquities
forgiven. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your Act. 3. 19. -- 26. 18.
sins may be blotted out, etc. So -- To turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sin,
etc. and salvation, or redemption, does so much consist in remission of sin,
that it is called it, and put for it. In whom we have redemption Coloss. 1. 14.
Ephesians. 1. 7.
through his blood, and what is that redemption? wherein especially and chiefly
does it consist? it follows, even the forgiveness of sins: Luke 1. 77.
so, to give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their
sins, or in the remission of their sins, that is, which salvation is by the
remission of their sins, or consists in, and depends upon remission of sin; and
as such are saved at present from the guilt, power, and condemnation of sin, so
they shall shortly be saved from the very being of sin, yea perfectly saved
from all evil, and brought to the perfect and full fruition of all good; of
which full salvation, in regard of God's purpose and promise, and Christ's
purchase, as also their having the earnest and first fruits of it, and their
being sealed to it, they are as sure of it, as if they were already actually
possessed of it. Secondly, that this is the way for a people to be saved, and
be happy, and have it well with them, for God to turn them again, and cause his
face to shine, appears from the precious nature and transcendent excellency of
the shining of God's face, of divine favor, from what it is, and from what it
does and effects. For 1. it is blessedness it self, happiness and salvation it
self, as appears from the very form of blessing, which God himself did
prescribe, Numb. 6. 22, 23, 24, 25. etc.
which was by supplicating this; and when the Church and people of God have
prayed that God would bless them, they have prayed for this, that God would
cause his face to shine Psalm 67. 1. Salus a gratiosa Dei praesentia, quae
lucida ejus facies appellatur, procedit. Mol.
upon them, and for God to cause his face to shine, and vouchsafe his favor,
it is very salvation it self. And hence the Prophet David calls it Salvations:
-- Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his
countenance, Psalm 42. 5.
thus we render this latter clause, for the help of his countenance: and indeed
God's countenance, his loving kindness, his special grace and favor, is a very
blessed helpful thing, nothing helps like it, and what can help without it? It
is, and affords the best help, it helps much, it helps mightily, it helps
sweetly, it helps universally, it helps all, and every way, and in every thing,
as the matter requires: there is nothing helps like it, blessed are they that
have it for their help, and O that it might be for the help of us all. But the
Original is only -- the salvations of his face, (...) salutes facierum ejus.
and so Ainsworth renders it, that is, for the salvations of his face, as the
matter of his praise, so some; or the healths of his countenance, that is,
Salutem omnimodam, quae proficiscitur a facie ejus, intuente me scilicet
gratiose. Pise.
which his countenance, which his face or favor, and gracious presence gives
to me, or which proceeds therefrom; and it is put in the plural number, as is
usual among the Hebrews, the more to heighten the sense, and so it denotes full
and complete, or manifold, and all manner of salvation. Chaldee reads it, for
the redemption which is from his face; others read this latter clause apart,
and asunder, and so we find it rendered in the Margent, his presence is
salvation, that is, his special gracious presence; and so the Dutch, his face,
i. e. his favor, is an assured or Non male conveniet sensus, si seorsim
legamus salutes esse vultus Dei, quia simul ac respicere suos dignatur salvos
praestat. Calvin. in locum.
manifold salvation. And though Calvin likes of the other reading, as denoting
the matter and cause of David's praise, yet the sense (says he) will well
agree, if we read it distinctly, as that the countenance of God (which is taken
for the manifestation of his favor) is salvations, for no sooner does God
dignifie us, so as graciously to behold us, but we are safe. One gracious cast
from his eye, one light some beam from his senene countenance, is a sufficient
counterpane against all troubles, be they what they will, inward or outward.
All amount to this, that when God causes his face to shine, vouchsafes his
favor, it is full and complete salvation, it self, and that all salvation
consists in, and flows from his loving countenance. And this must needs be our
happiness and salvation here, for it is that which shall be our full, perfect,
and complete felicity, Revel. 22. 4. Psalm. 41. 12. -- 73. 25.
in the full enjoyment thereof in heaven. And they shall see his face. -- And
set me before thy face for ever, and whom have I in heaven but Job 13. 16.
thee? etc. And he also shall be my salvation, for an hypocrite shall not come
before him, etc. 2. This will be sure to effect and accomplish whatever is
requisite; and necessary, as to our being saved, as to our being happy, and
having it well with us, both here and hereafter. Those whom God favors, he
will work all their works in them, and Isa. 26. 12. Psalm. 57. 2.
perform all things for them. The shining of God's face ingages him to the
putting forth of the power of his hand, whereby his people are not only saved
and preserved here, but kept to that salvation ready to be revealed in the last
1 Pet. 1. 5. Jude 24.
time, he is able to keep them from falling, and to present them faultless
before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, and his loving kindness
makes him willing, for this is the very root, spring, and fountain of all good
to man, his favor; so that when his heart is once set upon us, his hand cannot
be shut, but opened to us. -- He delivered me, because he delighted in me: and
Psalm 18. 19. -- 44. 3.
because thou had a favor to them, and because of the light of thy
countenance, thou did so and so for them. And hence are those expressions, If
I have found grace in thy sight, if I have found favor in thy eyes, do so and
so; and make (says David) thy face shine upon thy servant, and teach me thy
statutes, and according to thy loving kindness hear me, quicken me, etc. yea
that blessed man of God, for effecting all his good, and for salvation and
deliverance out of all his distress, he desires but this, that God would send
out his light and his truth. O send Psalm 43. 3.
out thy light and thy truth, that is, the light of thy countenance, vouchsafe
me but thy favor, Per lucem intelligitur favor, and veritatem adjungit, quia
lucem nonnisi ex Dei promissionibus, sperabat. Calvin in locum.
and perform but thy promise, i. e. made, thereof, and all the darkness of my
present so sad and gloomy condition shall be dispelled. Let them lead me (says
he) let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles, i. e. to thy
Sanctuary, to the place of thy public worship, where Ilong so much to be. O
whither will not the light of God's favor lead us and bring us? it will bring
us to be happy here, and blessed for ever hereafter; it will bring us into the
way of all our weal, to the enjoyment of God in his ordinances, Lucem and
veritatem appellat favorem and auxilium omnibus piis promissum a Deo, quibus
rebus pelluntur tenebrae calamitatum, etc.
and then above ordinances, even to the full and immediate enjoyment of himself
for ever; it will guide us with his counsels, and after receive us to his
glory. Lead us in the path of life, and then bring us to the place of life;
lead us in the way everlasting, and then bring us to the life everlasting; in
the paths of righteousness, and then bring us to those new heavens, and new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness; uphold us in integrity here, and then set
us before his face for ever hereafter; it will Ad illud templum immortale,
ubinumen ipsius augustissimum perpetuis hymnis celebrent mentes beatae.
make us fit and meet for heaven, and then bring us to heaven; lead us in
safety through these bottoms of death, and this valley of misery and tears here
below, and then bring us and exalt us to those mountains of Spices, and those
hills of Myrrh and Frankincense above; it will cause God to follow us with
goodness all the days of our life here, and then to bring us to partake of that
goodness, which he has laid up for those that fear him elsewhere. Which
because David cannot express, he admires, Psalm 31. 19. O how great is thy
goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee?

3. As it will accomplish all, so it is all, God's favor, his face, all that
is truly excellent, amiable, profitable, and desirable.

1. It is light. Psalm 43. 3. Send out thy light* Psalm 89. 15. They shall walk
O Lord in the light of thy countenance. And how sweetly and comfortably must
they needs walk, who walk in that light, for with thee is the fountain of life,
and in thy light, i. e. in thy favor, Psalm 36. 9.
when thou art pleased to show us thy face, and fatherly countenance in thy
son, shall we see light, that is enjoy lively comfort, and joy and gladness of
heart. So Job 29. 3. When his Lamp shined upon my head, and when by his light I
walked through darkness, that is, when he abode with me by his favor, and by
it I passed through and overcame the miseries and adversities of this life.

2. It is life. Psalm 30. 5. In his favor is Ps. 63. 3.
life. Many live, but no soul truly lives, but in his favor, in his sight, and
in the light of his countenance. H^s 6. 2. -- and we shall live in his sight;
yea it is better than life. For 1. people -- 119. 88.
may live, yea and have all accommodations of life, and yet be miserable, but a
soul cannot have the favor of God but be happy. 2. It is better than life, for
it is the very life and happiness Vitam reddit vere vitalem.
of our life, and without it life is no better than a kind of death. 3. Life
soon fades away, Jam. 4. 14.
and fails, it is even but as a vapor, that appears for a little while, and
then vanishes; but the favor Ps. 103. 15, 16 17.
of God is for ever, it is everlasting. 4. Life is common to all, but God's
favor peculiar only to a few. 5. Life may become a burden, and Ps. 106. 4.
people may grow weary of it, but never of God's favor. 6. The favor of God
is absolutely and indispensably necessary, but so is not life. etc.

3. It is felicity. Hence while others make out after other goods, David seeks
after this as Psalm 4. 6.
the only happiness, and as that alone which could render him blessed. There
be many that say, who will show us any good, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us.

4. It is safety and security. And hence the Lord is said to shield us
therewith. For thou Lord -- 5. 12.
wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass him as with a shield.
And Fear not Mary, Luke 1. 30.
for thou have found favor with God. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant,
save me for Psalm 31. 16.
thy mercies sake.

5. It is health. Psalm. 42. 11. Hope thou Obtexisti faciem tuam, and
aegrotavimus; illumina faciem, and salvi erimus. Austin.
in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and
my God. God and his favor is our health, and makes the countenance look
healthful, and cheerful; whereas its want or withdrawing, is the souls sickness
as it were, and makes the countenance sad, heavy, and cast down like the look
of one that is sick.

6. It is strength. For the joy of the Lord is Neh. 8. 10.
your strength, i. e. the joy of his face that he favors you. This is your
strength, that which fortifies Levavit pedes ^uos. Phrasi Hebraica emphatice
significat cum alacriter, and instar cursoris indefessi perrexisse. Pareus in
loc:
you; it makes to go from strength to strength, and causes a man to lift up his
feet, as Jacob, after he had met with God at Bethel. And Jacob went on his
journey. Hebr. lift up his feet, that is, being strengthened by the late vision,
he went on cheerfully and courageously in his journey.

7. It is joy, yea exceeding joy. Psalm 43. 4. Then will I go to the Altar of
God, unto God my exceeding joy: the Hebrew is, the gladness of my joy; the Lord
and his favor is not only our joy, but exceeding joy, the joy of our joy,
that is, the chief, the choice, the cream, the crown, the top, the head of our
joy. Psalm 16. 11. In thy presence, i. e. in thy special and gracious presence,
or in, or with thy face, is fullness Psalm. 16. 11. -- 4. 7. -- 21. 6.
of joy. I hou have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time when their
corn and wine increased, for thou have made him most blessed for ever, thou
have made him exceeding glad with thy countenance: it makes exceeding happy,
and exceeding glad. It is the greatest cheerer, the choicest cordial: for thy
love is better and we Cant. 1. 2, 4.
will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more than wine.

8. It is glory, it is our honor and exaltaion: For thou art the glory of
their strength, and Psalm 89. 17. -- 148. 14.
in thy favor our horn shall be exalted: he also exalts the horn of his
people: he and his favor, whose name alone is excellent, and whose v. 13.
glory is above the earth and heaven. And who should, or what should exalt his
people, if not God, and his favor? It is a crowning mercy, -- who crowns
thee with loving kindness and Psalm 103. 4.
tender mercies, the favor of God, the loving kindness of God, and those
special peculiar tender mercies, which flow from his very bowels as it were,
from his tender intimate and affectionate love, these crown, these are our
honor and ornament. With favor will thou compass -- 5. 12.
him as with a shield: the Hebrew is crown him: And so the Dutch and others
read it, thou shall crown him with thy favourableness, or well Ut scuto
voluntate coronabis eum.
pleasing complacency, as with a target, as with a buckler, with favorable
acceptance, thou will (...) Coronabis.
crown him. Not only does glory, life and immortality crown hereafter, but the
love and favor of God crowns here: yea, all the Gold, and Gems, and Rubies,
and richest and preciousest stones in the world, set and composed together, can
never make such a Crown for the head, as the favor of God puts upon the soul.
With favor will thou crown him. In the 2 Samuel 12. 30. we read there of a
Crown, the weight whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones, which
according to the weight of the Sanctuary weighed above an hundred pound, but
according to the ordinary talent above fifty four pound, but the Crown of Gods
favor exceeds it and excels it. Thus the favor of God is not only Shield and
Buckler, but Crown also; yea it is any thing, every thing that is truly
excellent, comfortable, and commodious, and that his people stand in need for
it to be unto them: But thou O Lord art a shield for me, my glory Psalm 3. 3.
Isa. 28. 5.
and the lifter up of my head. In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a
crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty unto the residue of his people, etc.
As he said to Paul, his grace is sufficient 2 Cor. 12. 9. Favor Dei and
auxilium spiritus sancti a favore isto proveniens.
for us, or enough for us, and is all in all to us, his accepting grace, and
his helping and sustaining grace, his favor, and what flows therefrom.

4. It covers and silences all that God has against his people. So that though
his people may have many failings which oppose their weal, and might be matter
of plea against them, yet God shining on them with his face, he passes them by,
and silences all in his love, for love even in us covers multitudes of sins,
how much more 1 Pet. 4. 8. Prove. 10. 12. Zeph. 3. 17.
God's love? The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he
will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, that is, as some
render it, he will take satisfaction and contentment in loving thee, in the
affection he bears to thee. But the Hebrew is, as is noted in the Silebit
propter dilectionem suam, obmutescet in amore suo.
Margent, he will be silent in his love, or because of his love, that is, he
will bear with thy infirmities, and pass them by, without manifesting any
displeasure for them, his love shall answer all objections against thee, so
that thy frailties shall not be charged upon thee, but born with. The Hebrew
signifies also to be dumb or deaf, and some render it, he shall be dumb in his
love; or deaf, that is, to speak after the manner of men, his ear shall not
hear, nor his mouth utter any accusations against thee, so as to reject thee,
though he may humble thee; he will quiet himself in his love, when his anger is
ready to be stirred, he will pass over many things, and as it were wink at
them, because he loves thee, as the tenderhearted loving husband does as to
his dear wife, the loving father or mother as to her dear child. So Hosea 14.
4. I will heal their backsliding, and whence, I will love them freely, for my
anger is turned away from him; and Micah 7. 19. He will turn again, i. e. in
mercy and loving kindness he will manifest his love, he will have compassion
upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into
the depth of the Sea, drown them in the ocean of his love. Psalm 85. 1: Thou
have been favorable unto thy Land, and then v. 2. Thou have forgiven the
iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their sin.

CHAP. IX. The Application of the point, and first in general by way of
Information, or inference.
IS it the only way for a people to be saved, for Use 1. of Information, or
inference.
God to turn them again, and cause his face to shine, as has been abundantly
made good; then there are several truths that this point does inform us of, and
instruct us in; and several things from hence are deducible, and may be
inferred.

As 1. That then there is a way for a people to be saved, and that let their
present state and condition be what it will, be it never so sad, though as sad
as this peoples was here, whose prayer God had seemed to be angry with a great
while v. 4, 5, 6, 12, 13
, yea and had fed them with bred of tears, and given them tears to drink in
great measure, made them a strife unto their neighbors, and their enemies
laughed among themselves, yea though God had planted them as his vine, yet now
he had broken down her hedges, so that all they who passed by the way did pluck
her. The bore out of the wood did wast it, and the wild beast out of the field
devoured it; yea all God's former mercies were now turned into judgments, and
yet were a peoples condition as sad as theirs here, yea sadder, yet there is a
way for them to be saved, yea let God but turn them again, and cause his face
to shine, and they shall be saved. Thus whatever are a peoples sicknesses or
sores, there is a salve; whatever their maladies, there is a remedy; whatever
is their case, there is a way of cure. If I shut up heaven (says the Lord) that
there be no rain, or if I command the Locusts to 2 Chronicles. 7. 13.
devour the Land, or if I send pestilence among my people, that is, whatever
judgments I inflict on a people, (for under these are comprised all other) if.
v. 14. my people which are called by my name shall humble themselves, etc. So
if they shall confess their iniquity, etc. and their uncircumcised hearts be
humbled, etc. At what instant I shall Levit. 26. 40. Jer. 18. 7, 8.
speak concerning a nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull
down, and to destroy it. If that Nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn
from their evil, I will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them. Is there
(says the Prophet) no balm in Gilead, is there no Physician Jer. 8. 22.
there? Gilead was a place where there was plenty of Balm, and it was famous
for the soveraignest Balsams, for from thence they were wont to be transported
into other countries; and there were also store of skilful Physicians, and
therefore it was strange, and matter of wonder indeed, that Balm and Physicians
should fail and not be had there. But admit there should be no Balm, no not in
Gilead, yet is there Balm with God; and that all Physicians fail on earth, yet
is there a Physician in heaven: who whatever are a peoples maladies, if he do
but undertake the cure, will be sure to bring remedy; Psalm 60. 11. -- 68. 20.
who gives help from trouble, when vain is the help of man, and unto whom
belong the issues from death. For we have no might against this great 2 Chr.
20. 12.
company that comes against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are
upon thee, who yet can help us and save us from above, though no help nor way
of salvation appears from beneath. Thus there is a way for a people to be
saved, whatever is their case; and truly this is a great mercy, and that the
Lord is pleased also to point a people to it, when their case has been
exceeding deplorable, and seemed almost desperate: as Joel 2. in the first
chapter, and the former part of the second, what sore and terrible judgments
had God threatened, and yet v. 12. Therefore also now says the Lord, turn ye
even to me, etc. So, Return thou backsliding Israel, says Hos. 14. 1.
the Lord, etc. Who (says the Lord) would set the briars and thorns against me
in battle, I would Jer. 3. 12.
go through them, I would burn them together. Or let him take hold of my
strength, that he may Isa. 27. 4, 5.
make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. How desperate seemed
Ninivehs condition, Jonah 3. 4.
-- yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed, and yet there was a remedy,
and they betaking themselves to it are saved. And as it is with people, so with
a particular person; and as in regard of their miseries, so their iniquities;
as Shechaniah said, We have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange
wives of the people of the Land, directly against God's express Law, Dent. 7.
3. yet now there is hope in Israel Ezra 102.
concerning this thing; our case is not desperate, but we may yet be brought to
repentance, and pardoned: -- Behold thou art wroth, for we have sinned; in
these is continuance: that is, in those Isa. 64. 5.
ways of grace and mercy, thou art still the same, and if thou please thus
still to show and manifest thy self, we shall be saved. So, wash ye, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings, etc. Isai. 1. 16, 18.
and then, Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, though they be red like
Crimson, they shall be as Wool. These were the deepest Dies, implying whatever
their sins were, though never so great, yet upon their repentance they should
be graciously and fully pardoned. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with Ps.
130. 7.
the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption: and he shall
redeem Israel from all his iniquities. There is a way for the wicked and most
unrighteous man to be saved, which the Lord calls and invites him to. Let the
wicked Isaiah 55. 7.
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his (...) Et vir iniquitatis.
thoughts. Hebr. The man of iniquity, or made up as it were of iniquity, or the
man of wrong or vexation, as some render it, one word signifies both, that has
so much wronged, not only his own soul, but God, and vexed his holy and good
Spirit; yet there is a way for such a one to be saved. Let him but forsake his
way and his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy
upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Hebr. he will multiply
to pardon. So that his pardons shall infinitely exceed his sins, there shall be
pardons and to spare, as (...) superabundavit, plus quam abundavit,
supermultiplicata est.
Paul expresses it, 1 Timothy 1. 14. And the grace of our Lord was exceeding
abundant, or redundant, superabundant, more than enough, or as it were
overfull, enough and to spare, it abounded to flowing over, as the Sea does
above Mole-hills. And because we are ready to be measuring God by our selves,
and to think this cannot be done, because we cannot do it, we cannot our selves
pass by so many and great provocations, and therefore how should God? hence God
foreseeing our low conceits of him, he answers v. 8. For my thoughts are not
your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord, v. 9. For as the
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my
thoughts than your thoughts.

2. If this be the only way for a people to be saved, this lets us see, in
what an unlikely way and posture we of this Nation are at this day to be saved.
And O that we had hearts to bewail it! I am sure we have cause even to have
rivers of waters to run down our eyes, as they did Ps. 119. 136. Jer. 9. 1.
David's, and to wish with the Prophet Jeremy, Oh that my head were waters, and
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night, etc. and to say
as the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 22. 4.
Look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, etc. For
are we turned again to the Lord? or do we turn from our sins? Surely as to the
generality of people amongst us, nothing less; no nor yet, though God has
inflicted upon us so many sore and heavy judgments, such as scarce have been
heard of, nor have been in our days, nor in our fathers days before us, such a
wasting pestilence, and such devouring flames, and many other judgments; and
yet such of us as have been spared, and were pulled as firebrarnds out of the
burning, how few of us have repented, and are turned to the Lord. May not the
Lord justly take up the same complaint against England, as he did against
Israel? I have sent among you the pestilence after Amos 4. 10, 11.
the manner of Egypt, your young men have I slain with the sword, and have
taken away your horses, etc. yet have ye not returned to me, says the Lord. I
have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as
a firebrand plucked out of the burning, yet have ye not returned to me says
the Lord. Strangers Hos. 7. 9, 10.
have devoured his strength, and he knows it not, yea gray hairs are here and
there upon him, yet he knows it not. And the pride of Israel does testify to
his face, and they do not return to the Lord their God, nor seek him for all
this: and Is. 1. 5.
why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more, etc. The
bellows are burnt, the Jer. 6. 29.
lead is consumed of the fire, the founder melts in vain, etc. I gave them
space to repent, but they Revel. 2. 21. -- 9. 20.
did not repent. And the rest of the men which were not killed by these
plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, etc. How have we
despised the riches of God's goodness and forbearance, and long suffering, not
knowing that the Romans 2. 4.
goodness of God leads us to repentance, that is, not only affords us time
and space to repent, but gives us reason to repent, but after the hardness and
impenitency of our hearts we have gone on to treasure up unto our selves wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. The
Lord has been harkening and hearing, and may he not justly complain of us as
of the Jews of old, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, Jerem. 8. 6.
saying what have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth
into the battle. When the hand of the Lord has been lifted up, we have refused
to see it, and though his judgments are in the earth, yet learn we not
righteousness. We have not said, what have we done? but have not some in the
pride and stoutness of their hearts been ready to say, what they would do, even
as those in Isaiah, The bricks are fallen Isa. 9. 9, 10,
down (say they) but we will build with hewn stones; the Sycamores are cut
down, but we will change them into Cedars: i. e. as if they had said, our
houses indeed are down, but what then? we value it not, we will build fairer
and better, and will have our streets now broader. Thus this is all that they
made then, and that many make now, of what the Lord has done; not to be be
brought thereby to consider what they have done, thus to undo so famous a City,
but to resolve what they will do, as to rearing and bertering their houses, but
not as to reforming their hearts and lives; and therefore the Lord threatens,
he will set up their enemies, and join Isa. 9. 11, 12.
them against them both before and behind to devour them with open mouth, and
yet his anger is not turned away, but his hand stretched out still. If indeed
not to turn again to God, but rather more and more away from God, and to turn
still unto sin, and every one to his course, as the horse rushes into the
battle, yea to wax worse and worse, and to have our tongues and doings more and
more against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory. If Atheism,
profaneness, licentiousness, superstition, idolatry, strange doctrines,
errors, heresres, schisms, apostacies, hypocrisies, infidelity, pride,
headiness, high mindedness, hardness of heart, carnal security, presumption,
incorrigibleness under judgments, unthankfulness for mercies, unfruitfulness
under means, hatred of God, and the power of godliness, contempt of his word
and ways, slighting and despising his ordinances, resisting and grieving, and
doing despite unto his Spirit, treading under foot his Son, crucifying of him
as it were afresh, and putting him to open shame: if shamelesness in sin,
declaring it as Sodom, and hiding it not; if swearing, cursing, blaspheming,
profaning God's Name and Sabbaths, if murder, blood, touching blood,
adulteries, fornications, wantonness, lasciviousness, and all manner of
filthiness and uncleanness; if drunkenness, gluttony, luxury, peoples making
their belly their God, and being lovers of pleasures more than of him, glorying
in their shame; if cruelty, unmercifulness, maliciousness, despightfulness,
bitterness, unrigteousness, oppression, fraudulent and unjust dealing, lying,
slandering, censuring, reviling, variance, strife, debate, differences,
divisions, emulations, selfishness, covetousness, earthly-mindedness, etc. In a
word, if an inundation of all manner of wickedness and debauchery imaginable,
and the Nation becoming a very sink of vice, or at best to have but only a
form of Godliness, but to deny the power thereof; and if for God, in stead of
causing his face to shine upon us, to hide it from us, and to turn his back
upon us, and to manifest his sore displeasure against us, as he has done
alate, in regard of those heavy judgments he has sent among us, dealing with
us as he threatened to deal with Jerusalem, And I will set my face against Exek.
15. 7.
them, they shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them. And
has not God dealt so with us? We were scarce got out of one fire which devoured
our bodies, which from above the Lord sent into our bones, into our strongest
parts, that is, sore plagues and pains, which like a fire did pierce deep into,
and consume the most solid and strongest parts of the body: as Jerusalem
complains, Lam. 1. 13. From above has he sent fire into my bones, and it
prevails against them, and against how many thousands of families and persons
did that fierce and furious fire of the pestilence prevail? And scarce, as I
said, were we got out of that fire, but another fire brake forth, which
devoured our houses and estates, and are there not still many sad symptoms of
his displeasure upon us, and for all this his anger is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still. And if these now were the way for a people to be
saved, we were a Nation in as likely a way and posture to be saved, as ever
Nation was under heaven; but if for a people to turn again unto God from their
sins, and for God to cause his face to shine, be the way for a people to be
saved, and the only way, as indeed it is, then the Lord have mercy upon us,
for we are a Nation in as unlikely a way and posture to be saved as ever Nation
was; and if we go on and continue still in this way, woe unto us, for we reward
not only evil for good unto God, who has not utterly destroyed us as our
sins deserved, but we reward evil to our selves, even to our own Souls, and
thereby shall hasten to bring upon our selves utter ruin and desolation.

3. If this be the only way for a people to be saved, then it necessarily
follows from hence, that the contrary must needs be the only way for a people
to be destroyed: I mean for a people still to go on in their sins, and not to
turn unto the Lord, and for God to hide his face from them, in stead of causing
it to shine upon them, or to set it against them; if the former be the way for
a people to be happy, certainly the latter is the way for a people to be
miserable; if one be the way of their weal, the other of their woe; if one, to
have it well with them, the other to have it ill with them; if one to be in a
good condi^ion, the other to be in an evil condition, for of contraries there
is the same reason. And this the Scripture abundantly declares, both as
concerning people and persons. Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange
Job 31. 3.
punishment to the workers of iniquity? And who are wicked? but such as love,
and live, and lie in sin, that make a trade of it, that still continue to go on
in it, adding sin to sin, withou remorse and turning to God, these are wicked,
and is not destruction to these? yes undoubtedly: this interrogation has the
force of a vehement affirmation; not only do such keep off from themselves
good, but procure evil, yea destructive evil, which shall certainly one time
or other, sooner or later, be the portion of all such as turn not from their
sins to God, such continuing such shall as certainly be destroyed, as if it was
already. The turning away of the simple shall stay Prove. 1. 32.
them. They are simple ones, to turn away from God and his ways, for whither
should any turn away from him, whose face and presence makes Heaven? where can
any mend themselves? Is it not simplicity to go from the fountain to a broken
Cistern, from light to darkness, from life to death, from God to the Devil,
from Heaven to Hell? And this simple turning away of Prove. 11. 19.
such is destructive, shall slay them; for as righteousness tends to life, so
he that purfueth evil, pursues it to his own death. He will after it, as the
hunter after his prey, but it is to his own death, his own ruin, -- The
perverseness of transgressors -- 11. 3.
shall destroy them. When they leave God, and turn aside from his ways, after
the crooked ways of sin, and refuse to return, this shall destroy them. When
the City was full of perverseness, pertinacious in their way, then says God,
Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity, etc. and I will destroy my
people, since Ezekiel. 9. 9, 10. Jer. 15. 7.
they return not from their ways. They profess themselves indeed to be my
people, and call themselves my people, and bear themselves up with this, but
let them know, that that privilege of being called and accounted my people,
shall not secure them, nor save them from destruction; this shall not serve
their turns, but I will for all this destroy them, since they return not from
their ways. I have forsaken my house, I have left my heritage, etc. Jer. 12. 7.
O nothing can secure an impenitent people, that turns not to God, from ruin:
destruction and misery are in the ways of sin, and they will be sure one time
or other to prove pernicious, and to bring mischief upon the sinner. But it
shall Eccles. 8. 13.
not be well with the wicked; and woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him,
etc, -- For all Isa. 3. 11. -- 9. 12, 13.
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: that
is, still to execute further judgments, and why, for the people turns not to
him that smites them, (the people, or that people, not my people as before,
God will not own them now, but disclaims them as it were) neither do they seek
the Lord of Hosts, not his face nor grace, that they might turn. -- Therefore
the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one day,
that is, A summo ad ^mum, a praestantissimo ad abjectissimum.
make a consumption of all, a Proverbial kind of speech, that is, one and
other, high and low, great and mean, Potentate and Peasant, first and last:
Branches, ye know, are the beauty and strength of the tree, but Rushes are poor
mean low things, that grow in the mire, etc. and thus it is interpreted, v. 15.
The ancient and honorable he is the head, and the Prophet that teaches lies
he is the tail, and the Lord will cut off all, and that suddenly in one day, he
will quickly dispatch them, and not be long a doing it, and he is resolved on
it. So, In thy filthiness is lewdness, Exek. 24. 13.
that is, pertinacy and obstinacy, because I have purged thee, that is, would
have purged thee, endeavored by all ways and means, to have purged thee, have
sought to purge thee, 1. by the exhortations, admonitions, and menaces of my
Prophets; as also 2. by the inflicting of lesser judgments, (for God has two
sorts of judgments, greater and lesser, rods and Scorpions, footmen and
horsemen, Jer. 12. 4. winds to fan and cleanse, and utterly to lay wast,) and
thou wast not purged, but all has been vain and fruitless, therefore I will
now take another course with thee, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness
any more, viz. by reprehensions and admonitions which have been in vain, and
which thou have not given place to, 'till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee, and so have utterly destroyed thee, 'till I have purged thee out of this
world into hell. I the Lord have spoken it, v. 14.
it shall come to pass, I will do it, I will not go back, neither will I spare,
neither will I repent, etc. And many the like places there are, as these among
other which follow. Prove. 12. 21. -- 10. 29. -- 28. 14. -- 21. 15, 16. -- 19.
16. -- 29. 1. 6. 32. Psalm 9. 5, 17. -- 92. 7. -- 145. 20. Job 36. 10, 11, 12.
1 Samuel 12. 23. Job 4. 8, 9. -- 9. 4. etc. Now consider this, ye that forget
God, and forget your selves, and your own interest and concern, in not turning
to him, lest he tear you in pieces, (as certainly he will, if ye turn not unto
him) and there be none to deliver, nay who can deliver out of his hand? and
therefore let destruction from God be a terror, and matter Isa. 43. 13.
of fear to you now, as it was to Job, that you do not feel it hereafter. For
destruction from Job 31. 23.
God was a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure. So,
for God to frown, or hide his face from a people or a person, and set it
against them, must needs be the way for a people to be destroyed, and to have
it ill with them, and to be miserable, as the Scripture abundantly evidences.
For we are Psalm. 90. 7, 11.
consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled, who knows the
power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. When he
gives quietness, who then can make trouble? Job 34. 29.
and when he hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be against a
Nation, or against a man only. The Lord said, I will hide my face from them, I
will see what their end shall be. O Deuteronomy. 32, 20.
how sad, how dismal must their end be that the Lord hides his face from, and
that his soul has no pleasure in! Surely the world is not so sad without the
Sun, the earth without rain, the body without the soul, as the soul without God
and his favor; and as all mercies then go, so all judgments then break in. I
will set my face against them, they shall go out from one fire, and Ezekiel. 15. 7.
another fire shall devour them, etc. And I will Deuteronomy. 31. 17.
hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and
troubles shall befall them, etc.

4. If this be the only way for a people to be saved, and everlastingly saved,
then are there but few which are like to be saved: why? because there are but
few who are turned again, and on whom God causes his face to shine, but are
rather under his frowns and displeasure. And 1 John 5. 19.
we know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness, that is,
the most and greatest part of the world, the whole unregenerate world lies in
wickedness, is not turned from it, but continues in it, and is under the power
and command of it, and set upon it, and so like to perish for ever in it. Thus
the greatest part of the world is in a perishing condition, because they
persist in sin: Many walk, says the Apostle, but they so walked, as that he
could not tell of them without weeping; for in stead of turning to God, they
made their belly their God, and in Phil. 3. 18, 19.
stead of turning from that which was matter of shame, they rather gloried in
it, and what could the end of such be but destruction? And this is like to be
the end of most, because they turn not to God, nor his ways, from which they
have turned aside, and gone astray. The Lord looked Psalm. 14. 2.
down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did
understand and seek God, for these are they, and only they, that God regards
and looks after. But what report does God give of the matter? it follows, v. 3.
They are all gone aside, or turned away from God, and his ways, gone out of the
way of holiness and happiness; they are altogether become filthy, there is none
that does good, no not one: that is, very few, none by nature, and few are
brought to do it by grace. My people are bent Hos. 11. 7.
to backsliding from me: though they called them to the most high, none at all
would exalt him. They, who? the Prophets, for this is their great
Subintelligendum est, Prophetae. Zanch.
work, to call people to the most high, to seek, and turn, and conform to him,
to devote themselves to him; whom yet, he being so high and glorious in
himself, has no need of, but sends his Prophets to do this for their own
advantage, viz. that coming of from such poor mean low and base things, they
should come to him who is the most high: but yet though they called them to the
most High, and that with greatest importunity, and upon every opportunity, yet
none at all would exalt him, or but very few, Non aspirant ad Deum, and hoc sit
uno* consensu, quasiomnes conspirassent in una ^ eadem malitia. Calv in locum
none in comparison: and so most people, though God be the most High, yet in
not turning to him, nor seeking of him, they do not exalt him, but rather
debase him, preferring mean and contemptible things before him; to which,
turning away, and turning aside from him, they betake themselves to. The
wicked, through the pride of Psalm. ^0. 4.
his countenance will not seek after God, God is not in all his thoughts. He
will seek after vanity and leasing, and so exalt these, but not after God.
There be many that say, who will show us -- 4. 6.
any good, but few mind or regard, or look after the chief good, God and his
favor, and the light of his countenance, none says, where is Job 35. 10.
God my maker, etc. -- They hold fast deceit, they Jerem. 8. 5, 6.
refuse to return. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done, every one turned to
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Thus most people live in a
neglect of God, they refuse to turn to him, or to seek him or his face, and so
most are like to perish and be destroyed for ever.

5. If this be the only way for a people to be saved, this then gives us to
see, the true reason and ground, why the Lord is so exceeding earnest and
intent upon this, and does so often and earnestly call and invite people to
this, and press upon them this; that they would turn again unto him, and seek
him, and his face and favor. Why, it is because this is the very way, and the
only way for them to be saved; and is not there then good cause for it, that
he should be so earnest, as the Scripture indeed every where declares him to
be? O how often does the Lord there call upon people to turn unto him, and to
seek him and his face. Yet return again unto me, Jer. 3. 1. v. 12. 14.
says the Lord! and return thou back-fliding Israel: and, Turn O back sliding
Children, etc. So, I have sent also unto you all my servants the Jer. 35. 15.
Prophets, rising up early, and sending them, saying, Return ye now every man
from his evil way, etc. And, Thus says the Lord to the house of Amos 5. 4, 6.
Is. 55. 6.
Israel, seek ye me and ye shall live; and, seek the Lord, and ye shall live;
and, seek ye the Lord while he may be found, etc. And, seek the Lord Psalm 105.
4.
and his strength, seek his face evermore, etc. And so I might give you
multitudes of places more, which let us see, how earnest and intent the Lord is
upon this, and it is because this is the only way for people to be saved, to
be blessed and happy, and have it well with them, and because else they perish,
and are ruined and undone, and it will certainly be ill with them for ever. And
hence it is, that the Lord makes use of such pathetical and affectionate
expressions. Say unto them, as I live says the Lord, I have Ezekiel. 33. 11.
no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way
and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye, O house of
Israel. How vehemently does the Lord here expostulate and press this upon them?
Turn ye, turn ye, which denotes the height and vehemence of his affection and
desire, how much his heart was upon it, and is there not good reason for all
this? why? they dye, and are undone, and perish else, for why will ye dye? life
and death are in these things, in turning or not turning to God; as life is the
happy effect of the one, so death and damnation is the fruit of the other. And
is it any wonder the Lord is then so earnest and importunate? when our weal or
our woe, when it being well or ill with us, when our happiness or our misery,
our being saved or eternally destroyed, depends upon this. And hence the Lord
is not content to speak it once, but speaks it again, calls for it twice,
because it was of such absolute and indispensable necessity, and not a small
matter, nor a business of indifferency. And what infinite cause have we then to
bless the Lord, that he should be so intent upon this, so frequently and
earnestly invite us to this, again and again, wherein our own good is so much
concerned, and which* is of such indispensable necessity, that we cannot
otherwise but perish: and what can we indeed do better, or wherein can we be
more happy than in turning to him?

6. This informs us, and gives us to see, whence it is that God's Prophets
formerly, and his Ministers alate, have been and still are so frequent and
earnest in preaching and pressing of this: why is it? because so much depends
on this, because they know it cannot else be well with them, neither can they
be saved, or be happy, nay they know it cannot else but be ill with them, and
they must else perish and be undone for ever, and therefore have they and do
they still so much urge and press this, not only speak but cry. Be ye not as
your fathers, unto whom Zach. 1. 4.
the former Prophets have cried, thus says the Lord of hosts, turn ye from
your evil ways, and from your evil doings, etc. They do not only call, but
cry, yea cry out, proclaim, so as the rather to be heard, and more to be
heeded, they were zealous and earnest therein, why? because the matter was of
such importance, and the danger was so great if they did not hearken. And hence
is it that Ministers still are so pressing and importunate, as to this they
pray and beseech, yea and if ye will not hear (says the Prophet Jeremy Jerem.
13. 7.
My soul shall mourn in secret for you, and mine eyes weep sore, and run down
with tears, etc. The voice of one crying in the wilderness, etc. Luke 3. 4.
Thus the Prophets and the Apostles cried, and Jesus Christ himself he cried,
John 7. 37. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and
cried, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. O for poor
sinners to come to Christ to believe on him, and repent and turn to the Lord,
is a matter of great consequence, of infinite importance, not a thing of
indifferency, but of absolute necessity; and hence Jesus Christ is so earnest
and intent upon this, as appears by his posture, he stood up, by his vehement
speaking, he cried, he spoke with a loud voice, which showed the fervor and
ardency of his Spirit. So it is said of Paul that great Apostle, that he showed
first unto them of Damascus and Acts 26. 20.
at Jerusalem, and through all the Coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles,
that they should repent and turn to God, etc. It was Paul's great work and main
business to have it well with all he came among, his hearts desire was that
they might be saved, and therefore was he so intent upon this where ever he
came, that they might repent and turn to God, as the only sovereign way of it,
and as knowing it could not else be well with them. Hence it was that that holy
Martyr Mr. Bradford, when he came to the stake, cried out so earnestly and
affectionately, O England, England, repent of thy sins, repent of thy sins, he
knew it was the only way of Englands weal then, as it is now; and therefore
whatever is the zeal and fervency of God's Ministers herein, so as that some it
may be may think them besides themselves, as some did Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 13. yet
this being the only way of their being saved, and they being else und one,
this gives sufficient reason and ground thereof.

7. This lets us see the reason why the Church and People of God have been so
fervent and frequent in their Prayers for this, that God would turn them again,
and cause his face to shine, as here in one Psalm they instance it no less than
thrice, v. 3. v. 7. and v. 19. and can ye blame them, or was there not good
reason for it? when as this was the only way for them to be saved, to be happy,
and to have it well with them; and how earnest have others also been, as to
these? as David how often and how exceeding earnestly does he beg that Psalm
119. 58.
God would make his face to shine upon him, and I entreated thy favor, or I
have earnestly besought thy face, so the Dutch, with my whole heart, or with
all my heart; and good cause, his very happiness and felicity consisting
thereon, and flowing therefrom, etc. Poenitentia, Angeloru^ delectatio, and
hilacritas, gaudent societati suae restitutos esse, quos in tenebris inferni,
ac Satanae potestate constitutos viderant, Gerhard.


8. This lets us see, whence it is, that there has been, and is still such
great joy, when a sinner turns to God, and that both in heaven and earth, as
the Scripture declares, Luke 15. 7. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be
in heaven over one sinner that repents, etc. and v. 10. Likewise I say unto
you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that
repents, etc. the repenting and turning though but of one sinner, makes all
heaven merry as it Heus, tu peccator, bono animo sis, vides ubi de tuo
gaudetur. etc. Tertull:
were, it causes joy all heaven over, it puts harps as it were into the Angels
hands, and songs into their mouths, etc. God the Father rejoiceth, and Jesus
Christ rejoiceth, and the Angels rejoice above, and his Ministers and People
rejoice beneath. It is said of Paul and Silas, that passing through Phenice and
Samaria and declaring the Conversion of the Gentiles, they caused Quoties been
agimus, gaudent Angeli, tristantur Daemones; quoties a bono deviamus, Diabolum
laetificamus, and Angelos suo gaudio defraudamus.
great joy unto all the brethren, Acts 15. 3. and Acts 11. 21. A great number
believing and turning unto the Lord, it is said of Barnabas, that coming ( v.
23.) and seeing the grace of God, he was glad, etc. and 2 Cor. 7. 9. Now I
rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, simply made sorry, but that ye sorrowed
to repentance, and for that I greatly rejoice. What Is the reason and ground of
this? why the point tells you, because when a sinner repents, and turns again
to God, and he causes his face to shine, and vouchsafes him his favor, he is
blessed and happy, and safe, and it is and shall certainly be well with him, he
is in a good case and condition, all things shall happily succeed to him here,
and he shall be eternally saved hereafter. His repentance is repentance unto
life, and unto salvation never to be repented of, and is not here cause of joy
and rejoicing indeed, when a soul is saved that was lost, more worth than a
whole world? what should be matter of joy and rejoicing, if not this? Luke 15.
23. And bring hither the fatted Calf and kill it, and let us eat and be merry,
v. 24. for this my son was dead, and is alive again, he was lost and is found,
and they began to be merry: and, v. 32. It was meet we should make merry and be
glad, for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again, and was lost and is
found. So that God is so far from refusing any that turn to him, that he
rejoices very much therein, and is more ready to receive them, than they can
be to come unto him.

9. This informs us, and gives us to see, what a choice mercy, and singular
privilege it is for a people to enjoy* the ministry of the Word, to have God's
messengers and ambassadors sent among them to preach and dispense the same*
why? because for a people to be saved, the only way, it being for God to turn
them again, and cause his face to shine, this is the way and means, which God
has ordered and appointed to effect this, to bring about this, as the
Scripture abundantly declares. Thus, when the Lord had appeared to Paul, and
made him a Minister, this he declares as the great work and business of his
Ministry; To open peoples eyes, and to turn Acts 26. 18. -- 20.
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they
might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ; and this he showed, 1. to them of
Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judaea, and then
to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, etc. and, we preach
unto Acts 14. 15.
you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made
heaven and earth, etc. This is the great work and business of Ministers to show
this, preach this, press this, urge this, exhort and excite to this, yea and to
pray for this. This was the great work and business of the Prophets of old, and
so ever since: in Jerem. 25. 4. the Lord there tells the Jews, that he sent
unto them all his servants the Prophets, rising early, and sending them: and
what was their errand, what did they say? v. 5. They said, turn ye again now
every one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, etc. So Zach.
1. 4. Be ye not as your Fathers, unto whom the former Prophets have cried; and
what did they cry? Turn ye now from your evil way, and from your evil doings,
etc. This the Prophets still said, and cried, and pressed, and urged. O turn ye
to God, and his ways, and walk no longer in the ways of sin, for they are
dangerous ways, there are Lions in those ways, that roaring Lion that seeks to
devour, and there is hell, and death, and damnation, and all the curses of God
in those ways, and there is no going to heaven in them; they are not ways to
live in, much less to dye in, and therefore come off from them, and speedily
turn to better, and do this or you dye, or you perish. And this is made the
great end and business of John the Baptist's ministry, to turn people to the
Lord, and turn the hearts of Luke 1. 15, 16.
the Fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just,
etc. And many of the Convertet ratione sui ministerii, praedicando
poenitentiam, etc. Winckelman.
children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God, that is, he by his
preaching, being accompanied with the power of the holy Ghost to make it
effectual, shall be a means of many of their conversions, and so of their
happiness and salvation; this was the work, and should be the happy effect and
fruit of his office and employment, as it further follows, And he shall go
before Luke 1. 17.
him (that is, before Christ the Messiah) in the spirit and power of Elias, to
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just, etc. The former of these seems at first harsh and
difficult, that the hearts of the fathers should be turned to the children; one
would think the hearts of the children rather should have been turned to their
fathers; the place is difficult, and is variously interpreted: if we understand
it simply and properly of Parents and Children, we must interpret it of evil
Parents, and of good Children that are converted. Thus many times children are
converted, and are godly, when parents are wicked and unconverted; and thus for
the hearts of the fathers, of the Parents, continuing as yet the Devils
children, to be by the ministry of the Word turned to their children being
good, and God's children, and so to be converted, and to be of the same mind as
they are, is a blessed thing indeed, and much to be wished and desired. But 2.
some understand it of the stubborn and refractory Jews, that he by his
ministry should make to become children of the Church, that is, of the number
of those new converts and Christians in those days. Thus some by Fathers
understand the unconverted Jews, by Children the Apostles and other Christians
newly converted, according Psalm 45. 16.
to that, In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children, which thou may make
Princes in all the Earth. Thus when the Jews were converted to become
Christians, and to be of one heart and mind, and to consent in one truth, then
were the hearts of the fathers turned to the Flectet sua efficaci praedicatione
omnium hominum ordines ad poenitentiam* etc. Tossan. in loc.
children. 3. Others, as Tossanus, a learned Expositour, understand it, that
John by his powerful preaching should bring all forts and orders and degrees of
men (whether fathers or children) to repentance, and to serve the Lord with one
accord, etc. And some of the Ancients, as Austin, and Jerome, by the Faithers
understand Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the Prophets; and by Children, the
Jews, and thus expound it, That when by the preaching of John, the Jews should
be brought to believe in Christ, in whom the fathers had believed, then should
their fathers hearts be turned and affected toward them, which otherwise were
averse from them, but then should they acknowledge them, or then may the hearts
of the fathers be said to be turned to the children, when being converted
themselves, their earnest desires are to their children, that they might be
converted also.

5. Others thus, that whereas at this time, when John came, all was out of
order, and there were many corruptions, errors, schisms, sects, Docet Angelus
Johannem suo ministerio patres and filios existo dissidio, in unitatem fidei
adducturum, etc. Winckelm.
as Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians, Samaritans, etc. and many differences,
divisions, and heartburnings thereupon, John by his preaching being made
effectual by the Holy Ghost, should so turn and convert all orders and degrees
of men from the errors of their ways, as to heal and reconcile the differences
and divisions among themselves, and to bring them to an holy union and mutual
love and amity one to, and with another, so as to join together as one man to
serve the Lord: so that Ephraim should no more Isa. 11. 13.
envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim, etc. And what a blessed work was this, thus
in this sense to turn the hearts of the children to the fathers, and of the
fathers to the children. And oh that God would do this work for England, that
he would send some John's, filled with the holy Ghost to effect this, that the
hearts of all that profess his name might be turned to God, and turned one to
another, that all might be one in the father and the Son, as the father and son
are one in John 17. 21.
themselves; as Christ prayed that all might serve him with one shoulder, or
one consent, and Zephan. 3 9.
his way and name might be one in the earth, and there might be no other
strife, but who might serve God best, and love one another most, the performing
of this work upon Mount Sion, and on Jerusalem, how would it further the
conversion of the Jews, and the bringing in of the fullness of the Gentiles? and
how soon then would God subdue our enemies, and turn his hand against his and
our adversaries round about? And this now, which way soever we take or
understand it, it being the work of the ministry, the design of the preaching
of the Word, to turn people to the Lord, to turn the hearts of fathers to the
children, and (as it follows) the disobodient to the wisdom of the just, that
is, to the wisdom of true converts, to that repentance and conversion which
they have already been brought to, whereby they are brought to themselves and
to a sound mind, and to be wise indeed, as also, it being the work of the
ministry of the Word, to reconcile people to God, and to bring them again into
favor and friendship with him, and to be at peace with him, and therefore is
it called the ministry and word of reconciliation. What a choice mercy, and
singular privilege must it needs then be, for a people to enjoy it? and how
much should people prize, and esteem, and value it? and as it is said of those,
Acts 14. 48. glorify it. If a Traveller was out of his way, and traveling in
dangerous paths, where robberies and murders used to be be committed; what a
good work was it for one to inform this Traveller of his danger, and to set him
into a safe and right way. So if he was fallen, to have one to raise him up
again, and this is the work of the ministry. Psalm 19. 7. The law of the Lord,
or the doctrine of the Lord, that is, his holy Word, is perfect converting the
soul, it says, this is the way, walk in it; and what a mercy is it to enjoy
such a word? this makes it to such as experience this blessed effect of it,
better to them than thousands of gold and silver, as David Psalm 119. 72.
says it was to him, The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of
gold and silver, that is, many thousands, though never so many: for was it the
gold and silver of many worlds, what could it do or contribute in the least, as
to what the Word does?

10. This speaks very highly of God's turning a people again, and causing his
face to shine, there being so much in them, and that flows from them, that when
God vouchsafes these to a people, they are then saved, they are then blessed
and happy, and it is well with them, and it shall be well with them for ever
hereafter: they are safe, and all shall happily succeed, they are freed from
all evil, and in the way of all good; and what blessed things are they that
put people into such a condition? O how well does God deal with those he
vouchsafes them to? they may well say, Thou have dealt well Ps. 119. 65. -- 65.
4. -- 63. 3.
with thy servant, O Lord, etc. and, Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and
causest to approach unto thee, whom thou turnest to thee, and turnest thy face
unto him, for this is beter than life, and man's only true felicity and
sovereign way of being saved, etc. And therefore how excellent is thy loving
kindness, O God, (says David) Psalm. 36. 7. that produces such excellent effects?

11. This justifies, and much commends solemn days of fasting and humiliation,
this being the great work and business of them, to seek God's face, and to
further our turning again to him; and this being the only way to be saved,
this speaks such days to be good days, blessed days, and such duties to be good
duties, and such a work to be a good work; and it is good for people, they
tending so much to their weal, to be much in them, such fasting days proving
many times effectual for conversion, and so to salvation, which makes them
Lach^ymae poenitentium, vinum Angelorum, dum hic ex animo lugemus commissa,
diem festum Angeli agunt in coelesti curia.
festival days to the Angels in heaven, who rejoice so much (as you heard
before) in the conversion of sinners, and to whom penitents tears become as
refreshing wine, etc.

12. This speaks afflictions not to be such sad things as many deem them: why?
because Singular beneficium cruce quasi spinis occludi viam peccandi.
God makes use of them many times to further and help forward this blessed
turn, and this being the only way for sinners to be saved, and to have it well
with them, this speaks well of afflictions. Thus Manasseh, who was so grievous
a 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.
sinner, yet being in affliction, he sought the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly, etc. and Luke 15. ^7, 18.
when the prodigal suffered hardship, and was ready to perish with hunger, then
he resolved to arise and go to his father: and when God hedged up Israel's way
with thorns, sent troubles and Hosea 2. 6, 7.
distresses upon them, then she resolves to go, and return to her first
husband, not as if they effected this of themselves, but by the Spirits working
in them and by them. But whiles sinners live in jollity and prosperity, and
have no troubles nor changes, they never think of changing their way, nor
returning to God: and thus the prosperity of fools destroys them, whereas
adversity might be Prove. 1. 32.
a means to save them, but by the other they are hardened and encouraged to go
on still in a course of sin without returning. Because sentence against an evil
work is not speedily executed, Eccles. 8. 11. Psalm 73. 5, 6. -- 50, 21.
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. They
are not in trouble as other men, therefore pride compasses them about, etc.
These things have thou done, and I kept silence, Psalm. ^0. 21.
thou thoughtest I was such a one altogether as thy self. So, Thou art wearied
in the Is. 57. 10. See also Ps. 55. 19. Jer. 5. 28. and 22. 21. etc.
greatness of thy way, yet said thou not there is no hope; and why? thou have
found the life of thine hand, therefore thou wast not grieved, that is, thou
have found comfort by the Assyrians, and they promise to strengthen thy hand
with help, and therefore thou art encouraged to go on still in thy way; and
therefore it is a great mercy to such for God to afflict them, and give them
trouble and grief, that so the ways of sin may be wearisome and troublesome,
and so they may think of returning from them, when in some measure they feel
the weight and burden of them; and happy affliction that works to conversion,
happy troubles that further a sinner's peace by furthering his turning to God,
and putting a stop to him in his sins; that cause sinners to seek the Lord,
whom before they forgot, and lived without. And how may this help to sweeten
and alleviate the bitterness of afflictions, and though bitter, yet render them
better than the sweetest pleasures of sin. Blessed is the man whom thou
ch^stenest, O Lord, and Ps. 94. 12.
teach him out of thy Law, etc. Blessed blacks, that are a means to turn us
white; and happy darks, that are a means to turn us to light! But 2 Chronicles. 15.
4 Is. 26. 16.
when they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord, etc. Lord, in trouble have
they visited thee, etc. In their affliction they will seek ^e verly, etc. Hos.
5. 15.
But while sinners go in (...) their greatest affliction and punishment is not
to (...) afflicted, their greatest cros^ and (...) crossed, for such are like to
go on still in their sins. And thus that which many sinners count their
greatest felicity, to prosper and be without trouble and affliction, in their
evil ways, they go on in, it is their greatest misery; and that which they
count their greatest privilege, is their greatest plague, and proves their
greatest detriment, there being nothing sadder than a sinner prospering in an
evil course, and God not afflicting him, and thus the Lord threatens it. I will
not punish your daughters when they commit Hos. 4. 14.
whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery, etc. And this is the
greatest punishment, the forest wrath, the highest displeasure, the furnace is
heated here, seven times hotter than ordinary, for such are like to go on to
commit whoredom and adultery still, God withholding those punishments whereby
they might be restrained, and letting them go on without control, to their
own utter confusion and destruction, not taking any more pains with them by
corrections to restrain their courses in sin, but letting them go on still in
the full career of their lusts, and be as vile as they will; and this is the
heaviest judgment, and argues the hottest displeasure, it is next door to hell,
and such are within one step of being as miserable as they Vis indignantis Dei
terribilem vocem audire, etc. Orig.
can be. Will thou, says one, hear the terrible voice of a provoked God, hear
it here? I will not punish, etc. So, v. 17. and Matthew. 15. 15. Bernard calls
it, a mercy more cruel than all Misericordia omni indignatione crudelior
indignation, a killing courtesy, a cutthroat kindness; yet how many are
ready to bless themselves, and think it a fine world to go on in their own ways
without trouble, whereas there cannot a greater plague befall them, which made
Luther cry, strike Lord, strike, spare not; and Feri, Domine, feri, etc.
Jeremiah 10. 24. O Lord correct me, but with judgment, etc. And this makes
afflictions a great privilege, a choice mercy, when they further our
repentance, and make us change our purpose, and resolve to turn to God.

CHAP. X. The second Use of the point in general, by way of Exhortation, and
first to seek this by Prayer.
THE only way for a people to be saved, Use 2. of Exhortation.
is it for God to turn them again, and cause his face to shine? O, as ever then
we would be saved, saved our selves, or have others saved, ours saved, the
Kingdom saved, Church saved, City, country, towns, families, friends,
relations, little ones, bodies, souls, religion, lives, liberties, estates,
Gospel, or whatever else is near or dear to us; and as ever we would be saved
indeed, saved to purpose, saved in mercy, so as to be blessed and happy in
being saved, and have it well with us, and all happily succeed to us here, and
be everlastingly saved hereafter; let us all in the name and fear of God be
exhorted, excited, and stirred up, to seek this, beseech this, earnestly to
entreat and importune this, O that the Lord God of hosts would turn us again,
and cause his face to shine: let this be our frequent and our fervent, our
often and our earnest prayer unto him, and let us continue thus praying,
asking, seeking, begging, beseeching, entreating, importuning, knocking, 'till
the Lord is pleased to give us a gracious answer; let us resolve with Jacob,
not to let him go, except he thus bless us, for nothing can avail us as to our
happiness, as to our weal, as to the having it well with us, without this, try
we what other ways or courses we will or can, without this they will signify
nothing. Our felicity or our misery, our safety or our peril, our weal or our
woe, our having it well with us, or our having it ill with us; in a word, life
or death, the blessing or the curse, our being saved, or our being utterly
destroyed, it depends upon this, on our being turned or not turned again unto
the Lord, and on his favor or frowns, on his love, and grace, and good will,
or anger and displeasure, upon his causing his face to shine, or hiding of the
same; and not on other things, though we are ready to think otherwise, and
strangely therein to mistake. If (think we) times would but turn, and things
were but so and so, O we should be a happy people! but let times and things
turn which way they will, let them turn as we think never so much for the
better, yet if we be not turned again our selves, and God does not cause his
face to shine, if he yet shall say, his soul has no pleasure in us, O woe unto
us, we are yet a miserable and an undone people! but let the Lord but do this,
which the Church here so earnestly craves, turn us again to himself, and cause
his face to shine, and then let our condition be what it will, seem outwardly
never so calamitous, we cannot but be happy. But otherwise let it seem never so
prosperous, we cannot but be miserable. For to be saved from our calamities,
and not to be turned from our iniquities, to be saved from our afflictions, and
not from our transgressions, from our sufferings, and not from our sins, what
is it but to be saved, so as afterward to be destroyed, and that with a sorer
destruction, as it is said of the people, that the Lord saved out of Jude 5.
the Land of Egypt, that he afterward destroyed them that believed not. And
hence when the Psalmist speaks of the Lords redeeming Israel in mercy, he
expresses it thus: And he shall Psalm. 130. 8.
redeem Israel from all his iniquities. And therefore let us be intent and
earnestly bent upon this, and importunate for this. Let us humbly and earnestly
supplicate this, Turn thou Lam. 5. 21.
us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned, renew our days as of old; that is
vouchsafe to us thy favor. And turn thou me and I shall be Jer. 31. 19.
turned, and let our hearts echo back to God, as David's did, When thou said
seek ye my face, Psalm. 27. 8.
my heart said unto thee, Thy face Lord will I seek. And thus in this sense,
let not the Lord say, Seek ye me in vain, but let us answer his invitation, O
seek we the Lord and his strength, seek we his face evermore, and entreat we
his favor with our whole hearts. Let the Lord hear us, and find us as frequent
and as fervent, as often and as earnest, as vehement and as importunate, as the
Church and people of God here, who thrice here (as I have said) in one Psalm
make this their humble and earnest suit. v. 3. Turn us again, O God, and cause
thy face to shine, and we shall be saved: and v. 7. Turn us again, O God of
hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved: and again, v. 19.
Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved. And the more to put us upon this, earnestly and importunately to seek
these, let us consider these several particulars.

As 1. That this is that the Lord invites us unto, and that often to seek him,
and his face, and that he would take away our iniquities, and turn us from our
sins, and when and where God invites and commands, shall not we obey? And
surely if we look about us, it is high time Hos. 10. 12.
to seek the Lord, and to stir up our selves to take hold of him, now that he
seems as it were to be going from us. How readily and cheerfully did David
answer God's invitation, when thou said seek ye my face, that is, my favor,
my grace, for favor appears and shines in the face, my gracious benign
presence, my heart said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek, he eyes God's
command, looks to that, and presently yields, and complies; thy face Lord will
I seek, as if he had said, whatever others seek, let them seek what they will,
the face and favor of others, but as for me, this is that I am resolved to
seek, and this shall be in stead of all to me, thou and thy favor, and herein
I freely and willingly comply with thy command; and so should we, as those to
whom God had said, Return ye backsliding Jer. 3. 22.
children, and I will heal your backslidings: Behold, we come unto thee, or
behold here are we, so the Dutch, for thou art the Lord our God.

2. Let us consider what great goodness, kindness, and gracious condescension
it is in the great God, that he should invite us to seek these, and in inviting
us to seek them should show himself so willing and ready to discover himself,
and to communicate them, to diffuse his grace and goodness unto us, yea such
goodness, the chief good. Seek ye me, and seek my face, as if the Lord should
say, I am for ever blessed my self, and I would have you so too; I am my own
happiness, and I would be yours too, which none else, nor any thing else can
ever be; I am happy, and I desire to impart happiness to you also, to shine
upon you. Seek ye my face, that I may impart that to you, for your felicity
that is my own. What kindness is this, that God should be thus willing to
bestow good, yea the chief good, to vouchsafe his favor, yea more willing to
vouchsafe it then we are for to ask it, so willing as that he becomes a Suitor
to us for to seek it, he seeks us to seek him. Heaven becomes a suitor to
Earth, the Creator to the Creature; he knows our happiness is out of our
selves, and wholly and only in him, and his favor the spring and fountain of
all good, and therefore puts us upon this.

3. Let us consider, that the Lord does this, it is not for any need that he
has of us, but because of that need which we have of him, not as if his
happiness could in the least be impaired without us, but because we cannot be
happy without him. How should all sufficiency it self be under any want, or
indigency, he who is himself all and every thing, and has every thing, be in
want of any thing? Whatsoever (says he) is under the whole heaven is mine, yea
whatsoever Job 41. 11.
is in heaven, for all that is in the heaven, and in the earth is thine, thine
is the kingdom, etc. neither 1 Chronicles. 29. 11.
needs he any thing, seeing he gives to all life, and breath, and all things:
or if it could be Acts 17. 25.
supposed that he should want any thing, which yet cannot be, no ten thousand
times sooner may darkness be in the Sun, drought in the Sea, than any defect in
God; but suppose such a thing, what supply could the fountain have from the
cistern, yea a broken cistern, the Sea from a drop, the Sun from a candle, the
fruitful field from the barren heath, the pleasant garden from the wast
wilderness, all sufficiency from indigency, he who is all, from such, who are
nothing less than nothing and vanity, a whole Jsa. 40. 17.
world of them, and yet though he has no need at all of us, that he yet merely
out of that respect he has to our good, should call upon us, and invite us to
seek so great things, so choice mercies, the transcendent excellency and
indispensable necessity of which might command our seeking of them, and that
with all earnestness, what kindness is this that God should say, seek ye me,
seek ye my face, why what can we seek better, or that is more? what makes
heaven but this? surely there is nothing there in comparison, nor in competition
with this. God's face, his special gracious benign presence, it is the heaven
of heaven.

4. That the great God should not only invite us to seek these, but that he
should as it were indent and covenant, and make as it were a contract with us,
if we will seek them; make such and such promises to us, and tell us he will do
so and so for us if we will seek them; yea, and upon seeking of them think
himself as it were obliged to us; though things in themselves so excellent, and
of such infinite importance, and of such indispensable necessity: as -- Seek ye
me, and ye Amos 5. 4, 6.
shall live; and, seek the Lord, and ye shall live; I will save you alive, I
will give you your lives Ps. 30. 5. -- 63. 3.
for a prey: why? the Lord's favor is life, yea better than life, and yet says
God, seek ye me and ye shall live; so seek ye the Lord, etc. it may Zepli. 2. 3.
be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger; and, if my people which are
called by my name 2. Chron. 7. 14.
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my Facies pro gratia, quae in
vultus serenitate, and ad aliquem conversione, cernitur.
face, etc. then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and heal
their land, if ye seek my face: and, seek ye first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you Now let Heaven and
Earth, Angels Matthew. 6. 33.
and men, be astonished, and stand amazed at this* at this way and manner of
God, that he
should thus as it were indent and covenant to seek such good; how well may we
cry out as David does in another case, and is this the manner of men, O Lord
God? do they use thus to 2 Samuel 7. 19.
do or deal? no, so admirable is thy grace and goodness herein, as it
altogether exceeds man's way and manner of practice, and it is peculiar to thy
self alone; Great ones do not use to invite and sue unto mean ones, to beg
great matters of them, much less will they engage, or covenant, or make
promises to them, if they will seek great things; no, their way and manner is
quite contrary. A poor creature may, if he beg, get it may be some small matter
of them, but if he ask any great matter, he is sent empty away; this is not the
way to speed, but to be denied, and have nothing: when a poor creature begs a
penny, will they say, ask a shilling? or if he beg a shilling, will they say
ask twenty? or if he ask twenty, will they say ask as many pounds, and you
shall then have both? no, never was any such thing found among men, this is
only the way and manner of God, which therefore let us for ever admire and
adore, and withal readily and heartily embrace and comply with; for as David
said in another case, And what can David 2 Samuel 7. 20.
say more unto thee? so what can poor creatures say more to thee? what can they
ask or desire more that thou should give them, than that thou put them
upon asking and seeking? And it is that which should very much humble us, that
though the face and favor of God be that which is our very happiness and
felicity, and our chief good, more than a Kingdom, than a world, yea many
worlds, were they extant, yea more than heaven or earth too, yet that we, even
we, who profess our selves to be
the people of God, and are called by his name, should be so backward for to
seek it, and that we should need to be bid, yea to be conditioned and indented
with for to seek it, as you have heard! O what strange kind of creatures are
we, and how woefully degenerate! Are people backward to seek the Ruler's face,
or to entreat the Princes favor, to seek the friendship of great ones? no,
Solomon tells us, Many Prove. 29. 26. -- 19. 6.
seek the Ruler's favor, Hebr. the face of the Ruler; and, Many will entreat
the favor of Hoc Proyerbio inertia nostra insigniter coarguitur, ut Deum
principum principem non precamur, etc. Cartwright:
the Prince, etc. and are we backward to seek the face and favor of the great
God? are people backward to seek and desire life? no, Satan in that said
truly, -- skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for his life:
and, what man is he that desires life? etc. Austin brings in all sorts,
saying, I do, and I do, and I do, -- all Job 2 4. Ps. 34. 12. Ego and ego etc.
Ps. 30. 5. -- 63. 3.
desire life. Why, the favor of God is life, yea better than life, and yet we
no more desire it! so backward to seek it! how should it humble us, and stir us
up the more to seek it for the future? and if this be the will and command, Ps.
40. 8.
and counsel of God, let us say with David, I delight to do thy will, O my God,
yea thy law, this thy law is within my heart; I do readily and heartily
reverence it, embrace it, and yield to it, and I will bless the Lord who has
given me this counsel: and is this that (Lord) which thou would have me to
do? Lord, I will do it, and thou shall not say to me, do this in vain. There be
many that say, who will show us any good? they are for any good, and who will
show us? no matter who, if any; and but show it, we will procure it, we will
work it out with our own wits, let us alone for that, we have wit enough to
compass it, but Lord lift thou up upon us the light of thy countenance, let us
but enjoy that Psalm* 4. 6.
good, and that shall be in stead of all, thy favor, Lord, thy face, one good
look from thee, one smile from thy countenance, vouchsafe us but this, and for
other things do what seems good to thee, we leave them to thy wisdom to dispose
as thou please.

5. The more to excite us to supplicate these, let us consider he only can
effect these, and vouchsafe these. 1. He only can turn us again to himself, as
was hinted before. This is God's work, the work of no less than an almighty
power, an omnipotent arm: we can easily indeed, and of our selves, turn aside
and turn away from God, but it is only the Lord God of Hosts that can reduce
us, the arm of Jehovah himself must be revealed to effect this: who has
believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Isa. 53. 1.
Lord revealed. The Lord himself must speak, and that with a strong hand, so to
instruct us, as not to walk any longer as we have done, or as others do, as the
Prophet Isaiah expresses it, For the Lord spoke thus to me with a strong hand,
or Isa. 8. 11.
as it is in the Hebr. in or with strength of hand, In fortitudine manus.
which denotes the strong and powerful operation of the holy Ghost in the
Prophet, and some others together with him; and instructed me that I should not
walk in the way of this people, that is, that I with others of the godly Jews
should not follow the manners and practices of the greater sort of that people,
and it must be the Lord's speaking, his instructing, and that with strength of
hand, that must effect this, else all our speaking and preaching, be it never
so earnest and often, is but with a weak hand, and ineffectual, and people will
walk and go on still as they did; we may tell people they should profit, or
declare to them what is profitable, but it is the Lord God only which can
teach them to profit, or what is profitable, that is, effectually. So we may
show them the way they should go, but the Lord God only can lead them in the
way they should go. I am the Lord thy God which teaches Isa. 48. 17.
thee to profit, or what is profitable, as the Dutch read it, which leads
thee by the way that thou should go, -- Every one therefore (says Joh. 6. 45.
Christ) that has heard and learned of the father, comes to me, and so by me
to him. This is never done indeed 'till God does it, and therefore how earnest
should we be in our addresses to him, that he would do it, for Ministers can
not do it, nor can we our selves do it, unless the Lord comes in with his help.
Acts 16. 9. It is there said a vision appeared to Paul in the night there stood
a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, come over into Macedonia and help
us: our great work and business is to help people, to help them in the main, in
their chiefest and greatest concerns, to help their souls, to help them as to
God, to turn them to him, to further their being brought home to him, and their
being reconciled unto him, but our help will signify little, unless the Lord
help, as the King said to that woman, unless the Lord help, how should 2 King
6. 26, 27.
I help. 2. He alone can cause his face to shine, we can indeed cause it to
frown, but he alone must make it smile. We can raise those mists and clouds
which obscure and hide his face, and interpose between us and him, and his
favor, but he alone can scatter and dispell them: your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you,
Isa. 59. 2.
etc. that is, have caused him to hide his face from you; you have done this,
but I only can and must do the other, viz. remove that which separates, and
discover my face, and display my favor; you can procure my displeasure, but I
only must manifest my love; you can erect a partition wall between me and you,
but I only can throw it down. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thy help. Ephraim by Hos. 13. 9.
the iniquity of his covetousness could cause God Is. 57. 17, 18.
to hide himself, and to be wrath, but God alone could restore comforts to him,
and to his mourners. David he could lose the joy of God's salvation, but God
only could restore it. I create Psalm 51. 12. Is. 57. 29.
the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, etc. We can mar our peace, but God
only can create it, and therefore to him we must seek and earnestly sue, as
the Church here, and David and the people of God often elsewhere. Lord, lift
thou up Ps. 4. 6. -- 31. 16.
the light of thy countenance upon us, make thy face to shine upon thy servant,
etc.

6. As he only can do these, so let us consider how infinitely able he is to
do them, he being as he is here described, the Lord God of Hosts. Job. 42. 2.
I know (says Job) that thou can do every thing, and that no thought can be
withholden from thee: that is, whatever thou have purposed and decreed, can by
no means be hindered, or kept from being performed. Is any thing too hard for
the Genesis 18. 14.
Lord? If any man (says Paul) be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things
are past away, and 2 Cor. 5. 17,
all things are become new; and what follows? And all things are of God, who
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ: and that was a great work
indeed, to reconcile heaven and earth, yea heaven and hell, as it were to
reconcile us, when we were such desperate enemies; to heal a breach that was
great like the Sea, and which all the creatures in heaven and earth, Angels and
men, could never have effected any thing, as to the making of it up: and all
things are of him, who has done so great things already, viz. which concern
this new Creation, greater than the first; all things, be they never so many,
or never so great, he can make new heavens, and new earth, and new hearts, and
new spirits, yea all new; and how should we then resolve with David, I will cry
unto God most high, Psalm. 57. 2.
unto God who performs all things for me; and can perform all things for
thee, be they never so many, never so great, all things that concern thy weal,
thy happiness, thy soul, thy salvation, thy conversion, and restoring thee into
his face and favor here, and to eternal felicity hereafter. We read often in
Scripture of that Phrase, (and it is very observable) of God's commanding such
and such things, such and such mercies, and blessings: as of his commanding
deliverances for Jacob, of his commanding strength, of his Psalm. ^4. 4. -- 68.
28. -- 133. 3.
commanding the blessing, even life for evermore. We beg and entreat, and
humbly supplicate these, but God he can and does command these, he can with
speed, power, and authority send these, exhibit these; he can command
conversion, and his loving kindness, and the light of his Psalm ^2. 8.
countenance, as the Psalmist expresses it, Yet the Lord will command his
loving kindness in the day time, and in the night his song shall be wi^h me:
command his loving kindness, that is, that it come to me, and comfort and save
me. David at this time was in a very sad afflicted condition, all thy waves and
thy billows (says he in the foregoing Viz. ut ad me veniat. Pis. etc.
verse) are gone over me, and that now which he expects and counts upon for his
comfort, both day and night, is the loving kindness of God, the favor of God,
the shining of his face, and this (says he) the Lord will command, he will send
forth to it a Mandamus, or commission, as it were, to go to him; he does not,
nor need not stand treating about going, or entreating it to go, but he bids it
go, lays his charge and command upon it to go; go to such a Soul, and it goes;
and come to such a Soul, and it comes; it obeys him, and indeed only him; we
may wish it, desire it, beg it, entreat it, but he can command it, and
powerfully and effectually command it, so as to do its work. It seems to be a
phrase taken from Kings and great Commanders in the field, whose way is to
command such and such things, and whose words of command stand for laws. So do
God's, he commands his loving kindness to go, and he commands it to act and
work, to do its work, to comfort, and cheer, and revive, and when he commands
it to do so, it powerfully and effectually does it, it gives songs in the
night, and causes even in darkness to arise light; he commands Mandare
benignitatem dicitur Deus, cum facit ut sensus ejus erga nos, a nobis
percipiatur, and reipsa experiatur. Mell.
the sense of his love, and the blessed effects and fruits of it upon the Soul.
The Lord makes that which his Ministers preach, for the peace and comfort of
his people, to be effectual to help their peace and comfort, and so creates the
fruit of their lips peace. It is said of Jacob, that all his sons and his
daughters rose up to comfort him, because of his grief, upon his supposing Genesis
37. 35.
his son Joseph to be rent in pieces, but he refused to be comforted; so would
deserted souls whatever we preached as making for their comfort, did not the
Lord command it: but the Lord says, Go loving kindness to such a soul, to such
a drooping heart, and cheer and revive it, and comfort it, and it goes, and it
acts, and does its work and errand it is sent about.

7. Let us consider not only how able, but also how willing he is to do these,
to turn us again, and cause his face to shine, if we do indeed seek unto him to
do them. For 1. what mean else those frequent and earnest invitations to seek
them? those gracious promises of obtaining them, if we do indeed seek them? as,
Ask, and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, etc. and Luke 11. 9.
Amos 5. 5.
seek ye me, and ye shall live, etc. And 3. why else does the Lord continue
still the seasons of grace, and means of converting and turning us again to
himself, and bringing us into his favor? And 4. continue still to exercise
such patience and long suffering toward us, what is the meaning thereof?) The
Apostle Peter tells us, it is because he is not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come to repentance. The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, as some men count slackness, but is long suffering to Deus expectat
conversionem nostram, and ut revertamur ipsi ad gratiam: expectat gemitus sed
temporales, ut remittat aeternos, lachrymas nostras, ut profundat pietatem
suam. Ambr.
us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. 1. He is not slack, as if he regarded not what was done here upon
the earth, but sat in heaven as one of the Idol-Gods. Nor 2. as if he was not
sensible, or laid not to heart men's carriages toward him: O he apprehends,
and is very sensible of the wrong done to him, as he often in Scripture
expresses it. Numb. 14. 11. How long will this people provoke me, etc. Forty
years long was I grieved with this generation, etc. Behold I am Amos 4. 13.
pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves: and, Thou
have wearied me with thine Isa. 43. 24.
iniquities: and, Because I am broke with their whorish heart: and, God is
angry with the wicked Ezekiel. 6. 9.
every day, etc. But it is because he is patient and Psalm 7. 11.
long suffering, which was part of his name, which he proclaimed before Moses,
as his glory. Exodus 34. 6. So that men count him slack, when he is only
patient, and bearing long with sinners, not willing that they should perish,
but come to repentance, and therefore vouchsafes them time, and gives them
space to repent; and hence v. 15. account (says the Apostle) that the long
suffering of the Lord is salvation, that is, that the Lord defers his coming to
judgment; account of this as that which the Lord does, as tending to your
salvation, and as very serviceable for the furthering thereof, in giving you
time to repent and turn to him. He might have sent you to Hell, as soon as ever
ye came into the world, or cut (...) many years since, as he has done many the
thousands of others, cut you off in your youth, while ye were pursuing your
youthful lusts, but that he has still born with you, and spared you from time
to time: this is the meaning thereof, that he is willing ye should not perish,
but repent and turn unto him, and so recover his favor here, and eternal
salvation hereafter.

8. The more yet to encourage us in our suits, notwithstanding our own
sinfulness and unworthiness, let us in our addresses to God consider, that when
any are turned again unto the Lord, and have his face shine upon them, it is
from mere free grace, and undeserved kindness. This and this alone is that
which puts him upon it, and not any thing in those whom he turns, and on whom
he causes his face to shine: the mere favor of God bestows the first grace,
and following grace, and it is from grace that he exhibits grace, and turns any
by his grace; it is from favor that he vouchsafes favor, from mere good will
that he manifests good will, and from his face that he causes his face to
shine, and from the light of his countenance that he lifts it up. It is not
that he has any need of us, or any motive from us, except our misery: and this
the Scripture every where holds forth. Of his own will (that is, of his mere
good pleasure James 1. 18. (...), quia voluit, becanse he would.
and free grace) begat he us with the word of truth; this alone is the spring
and original both of our regeneration and salvation. For by grace ye are saved,
but God who is rich in mercy for his great love wherewith he loved us, even
when we Ephesians. 2. 8. v. 4. 5.
were dead in sins has qu sav^d us, etc. -- But according to his mercy he
(...) us, by the washing Titus 3. 5.
of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, etc. I will heal their
backsliding, I will love Hos. 14. 4.
them freely, etc. He will turn again, and whence? he will have compassion upon
us, he will subdue our iniquities, etc. Since thou wast precious in my sight,
that is, since thou becamest dear to me, Is. 43. 4.
and I vouchsafed thee grace and favor, thou Iter ad gratiam est per gratiam,
per quae ipsam venitur ad ipsam. Prosper.
have been honorable, and I have loved thee. I have manifested my love several
ways to thee, and all from love, and mere grace and good will. So that it is of
free grace merely, that God exhibits and shows grace, it is of love that he
manifests love: and how much may this encourage poor creatures to seek unto the
Lord, that he would turn them again, and cause his face to shine, it being
nothing but free grace, and mere mercy, that has put him upon doing this for
others; and though they be so unworthy, yet why may not free and rich grace put
God upon doing that for them, which it has put him upon doing for others; God
never turned any again to himself, or caused his face to shine on them, because
they were worthy, but because he was gracious; not because they deserved it,
but because it was his good pleasure so to do it; not because of any merit in
them, but because of that mercy that is in himself; not because of works which
they had done, but because of what he was pleased of mere mercy and free grace
for to do. Thus the Lord tells Israel, that because Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8.
he loved them, he set his love upon them; here is the spring and rise of all,
the good will and pleasure of God, the natural bent, purpose, and Romans 9. 15.
Phil. 2. 13. (...), pro gratuita sua benevolentia. Pise.
inclination of God's heart to do the creature good. I will have mercy on whom
I will have mercy, and I will have compassion whom I will have compassion, and
he works both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

9. Let us consider, that as it is from free grace, that any are turned again,
so it is by grace, that they are turned, as from favoring accepting grace, so
by sanctifying renewing grace; as from the freeness of the one, so by the
effectual operation of the other, it is free grace alone that puts God upon
doing, and then sanctifying grace that does it. Look what ever any have been,
or are, as to any saving work of conversion upon the soul; and turning them
again unto the Lord, as it has been wholly upon the account of free accepting
grace, so it has been wholly by the powerful operation of sanctifying renewing
grace, as merely from grace, so wholly by grace, and whatever any have been, or
are, as to any saving work, it is by the grace of God that they are what are,
and what that grace has done for others, that sometimes were, what thou now
art, the same can it effect for thee. We all, says the Apostle, with 2 Cor. 3.
18.
open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory: But how? by the Spirit Psalm. 51. 12.
of the Lord, and the Spirit of the Lord is free, not only as making free, or
being freely given, but as acting freely, The wind blows Joh. 3. 8.
where it lists, etc. and so does the Spirit breath freely where he pleases,
and can cause the same gales of grace to breath upon thee, as he has done upon
others; as God vouchsafes his favor, so he also gives grace, and works by his
grace, where, when, and on whom he pleases, and all, that any are, or have, it
is by that grace, as the Apostle expresses it, as concerning himself, that
they are what they are, and have what they have. And last of all he was seen of
me also, as of one born out of due time. For I am the 1. Cor. 15. 8, 9, 10.
least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I
persecuted the Church of God, but by the grace of God I am what I am. what I am
as to that change that is now wrought in me, as to any saving work of
conversion Quicquid est, non sibi, aut meritis suis, sed soli gratiae Dei
tribuit. Pareus.
upon my soul, as to being a true convert, a true Christian and believer, as to
being an Apostle, and a preacher, who before was a persecutor, as to what I
thus am, as it is merely from grace, so it is wholly by grace that I am what I
am; and others whatever they are, being by grace what they are as to any saving
work of grace, why by the same grace may not thou be the same they are? Is
not grace as free and as effectual for thee, as for another? can it not do and
effect that for thee, that it has done for others? Take grace away, and others
are what thou art; let grace work upon thee, and thou shall be the same as
others are. O what may not free grace put God upon, and what will not effectual
2 Cor. 9. 8. (...)
grace do. And God is able (as the Apostle speaks) to make all grace to abound
toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to
every good work. What cause have we to adore the fullness of this Scripture!
here are five alls. 1. All grace, and not some only. 2. All ways, and not now
and then only. 3. All Sufficiency, and not some sufficiency only. 4. In all
things, and not in some only. 5. To every or all good works: and all grace
abound as to all these, what wants can exceed such supplies? what indigencies
such sufficiency? and what cannot such grace do?

10. Consider how far soever thou may have turned away, or turned aside from
God, yet God has turned again as great sinners, and turners aside as thou have
been, or art. Ephesians. 2. 1. And you has he quickened, which were dead in sins
and trespasses, not only asleep but dead, and yet quickened; and not only
dark, but darkness it self, in the abstract, and yet made light in the Lord. If
sinners indeed had never heard of any great sinners that God had turned again
from their sins to himself, or that it was not better with them then, than
before, when they served their lusts, they might have the more plea, but there
are many presidents in sacred Writ, and if with mourning and humiliation thou
turnest with them, thou shall be happy with them. We find in the 15. of Luke,
that the Prodigal there went a great way off from his father, he took his
journey not into some near adjacent parts, but into a far country, and there
he spends all, makes himself a mere bankrupt, so that he falls to feed Swine,
and feeds on the husks that the Swine did eat, and yet could not have his belly
full of them neither; and yet this Prodigal he is brought to himself, and
brought home again to his father, and there he is kissed and embraced, and has
the best his fathers house can afford. How exceeding far had Manasseh turned
away from God, yea how exceedingly had he turned against him? we scarce read of
any that ever did worse: read 2 Chronicles. 33. from the 1. v. to the 10. 2 Kings
21. from the 1. v. to the 17. It is said, he used enchantments, and dealt with
familiar spirits, and wizards, and wrought much wickedness in the sight of the
Lord to provoke him to anger: he made his children to pass through the fire in
the valley of the son of Hinnom, etc. and yet Manasseh is made a Convert, and
turned again to the Lord, the Lord he turns to Manasseh, and turns Manasseh
again to himself. So what a persecutor was Paul, he breathed out threatenings
and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, etc. Acts 9. 1, 2. yea, as
himself says, he was exceedingly mad against them, Acts 26. 11. and yet this
persecutor is turned to be a Preacher, and to prosecute what he formerly sought
to destroy. Mary Magdalene had seven Devils lodging Numerus certus pro incerto.
in her, that is, many, and yet Jesus Christ casts them all out, and makes that
heart where so many Devils had lodged, fit for himself to lodge in, who had the
seven Spirits of God; and she, who had been so vile and miserable, he appears
Mark 16. 9.
first to, and makes the first witness of his resurrection. And such were some
of you: what? 1 Cor. 6. 11. (...): and haeceratis quilibet.
such kind of things; he does not say such men, or women, but such kind of
things, as if the Apostle knew not how to style them, nor what to call them,
and therefore he puts it in the Neuter Gender, such kind of things; O they were
sad and strange kind of things indeed! and yet of such kind of things God makes
something of, yea makes blessed things of, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. It matters not much whither, or from whence we are fallen,
if the Lord undertake but to raise us; nor whither we are wandered, or Junius
before his conversion, is said to be an Atheist, but afterward became very
pious, styled the Glory of Leyden.
where we are wilder'd, if he undertake but to reduce us; nor how far we are
turned aside, or turned away, if he undertake but to turn us again; no matter
what is the sickness, if he be but the Physician, and undertakes the cure: he
can do good of any one, be it who it will; that is very encouraging to poor
sinners, which he said to Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. My grace is sufficient for thee;
it is sufficient for the greatest of sinners, his accepting grace is
sufficient, and his sanctifying renewing grace is sufficient; one is sufficient
against all our unworthiness, and the other is sufficient against all our
uncapableness and unfitness; one is sufficient to put God upon doing what is to
be done, and the other is sufficient for to do it; one as to motive, the other
as to efficacy; he can make dry bones live, and is Ezekiel. 37. 5, 6, 7. Matthew. 3.
9.
able of stones to raise children to Abraham; he can change condition and
disposition, pardon and purge, justify and sanctify, yea do every thing, and
perform all things. And therefore let all, even such as have turned farthest
aside from God, be encouraged to go unto God, and to call upon him, and cry
unto him, to perform all things for them, for all things are of him, and to
Psalm. 57. 2.
perform this for them, to turn them again, and cause his face to shine. Say,
Lord thou command us to turn, O do thou make us to turn! it is thy precept
that we should turn, Lord, according to thy promise give us grace for to turn,
Turn us, and we shall be turned, convert us and we shall be converted; we have
turned aside after the world, and vanity, and sin, yea after Satan, but O turn
us again to thy self; we have turned aside to our own ways, and after our own
lusts, but O turn us again to thee, and thy ways: thou say, Return ye
backsliding children, and I Jerem. 3. 22.
will heal your back slidings: and, Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the
Lord our God, that thou may cause us and enable us to return, for the way of
man is not in himself, it is not in man Jer. 10. 23.
that walks to direct his steps; turn us therefore and we shall be turned;
and thou who give us space to repent, give us grace to repent, and to turn to
thee, and that with a true, hearty, real, and universal turn. Lord, every thing
within us is turned from thee, and is averse to thee, yea is turned against
thee, and therefore do thou by thy grace cause all to turn again to thee, mind,
will, heart, affections, all within us, and all without us, that so we may not
be half, but whole Converts, and our conversion may not be partial but total,
and universal, of the whole man, and from all evil, and to all that is good.
Salvation is said to belong unto the Lord, and his blessing Psalm. 3. 8.
to be upon his people; and let us beg that the Lord would thus save us, and
not only us, our selves, but others also, ours his people, and that this
blessing may be upon us all, the blessing of turning us all again to himself,
and of causing his face to shine, the blessing of saving conversion, and of
Divine favor and affection; that the Lord would thus save and bless the
Nation, this Kingdom, Church, State, Cities, Towns, Families, houses, hearts,
even with the great Gospel-blessing of Jesus Christ raised from the Acts 3. 26.
dead, in turning us all from our sins and iniquities to himself. Lord, thus
bless the house of Israel, and thus bless the house of Aaron, yea thus bless us
all both small and great. Let this blessing, O Lord, be upon high and low, rich
and poor, mighty and mean, upon Prince and people, upon Court, and City, and
Country, upon our Metropolis, our chief and Mother-city, yea and upon all her
Daughters, our other Cities, and upon the whole Nation, yea the three Nations,
and then shall we be blessed indeed, yea Psalm. 115. 15.
the blessed of the Lord which made heaven and earth. Thus though we cannot
turn our selves, we may yet pray unto God to turn us, and entreat his favor,
the want whereof, as aggravating their sin, the Prophet Daniel confesses and
bewails. All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer before the
Lord our God, that Dan. 9. 1^.
we might turn from our iniquities, etc. They could not turn of themselves, but
they might have prayed to God for grace to turn.

CHAP. XI. The second Branch of Exhortation, to add to our Prayers, our
Endeavors.
ANd let us not only pray, but earnestly endeavor after this, not only
beseech it, but strenuously pursue it, and follow after it; let us join to our
prayers our pains, and to our desires our labor, care, and industry; setting
about it, and setting our selves seriously to it, and laying out our selves to
the utmost for the attaining of it, that we may be converted, and turned again
from our sins to God, and that he may cause his face to shine on us. In all
labor (says Solomon) Prove. 14. 23.
there is profit, but the talk of the lips tends only to penury, that is,
nothing comes of that. As the door turns upon his hinges, so does -- 26. 14.
the slothful upon his bed, that is because of his sloth he is still where he
was, and hangs where he did, comes not off, and this is his undoing. The desire
of the sloathful kills him, for his Prove. 21. 25.
hands refuse to labor. Many wish well to themselves, Immoritur optando, nihil
operatur, non utitur mediis quibus potiri optatis queat, etc. Remus in locum.
and they say they do desire grace, but refuse to labor, and this kills them,
for grace is not had with wishing. If ever we would be savingly converted, we
must not only wish and desire it, but labor and strive after it, we must up
and be doing, use diligence. The want of this the Lord complains of concerning
that people, as the cause of their ruin. They will not frame Hos. 5. 4.
their doings to turn unto their God, etc. not so much as set about it, nor set
themselves to it, nor see what they can do. They will not so much as
endeavor, and bend their course that way, Non adjicient studia sua, ut
convertantur ad Deum suum. Video me operam ludere, quia mihi negotium est
potius cum brutis animalibus, vel cum saxis quam cum hominibus, etc. Calvin. in
locum.
nor show their good will, nor make use of these means which tend toward it,
not do what they can do and might; and therefore I do by my Prophets but spend
my labor in vain, and I have to do as it were but with beasts and stones
rather than men. Indeed I am their God by profession, and I have shown my self
so by the care I have had of them, and the many good offices I have done for
them; and yet though I am their God, and the fountain and wellspring of all
their good, and their happiness is to turn to me, yet they will not so much as
once frame their doings to turn unto me. And this is an heavy aggravation of
peoples impenitency, and leaves them altogether inexcusable, when they will not
endeavor, nor so much as make use of the means as in reference to so great a
concern, not do what they might do: we are not able indeed to turn our selves;
no, conversion is too great a work, and lies beyond our line, and we should get
a due sense thereof, so as to drive us to God for help, but yet we may
endeavor it, and attempt something as in reference to it; something we may do,
but what (you will say) may we do? and what would you have us for to do? I
shall show you in several particulars.

1. Attend constantly on the ministry of the Word, wait still upon God in his
ways, and in the use of those means he has instituted, appointed, and set
apart to be instrumental as to that great work of turning you again to himself,
and of bringing you into favor, and recovering again his face. Do as those
impotent folk, they could not indeed heal themselves, yea, but they could and
did lie at the Pool, waiting for the moving John 5. 3.
of the waters, that they might be healed. Get there still where Christ walks,
and where he works, as Zacheus he got up into a tree, in the Luke 19. 4.
way where Christ was to pass, and who knows but Christ may look upon thee, as
he did upon him, and it may be a time of love, and he may say to thee, though
in thy blood, live, and bring saving conversion, and salvation home to thy
soul. It is good being in God's ways, how many has he savingly and graciously
met there, and his power has been present to heal them, to convert and save
them. The very work and business that he sends his Ministers about, it is (as
he told Paul when he had converted him from a Persecutor, to be a Preacher, and
as you have heard) to open sinners eyes, and to turn them from darkness to Acts
26. 18.
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, etc. And how many thousands of
souls are there, who have experienced this, and for whom it has been effected
by their means, and why may it not be effected for thee also? The word is
called a word of grace, a converting word, and wait on it for God to make it so
to thy soul. Of his own will (says the Apostle) begat he us by the James 1. 18.
word of truth, and why by the same word may he not beget thee, if thou attend
upon it? God sends his Ministers to help people in this great work, And a
Vision appeared to Paul in the night, Acts 16. 9.
there stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him saying, come over into
Macedonia and help us. Now be sure then to be there where he vouchsafes such
help, which is the best help, and better a thousand times than the having such
come that might help you in other matters, as in your estates and in matters of
the world, though it was to compass never so much of it. And how sad must their
condition then needs be, and how inexcusable will they be found at that great
day, who refuse this help, who carelessly neglect or despise the Ministry
appointed for so blessed an end, how deservedly and inexcusably will they
perish? and how by this act of theirs do they their own selves judge themselves
unworthy of conversion and salvation, as the Apostle told those refractory
Jews. Then Paul and Barnabas Acts 13. 46.
waxed bold, and said it was necessary that the word of God should first have
been spoken to you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. And therefore as ever
you would be turned again unto God, wait for it, in a constant and diligent
attending upon the plain and powerful preaching of the word, which is the great
organ and instrument which God has instituted for that purpose; and how many
blessed and glorious conversions have been effected by it, and that upon most
indisposed and unlikely subjects? and this is the great reason why Satan does
so much rage, and set himself against it, it being the great Engine and Battery
which God makes use of to destroy his Kingdom, and to rescue poor souls out of
his snares, and to turn them to himself: and this, when you go to attend upon
the word preached, you are chiefly to mind and look after, that it may have
this blessed effect upon your souls, to turn you to God, and you should be
restless and unsatisfied till it be so. The Law of the Lord, that is, the Psalm
19. 7.
doctrine of the word, is perfect converting the soul. And O that it might
convert mine, that it might have the same effectual work upon me, which it has
had upon others: and the rather you are to mind this, because if you be not
convertible by the word, neither would you be persuaded though one rose from
the dead. Luke 16. 30. And he said, nay, father Abraham, but if one went unto
them from the dead, they will repent. v. 31. And he said unto him, if they hear
not Moses, and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose
from the dead. And because knowledge and understanding is initial and
introductory, and primarily necessary as to conversion; for as God in the first
Creation wrought light, so he does in conversion of a sinner, who by nature is
a miserable chaos of confusion; and seeing it is peoples ignorance and
stupidity, and their want of knowledge of God, and themselves of their malady
and remedy, that does so hinder and indispose them as to conversion, beg of God
that the ministry of the word, which is called the key of knowledge, may be
effectual to give thee knowledge and understanding, and that thine eyes may be
anointed with eye salve, that thou may see. Do as Solomon advises, Prove. 2.
2, 3, 4, 5, etc. O how many are destroyed, and never converted, because of
their ignorance and stupidity, because the scales of ignorance are yet upon
their eyes, and the vail upon their hearts! ignorance being not only a great
evil it self, but a very source of all evils, and that which hinders all good;
and therefore be earnest for the removal of it.

2. When the Spirit at any time comes to thy soul, as he does to all at one
time or other, and begins to stir and move thy heart, the Spirit it may be
would convince thee of sin, and humble thy soul, and bring thee to sorrow for
sin here, to prevent worse, even eternal horrors hereafter. For do any think
ever to go to heaven, and never to have their hearts touched for their sins? It
is as impossible, as for a man below to reach the heavens with his hands. Now
when I say the Spirit begins to do this, this is thy season, prize it and
improve it, take the present opportunity, and beseech him whatever he does to
go on. O cherish and make much of such motions, for they are very precious! and
do not quench them, nor resist the Spirit, but give up thy self to be wrought
upon by him; do not say, Go away, and come again another time. Remember, the
Spirit, which is the worker of repentance, is not at thy beck, neither can
thou set him a work when thou please, and therefore let him work when he
pleases, and remember God has said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, and Genesis 6. 3. Hebr. 3. 7, 8.
therefore, To day if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts.

3. Break off from your evil company, and have no longer fellowship nor society
with them, but say, depart from me ye evil doers, bid them Ps. 119. 115.
be packing, and gone; forsake the foolish and live, and go in the way of
understanding. As you love your souls forsake such, you dye else, your souls
perish else, but if you forsake such you are in the Ut ii qui in Sole. ambulant
nigredinem sibi contrahunt: sic qui cum sapientibus versatur, sapere discet,
Remus.
way to live, to attain to that repentance which is unto life, and to go in the
way of understanding, which is to depart from evil. I dare be bold to say, and
affirm, that there is no one thing under heaven that is a greater hinderance or
obstacle to the work of saving conversion, and bringing a sinner home unto God,
than loose, jovial, vain, wicked company: for these take off the sinner from
being ever serious and considerate of his present condition, and from weighing
his sins, and the evil of his ways, and more and more hardens him therein, and
so proves a marvelous impediment as to any such work. How often in affliction,
and under a Sermon, does the heart of a sinner seem to be wrought upon, and he
is under some conviction of the evil of his former ways, and courses, and
resolves to amend, but afterward by falling into vain and evil company, all
dwindles away and withers, and comes to nothing; and as a dog returns to his
vomit, so a fool returns to his folly. Thus how many have been affected, and
almost persuaded to be converts at a Sermon one day, and by falling into evil
company have been the same again the next day. And therefore, hence it was,
that the Apostle Peter, when he perceived that the Jews he had been preaching
unto, were affected with what he had delivered, and their hearts began to be
wrought upon, and to be touched for their sin, they asking him and the rest of
the Apostles, what they should do? he answers first to them in general, Repent;
but then afterward, that so good a work might not be hindered, nor obstructed,
he gives them withal that special advice, Save your selves from this untoward
generation; Acts 2. 40.
as if the Apostle had said, I perceive God has begun indeed to touch your
hearts for your sins, and my advice to you is, to repent and turn to the Lord;
but now that you be not hindered therein, this I testify and exhort too, that
you associate no longer as you have done with this untoward generation, but
save your selves from it, else they will flatten and deaden that work again,
and so hinder the conversion and salvation of your souls: and though other
words, with which the Apostle did testify and exhort, might be left out; yet
this, as that which was of so great concern, the holy Ghost would have
recorded: And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, save
your selves from this untoward generation: And so do you, quit Egypt, if ever
you would come to Canaan; and the Devil's disciples, if ever you would become
Christ's: bid them depart from you now, that Christ do not bid you for ever
depart from him, avoid them as you would a Pesthouse, or those that have the
plague, as being more dangerous and pernicious. Who can touch Pitch, and not be
defiled therewith? or lie on a dunghill, and not smell of it? Examples are more
prevalent than precepts, and soon make impression. Hence, I have not sat, says
David, with vain persons, Ps. 26. 4, 5.
neither will I go in with dissemblers; I have hated the congregation of evil
doers, and will not sit with the wicked. David prays, that God would not gather
his soul with sinners, nor draw him away -- 26. 9. -- 28. 3.
with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity: but if we would have our
souls not gathered with sinners, nor be drawn away with the wicked hereafter,
we must get far from them here, else we shall be in danger to be like them
here, and so be gathered and drawn away with them, and to them hereafter.

4. Get into good company, into the society of such as are already turned, and
they may further and help forward yours. He that walks with wise men (says
Solomon) shall be wise, but a Prove. 13. 20.
companion of fools shall be destroyed. As no one thing has a greater force or
influence for hurt, (...), etc. Theogn.
than the company which people keep, and ordinarily associate themselves with,
so for good, as to hinder a sinners conversion, and turning Societas bonorum
bonos, improborum improbos reddit.
to God. So to futher it, He that walks with wise men, that is, with godly
men, with such who are converted, and turned to God, and so from being
disobedient, to the wisdom of the just, with such who fear the Lord and depart
from evil, (for these the Scripture every where Prove. 14. 16. Job 18. 28. Psalm
111. 10. Luke 1. 17. etc.
declares to be wise) and he now that walks with such, that associates and
ordinarily converses with such, he shall be wise, that is, he is in the ready
way to become wise, to attain to that heavenly wisdom, which consists in our
repenting, and turning again to the Lord: for such will be advising him,
counselling him, exhorting him, supplicating grace and mercy for him, showing
him the danger of going on in sin, and the excellency, necessity, and advantage
of turning to God: But a companion of fools shall be destroyed, Ut lutum
farinam, acetum vinum corrumpit: ita ma ^ homines bonos. Chrysostom.
that is, of wicked men, who still impenitently go on in their sins without
remorse, for all such are fools, as the Scripture every where brands them, and
a companion of such fools shall be destroyed: and why? because by keeping
company with such fools, he becomes a fool himself, and is hindered from
becoming wise, from turning to God, wherein indeed true wisdom does consist.
The Hebrew is, broken, that is judicially broken, because by keeping company
with such fools* he is hardened, and kept from being penitentially broken. As
he that comes where sweet Spices and Ointments are stirring, does Qui in
taberna unguentaria resederunt, and paulo diutius commorati sunt, odorem fecum
loci ferunt, etc.
carry away some of the sweet savor, though he think not of it; so he that
converseth with good men, shall get good, somewhat of the sweet savor that is
manifest by them, may abide upon him. 2 Cor. 2. 14. -- and makes manifest the
savor of his knowledge by us in every place: and we are v. 15. a sweet savor
of Christ, a similitude from the Incense, which being kindled, spreads it self
through the Temple, and over the whole congregation. Thus Christ's Ministers
and believers, go up and down perfumed as it were; and whereas others savor of
sin and Satan, and hell, and death, they savor of Christ, and grace, and
heaven, and holiness, which savor they send out to others that associate with
them; and therefore get into the company of such, who are of the same society
as the Angels and Spirits of just men made perfect.

5. Get sometimes alone, and retire in secret, and there seriously weigh and
consider your ways and your doings, how it is with you, what is your present
state and condition, what you have done and are doing, and whither you are
going, or what ever else may further and help forward this work. This the Lord
often and earnestly Hag. 1. 5, 7. Ponite cor vestrum super vias vestras.
calls for. Now therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways,
Hebr. set your heart upon your ways: which manner of speech signifies so to
consider of a thing, as to come thereby to understand it thoroughly; and because
this is a duty that naturally men are so averse from, and backward to, and a
duty which so seldom is done to any purpose, and yet withal a duty so
necessary, the want of it being the main cause why people go on still in the
evil of their ways, therefore it is once and again pressed. God tells the sinner,
These things have thou done, and I Psalm. 50. 21.
kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self;
but says God, I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thine eyes,
that is, I will bring thy sins as an army (...) In ordine proponam; verbum
militare*
against thee, and I will set them all in order, as it were, in rank and file,
before thee, as the Hebrew word signifies; as if God had said, Thou thoughtest
thy sins were scattered, and dispersed, and that thou should hear no more of
them, that they should never be rallied not brought together again, but I
assure thee (says the Lord himself,) it is otherwise, as thou shall Deus
distincto ordine catalogum omnium scelerum proponet, quem (velint nolint)
legere and agnoscere cogentur. Calvin. in loc.
shortly find, when I shall muster them up all against thee, as it were in
battle array: here a Regiment of evil thoughts, and there of evil actions; here
of oaths, and there of lies, and there of false dealings; here of blasphemies;
and there of prophanations of God's Sabbaths, etc. And what shall these make
thee, but as God threatened Pashur, a mere Magor Missabab, i. e. Jer. 20. 4.
fear round about, a terror to thy self, and a terror to all about thee: and
what does the Lord advise now the sinner in this case, as his great concern?
why, Consider this (says he) ye that Ps. 50. 22.
forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. Consider
this, that is, what I say and threaten, and will do, to prevent your utter and
inevitable ruin, which else will be, if ye do not. O it is inconsiderateness
that undoes so many thousands! God considers sinners ways, and courses, but
they themselves do not, nor will not, as the Lord complains. And they consider
Hos. 7. 2.
not in their hearts, that I remember all their wickedness: and God declares
this as the reason why, when he hearkened, and heard no man speak right, no man
repented him of his wickedness, Jerem. 6. 6.
it was because no man said, no man considered, what have I done, hence every
one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle; whereas David
tells us, I thought on my Psalm. 119. 59.
ways, I considered my ways how they were out of order, and turned my feet unto
thy testimonies. Chishabti.
I weighed and pondered my ways, I turned them upside down, as it were, looked
all over them, and on every side of them, both above and beneath. So much the
Hebrew word notes, and it seems to be a phrase taken from curious works, which
are the same on both sides, so that they who work them, must turn them on every
side, etc. And thus did David, as in reference to his ways, which caused him to
turn his feet unto God's testimonies: so it is said of the Prodigal, that when
he came to himself, he said, to whom did he say? to and with himself, he
weighed and considered, how many hired servants of my fathers have bread
enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger? As if he had said, O what a
beast, what a brute am I, thus to feed swine, and to feed upon husks that swine
do eat, and to be in want of them too, when I might have bread enough in my
father's house! why there is never a hired servant in my father's house, but is
in a far better case than I; and the serious weighing and considering of this,
and dwelling in his thoughts upon this, made him resolve: as v. 18. I will
arise and go to my father, etc. So it is said of Peter, when he thought
thereon, he wept, Mark 14. 72. And the Church Lam. 3. 19. remembering her
affliction and her misery, that is, still remembering it, and meditating upon
it, and especially her sin, which occasioned it, the wormwood and the gall, the
bitterness in sin as well as for sin, My soul has them (says she) still in
remembrance, v. 20. and is humbled in me, etc. And beg of God to make thee
know, whilst yet thou go on in thy sins, the danger thou art in, where thou
art, and whither thou art going, upon what slippery and dangerous precipices
thou walk, and where thou will shortly be, unless thou gettest out of the
way where thou art. Pro. 21. 16. The man that wanders out of the way of
understanding, shall remain in the congregation of the dead. Such a one, unless
he turn, will be shortly lodged in hell among the Devils, and the damned. Now
this you may do, and this you are greatly concerned to do, to consider your
ways, etc. and that you may do this, you must get alone, get in secret; for
there is no casting up of accounts in a crowd, no, a man must go aside and
alone to do this, as the Prophet expresses it, Lam. 3. 28. he sits alone,
and keeps silence, etc. and Zach. 12. 12, 13, 14. Their families apart, and
their wives apart. and, Psalm 4. 4. stand in awe and sin not, commune with your
own heart upon your bed, and be still, that is, get alone, be still, and quiet,
and then commune with your own hearts; if you would consider your ways, you
must sequester your selves, and having done thus, go unto God, and lay open
your ways, and your case, and condition, which you have weighed and considered,
before him; confess your sins, and humble your souls, and seek his face, and
supplicate his mercy and grace, that he would say of you as sometimes he did of
Ephraim, when he had gone on frowardly in the Isa. 57. 17, 18.
way of his heart, I have seen his ways, and will heal him, etc. I will turn
him, and he shall be turned; I will pardon, and not impute what is past, and
prevent and help against the same for the future.

6. Occasion your hearts this way as much as you can, I mean as to this blessed
turn; we say Occasion makes a Thief, it furthers and helps Occasio facit furem.
forward his theevery; and so it may tend to make a Penitent: occasion, as it
is of great force as to that which is evil, so it may prove also as to that
which is good: it is a main thing as in matters of sin, so of grace, and
therefore if thou would repent, and turn to God, occasion thy heart that
way, and it may much further thee therein, as by often reading, and hearing,
and meditating on the Word, and conferring of the same, especially such a word
as tends most to help forward such a work; so by considering thy sins, and what
thy misery is till thou do turn, and how happy thou shall be when thou art
turned, by considering the motives to repentance, as its excellency, equity,
utility, and absolute and indispensable necessity, etc. as shall be afterward
held forth. Thus give your hearts as many occasions that way as possible ye
can, and they may take and avail at length. Why are men so carnal, and worldly,
and earthly? why? they occasion their hearts still that way, they are still
speaking, thinking, and plodding on the world; they speak of little else, hear
little else, think of little else. 1 John 4. 5. They are of the world,
therefore speak they of the world, etc. they Philip. 3. 19. Psalm. 49. 11.
mind earthly things. Their inward thought is that their houses shall continue
for ever, etc. And if men would more occasion their hearts that way, they might
become more penitent: while I was musing (says David) the fire burned, and Ps.
39. 3. Mark 14. 72.
Peter whiles he thought thereon, and so occasioned his heart that way, he
wept. You should deal with your hearts, as it is reported Junius his father
once in another case dealt with him, who perceiving his son Atheistical, and
knowing the reading of the Scriptures might be a principal means under God to
cure his Atheism; to occasion him that way, he lays a Bible in every Room, that
so where ever he came he might still have occasion to look into it, and read
it; he could go into no room but still he found a Bible haunting him, and as it
were inviting him to read it, and being thus occasioned to read it, at length
he read it, and was thereby (says the
Story) converted of his Atheism: so though repentance seem never so difficult
at first to corrupt nature, yet frequently occasioning your hearts that way,
might much help you, if you would but be still haunting your hearts with what
might further it, as with precepts, promises, threatenings, judgments, mercies,
Law, Gospel, etc. and never giving over 'till something comes of it, for
occasions are to be pressed and urged to the utmost, and thoroughly to be
improved, as it is said of those Jews, (I do but allude to it) that they said
unto Nehemiah, and the Premenda est occasio.
rest that were building, ten times, that is, very often, in all ways that ye
pass to and again, the Nehem. 4. 12.
enemy will be upon you; and thus still haunting them with warnings, at length
they looked about, and set guards in every place. And so deal with your hearts,
and warn them often, again and again tell them; O! if you do not repent, the
enemy will be upon you, the wrath and curse of God will be upon you, hardness
of heart will be upon you, all those judgments threatened will be upon you; but
if you repent, the blessing and favor of God will be upon you, grace, and
mercy, and peace will be upon you, all the good promised will be upon you, yea
God himself will dwell in you, and his Angels will guard you, and minister unto
you, etc. and tell your hearts such and such things often, yea never give over
'till you have brought it to some good issue. Thus as others occasion their
hearts sinward, hell-ward, vanity-ward, world-ward, so do you grace-ward,
heavenward, repentanceward, conversion-ward, and so salvation-ward*

7. Remember God of his promises, and in your prayers plead, and press, and
urge the same. Lord, have thou not in thy Word of free grace, made promises not
only to grace, but of grace, and do Lord, as thou have said, be as good as thy
word, O remember thy promise! Thus turn promises into prayers, as these and the
like. Turn you at my reproof, behold I Prove. 1. 23. Is. 44. 3.
will pour out my Spirit unto you, etc. and, I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and not only so, but floods upon the dry ground, that is, my Spirit
upon barren and fruitless hearts, that have neither saving knowledge, nor are
able to perform any good work. I will pour my Spirit upon thy Is. 35. 5, 6, 7.
seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring. Then the eyes of the blind shall be
opened, etc. and in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the
desert, that is, the Spirit shall be abundantly poured out upon all sorts, even
upon such as were as a wilderness, and as a dry and barren heath. And the
parched ground shall become Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27.
a poole, and the thirstly land springs of water: in the habitation of Dragons,
where each lay, shall be grass, with reeds and rushes. Then will I sprinkle
clean water upon you, and ye* shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from
all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new
Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments Jer.
3. 19.
and do them. But I said, how shall I put thee among the children, and give
thee a pleasant land? etc. that is, being spoken of God after the manner of
men, I thus thought and considered with my self, how shall I put thee among the
children? etc. How shall I make such as you my people, who are so vile and
unworthy, and adopt you to be my children, and so make you heirs of that
heavenly and glorious Canaan, of which the other was but a type? Now to this
God himself makes answer within himself, and the more to express the greatness
of his mercy, and the riches of his free grace against their unworthiness, he
says, Thou shall call me my father, and shall not turn away from me, that is, I
will by my Spirit, being a Spirit of conversion and adoption, cause thee to
return, and to cry unto me in faith, Abba father, and thou shall not depart
from me. Now remember God of these and the like promises, and press them, and
plead them, and urge them, turn them into prayers, 'till God turn them into
performances. So I might mention others, I will heal their backsliding, I will
love them freely: and, they shall return to me with their whole heart: and,
Hos. 14. 4. Jer. 24. 7. Psalm 22. 27.
all the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to the Lord, etc. And
because knowledge and understanding is, as I said, initial, and so influential
as to conversion, urge the promises thereof, as these, and the like. For the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters Is. 11. 9.
cover the Sea: and, They shall all know me from Jer. 31. 34.
the least of them to the greatest, etc. and, they shall be all taught of God.
Is. 54. 13. Joh. 6. 45. etc.

8. Follow after faith, labor to believe: for Non recte possit agere
poenitentiam, nsi qui speraverit indulgentiam.
true kindly Evangelical repentance, and saving conversion, does (as I said)
arise and flow from faith, and is an happy effect and fruit thereof; and faith,
at least in some measure, must go before it, as the ground and root thereof. A
true repenting sinner, is a believing sinner, that has had some apprehensions
and persuasions of the mercy of God in Christ, and of forgiveness of sin, in
and through him, to such as are penitent. And without the root, how should you
partake of the fruit, or without the cause, of the effect? it is said, A great
number believed and turned to Acts 11. 21.
the Lord, if ever we would turn to the Lord indeed, we must first believe,
which should make us therefore the more to study and endeavor by all possible
ways and means to obtain that precious grace of faith, as the Apostle Peter
calls 2 Pet. 1. 1.
it: precious indeed, for what is there that is precious, but faith brings us
to obtain it? and this we must in some measure have, if ever we repent and turn
to God to purpose; for an unbelieving Conversio ad Deum complectitur praecipue
fidem, qua homo in solo vero Deo fiduciam collocat, etc. Winckelm.
heart is ever an hard evil and impenitent heart. Paul speaking of such as live
godly, and so are true converts, he speaks of them as being in Christ Jesus,
that is, interested in him, united to him by faith, as branches into the Vine,
members to the head, and such must all be that Joh. 15. 5.
live godly, for severed from him they can do nothing, because in Christ and
from Christ is all that strength and ability for to do, and so to repent and
turn. I can (says Paul) do all things, but it is through Christ which
strengthens me: so that we must receive Christ before we can walk in Christ,
and the obedience of faith must go before the obedience of life; and before we
can do any other work to purpose, we must do that great Gospel-work of
believing. Faithless persons are ever impenitent and unconverted persons, for
whiles they are shut up under unbebelief, they are shut out from him and his
grace, whence all their ability thereto does and must proceed. Hence says
Christ, If a man abide not Fide destituti nunquam ad resipiscentiam veram
perveniunt.
in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them and
cast them into the fire, and they are burned. And therefore how infinitely are
we concerned as to faith, as to believing, Joh. 15. 6.
for no being turned no being saved, and no faith no being turned; and
therefore study and labor after faith, and that you may obtain it, attend upon
the word preached, which is the word of faith, and by hearing of which, faith
is said to come; so then faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17.
and hearing by the word of God. Attend then diligently and constantly upon the
Word, and beg of God that faith may come by it to thy soul, and when faith once
comes, O how much comes! for then Christ comes, grace comes, the Spirit comes,
repentance, saving conversion come, and so life, and salvation, and eternal
happiness come, heaven comes. And we should labor for increases of faith, as
the Disciples cried, Lord increase our faith, for the more faith the more Luke
17. 5.
repentance, as the one is maintained and nourished, the other is renewed and
increased, yea the very being, life, and increase, not only of this, but of
all other graces depends much upon faith, all other graces thriving or decaying
as it were together with it, and how earnestly then should we make out after it?

9. Live no longer in the common practice of gross sins, but forthwith break
them off, at least as to the outward act, for this you may do, thou can not
indeed convert thy self, nor change thy heart, I but thou may forbear, and
cease from the gross acts of the sins of thy life, as many have done and do,
for fear, or upon some other account, as by the dictates of nature, and the
power of moral precepts. History tells, of a certain Heathen, who being a
debauched person, and though continuing a Heathen still, yet hearing Socrates
read his Lectures of Morality, left off his outward debauchery. Thou can not
wash thy self, but thou need not wallow in the mire, nor tumble in the dirt:
thou can not mortify sin, but thou may forbear to Quoad externos actus.
commit such and such gross acts of sin, and perform such and such outward
duties, though not after a right manner. Indeed, as to spiritual acts as such,
man is impotent, and has no power, but he has as to moral, he may as to
outward acts live soberly and chastely, and may abitain from gross sins, as
whoredom, drunkenness, swearing, etc. so he may come to the congregation, hear
the word. Was there a strict law made by man, that whoever committed such and
such gross sins, or omitted such and such known duties, some fore penalty, as
confiscation of goods, or loss of life, should be inflicted, how many would
abstain from those sins which now they commit, and do those duties which now
they omit? and therefore they can do it. Thus Daniel counsels Nebuchadnezzar to
break off Dan. 4. 27.
his sins, his pride, tyranny, and oppressings of God's people, and to practice
the contrary virtues; and hereby God is less dishonored, his wrath less
provoked, the Saints less grieved, and others less encouraged to do the like.
And if you would be kept from the outward acts, you must shun and avoid the
occasions, for the not avoiding Vitare occasiones peccandi, est vitare ipsum
peccatum.
of them exposes to the other; he that would not be burned, must not come too
near the flames, nor be drowned, the Rivers brink, nor hear the Bell, meddle
with the rope. Solomon dehorting from being ensnared by the strange woman,
whose lips drop as an honeycomb, and whose mouth is smoother than oil, but
whose end Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5, 8.
is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword, and whose feet go down to
death, and whose steps take hold on hell; he gives this advice, Remove thy way
far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house, much less knock at her
door; flight here is the best fight, and the safest way of victory a speedy
retreat. He that would not come into naughty houses, must not come near them,
but keep far away, want of which undid that simple young man, Prove. 7. 8. he
went the way to her house; can we think he would escape the plague, that comes
near infected houses, or he avoid the sin, that does what tends or leads to it?
It is a tempting of God for one to come where he is like to be tempted, and
never let such a one look to be safe. Straw will quickly take fire, and
Gunpowder is not (says one) more apt to kindle, than our corrupt nature to be
provoked to sin, especially that of Oculus incitat appetentiam, and objecta
movent sensus.
uncleanness. Solomon elsewhere dehorting from drunkenness, says, Look not thou
upon the wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the cup, etc. that
is, avoid the occasions; the eye stirs up desire, and objects move the senses:
keep therefore far off from what thou would be freed.

10. What you do, do speedily; for there is danger here in delaying, and
besides the matter is of so great moment and importance, that it does not admit
of it; we say necessary things fall not De necessariis non est deliberandum.
under deliberation, but require present expedition. Was a man fallen into the
fire, or into the water, was it for him to lie there and deliberate, whither or
no he should get up? no, the necessity thereof does not admit it, for unless he
rises up, and gets out, he perishes, he is in danger to be burned or drowned.
Now whiles you yet go on impenitently in your sins, you are as it were in the
fire, and in danger to be drowned in destruction Jude 23. 1 Timothy 6. 9.
and perdition: And some save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, etc. And
is not the greatest expedition requisite here, even such as Solomon speaks of
in case of suretiship, Give not Prove. 6. 4, 5.
sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, deliver thy self as a Roe,
etc. Men do not delay in matters of the world, especially if they be of
consequence, and must there only be delays here? were a man's house on fire,
would he delay to seek to quench it? or was his estate, much more his life, in
danger to be lost, would he delay to seek to save it? But is not the loss of
the Soul ten thousand times sadder? If ever you mean to turn from your sins to
the Lord, are there not the same reasons for it now, as hereafter? Is not sin
evil, bitter, and destructive now, as well as afterward? and does it not now
dishonor God, thwart, oppose, provoke, offend, burden, yea weary him? and
debase, defile, and wrong your own souls, and threaten your ruin, and hinder
your own happiness, comfort, and peace, separate between you and Is. 59. 2.
God the chief good, and his favor, which is better than life? and is not God,
you should turn to, as full, lovely, desirable, sovereign, excellent, and
all-sufficient a Good now, as he will be afterward? or what other reasons are
there for turning from your sins to God that are not now, and the reasons being
the same now as hereafter, why should you defer, and go on still to add
further to your own shame, trouble, and grief? O how much more peace and
comfort Castigemus igitur mores and moras nostras.
might sinners have, did they sooner break off from their sins, and turn to
God, and were they but betimes converted, and brought home to him in their
younger days? and how much more honor might they bring to him, and how much
more service might they do for him, which they are not capable of till they
come to be converted? for till then they are in the flesh, that is, in Romans 8.
8.
the state of corrupt nature, and so cannot please God, nor serve, nor honor
him; and yet what is our end? or what were we made for but this? or what is it
worth the while to live for, but in reference to this? which makes our life to
be life indeed, and without which it is no better than death, that being the
very end and business of our living: and though we be, we do not properly Fuit
non vixit.
live 'till then, For she that lives in pleasure, 1 Timothy 5. 6.
is dead while she lives. And what an honor is it to please, honor, and
serve the great God, which is the honor of Angels, and of those blessed Heroes
above? Thousand thousands Dan. 7. 10. Rev. 22. 3.
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, etc.
-- And his servants shall serve him, etc. But 'till you are turned again, you
neither do nor can serve God, but serve sin, Satan, your lusts, instead of the
Lord of life and glory. And who would not hasten out of such an estate? O how
good is it to bear the yoke in our youth, and feel the bitterness of sin, and
abandon it betimes, and not defer what is so infinitely for our own happiness
and good! and yet this is that people are exceeding prone unto, still to put
off and procrastinate their turning to God. They deny not but it is to be done,
and they say they purpose and resolve to do it, but not yet, all in good time,
and so never set upon it; and this is occasioned partly from their sloth, and
idleness, partly from their excessive love of their lusts, and sins, and
vanities, as also from their hearts, being so much glued to the world, and the
cares and encumbrances they have about the same, and their still continuing in
a prosperous estate, in health, and strength, and not being in those troubles
as Psalm. 73. 5. Jer. 22. 21.
others are. I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, but thou said I will not
hear, etc. But what contempt do these delays cast upon God, and his favor, and
so upon the soul, and upon heaven, and salvation, as if these were not worthy
the minding and regarding presently? But the vain things of the world, which
cannot profit nor deliver, were to be preferred before them; and therefore the
more to put you upon speed and expedition herein, I shall leave with you these
following considerations.

1. Consider, Repentance is not in your power, nor at your command, to repent
when you please; no it is God that gives it, and the Spirit that works it,
which is a free agent, and Qui poenitentiae indulgentiam promisit, secure in
peccatis pergenti poenitentiam non promittit.
works when and where he pleases, and is not at thy beck; and God who promises
pardon to such as repent, does not promise repentance to the secure; thou
may have time, but want power, have space, but want grace to repent. If God
peradventure will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25.
etc. and therefore put it not off.

2. It is a great work, even the work of thy whole man, and thy whole life, and
thy whole strength, and will you still put it off, when as so much of thy time,
and life, and strength, is spent already? does it need all, and shall it yet
have less?

3. The longer it is deferred, the greater it will be. It may be as yet thou
have some meltings, some relentings; but sin, the longer it is lived in, the
more it hardens, and the hardlier it is left: lest any of you be heardened
through the deceitfulness Heb. 3. 13.
of sin. There is an inbred natural hardness Ezekiel. 36. 26.
that is in all by nature, we have all stony hearts, but sinners by going on
still in sin, and refusing to turn, add acquired hardness, and the heart
becomes more stony, and less capable of the impressions of God's Spirit, and so
the sinners condition less hopeful, continuance in sin taking away the sense
and feeling of it, and becomes as a millstone about the sinners neck. He Qui non
est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.
that is not fit to repent and turn to God to day, will be more unfit to
morrow, and the less time he will have to do it in, and the less strength to do
it with: there will be one day more to repent of, and one day less to repent
in. The further any go on in the ways of sin, the further off still they go
from God, and so their turning again is the more difficult; and therefore it is
good to stop betimes, else it will be the harder task; and seldom is it seen,
that such as have been long in travel from God in the ways of sin, do bethink
themselves of returning. Can the Jer. 13. 23. Principiis obsta, etc.
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may ye also do good,
that are accustomed to do evil. Wounds are presently to be healed, else their
cure will be harder: and how much easier might this work be, would sinners but
set upon it betimes.

4. The time is short. It is, as the Apostle expresses 1 Cor. 7. 29. (...),
terminus nauticus.
it, drawn in, or drawn together, rolled up into a narrow scantling, as Sails
use to be by the Mariner, when the Ship draws nigh to the Harbor, so much the
Greek word imports; and therefore you had need without any further delay, mind
and hasten your great work, and having so little time, lose no more of it,
there is water little enough to run in the right channel, and therefore let no
more run besides; and your time being so short, can you find in your heart that
God should still have less of it, and the Devil, and your lusts, and your
vanities more? The Apostle Peter tells us, The time past of our life may
suffice us to have wrought the will of the 1 Pet. 4. 3.
Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, etc. to have gone on in the
ways of sin; for the least time is here too much, it being but lost time, and
time which sinners employ to wrong and ruin their own souls in. Take our whole
time, all our days, and they are (as the Prophet David expresses it) but as an
hand breadth, and our age is as nothing before God: our life flies Psalm. 39. 5.
Vita hominis subito transvolat, and finis ejus initio fere est contiguus.
away, and our end is contiguous to our beginning. Remember how short my time
is, wherefore have thou made all men in vain? Truly unless we speedily turn to
God, and give up our selves to serve him, we seem made but in vain, our Psalm.
89. 47.
time is so short; hence (says David) God's hands having made him and fashioned
him, I made have and delayed not to keep thy commandments. Enoch walked with
God three hundred Psalm. 119. 60,
years, and was it Methuselah's years, which where above nine hundred, God
deserved them all, and infinitely more; but being so few, shall we still keep
from God more of these few, and give them to his and our worst enemies, to whom
we owe none at all; and if God have any, shall he have none but the worst, the
bran, the carcass, the lame, infirm service of old age? Offer it now Mal. 1. 7.
unto thy Governor. Some are indeed called at the eleventh hour, but how
quickly is it then night, and how little service is God then like to have? The
Devil, because his time is short, he hastens the more to do mischief; and wilt
not thou, to further thy own souls weal? Epicures say, Let us eat and drink,
for tomorrow we dye, but say thou the contrary, Let us turn to the Lord, for
tomorrow we dye, and remember, that upon this weak wire hangs the heaviest
weight, on this little moment depends a twofold eternity.

5. Our time here is very uncertain, it cannot be long, but it may be less than
you are aware of. If you do not repent today, you are not sure of tomorrow to
repent in, for who has given Prove. 27. 1.
you security of it? Boast not thyself of tomorrow, Nescis quid serus vesper
vehat.
for thou know not what a day may bring forth, no, nor an hour, not a
moment, it may bring thee to thy end, to the grave, and that Accidit in puncto,
quod non accedit in anno.
may happen the next moment, which never yet befell thee all thy life. It was a
wise answer of a grave person to this purpose, who being invited to a feast on
the morrow, answered, Of many years I have not had a morrow-day to promise to
myself. That rich man in the 12. of Luke, v. 19, 20. he counted indeed of many
years, but God called him fool for it, and tells him, that night his soul
should be required of him. If you do not get turned by conversion today, you
may before tomorrow be turned to destruction, and Psalm. 90. 31
your bodies may not only be turned into the Psalm. 9. 17.
grave, but your souls into hell; and what a sad Ne desperando peceata
augeamus, propositus est poenitentiae portus: nesperando augeamus, datus est
dies mortis incertus. Gerh.
turn will that be, and had you not need then set about and hasten the other?
Remember, your time is not in your hand, in your power, but in God's, he is
Lord of our time, and not we, to limit it, to lengthen it out, or cut it off as
he pleases; which made Austin to profess, that he would not for the gain of a
million of worlds be an Atheist for half an hour, because he knew not, but that
God might in that time take him away.

6. It is irrevocable, being once gone, it can by no means be recalled, no not
one moment; it passes and speeds away as an hasty headlong torrent, but never
repasses; it is swift, violent, Vestigia nulla retrorsum.
and constant in its progresses, without any the least intermission, stop, or
stay, but never admits of any the least retrogresses or going back; here is
always ebb, but never flood, always running forward, but never returning
backward. How many, when they have been dying, would have given a world for a
little time? and others have been heard crying day and night, Call time again,
call time again; and another in a dispairing condition cried out, Can you call
time again? if so, then there is hope; but it* cannot be, there is something
before of time to Post est occasio calva.
take hold of, but it is bald behind. And how should you hasten then to take
the present season? men do it for other matters, as the merchant for buying or
selling, the husbandman for sowing, etc. and only here will you be so foolish
as to let it slip, especially when it cannot be recalled.

7. The days are evil, and had ye not need then redeem the time? The days are
evil, because Ephesians. 5. 16.
we are evil, for the days are not morally evil, but evil men, and evil
manners make evil days, and the evil of sin procures the evils of troubles and
punishment; and our evils of sin Ezra 9. 6.
being so many, and so exceeding great, grown up even to the heavens, what
further evils of plagues and punishments may not we fear may be coming upon the
Land? And therefore what need had you to lay hold with all speed on the present
opportunity, and make the utmost advantage of it, as to the furthering this
great work?

8. There Is no doing any thing, as to this Quando istine excessum fuerit,
nullus jam locus poenitentiae, hic vita tenetur aut amittitur. etc. Cyprian.
great work, when you are gone hence, and therefore you had need to hasten, and
do what you can here; for if it be not done, you are undone for ever.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with might, for there is no work, nor
devise, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go: there all
work cease, the grave is the land of silence, this life is the time of
working, but death of cessation, not only do civil works cease then, as
buying, selling, trading, etc. but the religious also, as praying, hearing,
repenting, believing, etc. The time for these is only while you are upon the
earth, there are none of these in the grave, nor in hell; and therefore how
should you resolve to work the work of him that sent you, while it is day, for
when the night Joh. 9. 4.
comes no man can work.

9. You can never come hither again to do it; when once you are gone, there is
no return back. As the cloud is consumed, and vanishes away, so he Job 7. 9, 10.
that goes down to the grave shall come up no more. He shall return no more to
his house, neither shall his place know him any more. I shall behold Is. 38. 11.
man no more, with the inhabitants of the world. And, There is hope of a tree,
if it be cut Job 14. 7, 10.
down, that it will sprout again, etc. But man dies, and wastes away, yed man
gives up the ghost, and where is he? etc. no more here, where ever he is: not
that Job denied, or was ignorant Non negatur resurrectio ad vitam, sed ad
similem vitam: Pined.
of the resurrection* but he speaks it in regard of a natural life; he shall
come no more into this world, to live and dwell here amongst men as he did, or
to dispatch any work, no, if his work was not done before he went hence, he
cannot return again to do it, but it must cease for ever, death as to that
being the utter conclusion of man: he is gone, and returns no more, and had you
not need then to hasten to do your work, when (as Job speaks) after a few years
are come, it may be weeks, or days, or hours, you shall go Job 16. 22.
the way whence you shall not return.

10. The Scripture runs all upon Nows, and upon the present, as to this great
work. Acquaint now thyself with him, etc. Therefore also now Job 22. 21. Joel
2. 12.
says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart, etc. and, Return ye
now every one from Jer. 18. 11.
his evil way. God does not only command the duty, and makes it every man's
duty, but prescribes also the time, that it be now, that it be forthwith,
without any further delay. But now commands all men every where to repent:
and, Act. 17. 30.
If thou will return, O Israel, says the Lord, return, that is, presently:
and, To day if ye will Jerem. 4. 1.
hear his voice, etc. See also Eccles 12. 1. Math. 5. 25. Isa. 21. 11, 12. etc.

11. The not doing what you are to do at present, as to this great work, makes
Gods putting a price into your hand in vain, and to no purpose. Why? because
you do not employ it, nor improve it, and so to what purpose is it? it is all
one as if you had none. Wherefore (says Solomon) Prove. 17. 16.
is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart
to it? Now to repent and turn to God is your wisdom, and you have at present a
price in your hand for to get it; a price of time, strength, parts, gifts,
means, and opportunities of grace, but to what purpose, seeing you have no
heart to it, nor to improve the present price that is in your hand for to get
it. Whereunto do opportunities and advantages of gettting good serve, unless
improved? Say a man wanted some necessary commodity; that he could not be
without, but must perish, if he get it not; and not having wherewith to procure
it, another should put a price into his hand* now to what purpose was this, if
he be yet such a fool as not to lay it out, but perish with a price in his
hand, had it not been better he had none? To every thing there is a season,
Eccles. 3. 1.
and a time to every purpose under heaven; and so for this, but what are any
the near if they let it slip, and have no heart, as to what they should improve
it for? which is wisdom, saving conversion, and so salvation; and what should a
man have an heart to, if not to these?

12. The not hearkening to God, now at present while he calls, does much
provoke his wrath, and aggravate your sins, and will augment your misery. For
who are we, that we should not presently stoop to, and obey, the call of so
great a Majesty, especially in what is so much our own concern? Because (says
he) I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man
Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, etc.
regarded. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would have none of my
reproof. I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes,
etc. And this was the heavy aggravation of Jezebel's fornication, that God gave
her space to repent, but she repented not: and so Rev. 2. 21. -- 9. 20.
of those, who though not killed by former plagues, yet repented not of the
works of their hands: and Solomon tells us, that because to every purpose there
is time and judgment, therefore Eccles. 8. 6.
the misery of man is great upon him. But how is man's misery therefore great?
is it not rather a mercy? yes, but his misery is therefore great, because he
either is so blind that he cannot see it, or else so careless and negligent,
that he lets it slip. For man also knows not his -- 9. 12.
time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are
caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it
falls suddenly upon them; they know not in this their day the things which
belong unto their peace, at least not practically, not savingly, so as Luke 19.
41, 42, etc.
to pursue them, till they are hid from their eyes, which is so sad, as that it
made Jesus Christ himself to weep over Jerusalem; and the neglecting such
opportunities given to sinners, for the good of their souls, will certainly be
another day as a dagger at their hearts, when they shall see how wilfully and
foolishly they have ruined their own precious souls, in delaying to make Cum
nihil morte certius, ac hora mortis incertius, quomodo quis audebit, sciens ac
volens in tanto remanere periculo, per quod incurrere potest aeternam poenam.
etc. Gerh.
use of those helps they had, to have prevented it; and that they should be so
strangely besotted, and as it were bewitched, not to look after that which so
infinitely concerned them, till it was too late. And therefore as you love your
souls, and tender your salvation, delay no longer, but forthwith set upon the
work, and dare not to go one step further in those dangerous ways, in which
while you go on, hell is gaping for you, and utter destruction is ready to come
upon you, yea and which, unless you turn from, you cannot escape. O seek ye the
Lord while he Is. 55. 6.
may be found, and call ye upon him while he is near: and, Give glory to the
Lord, before he Jer. 13 16. 2 Cor. 6. 2.
cause darkness, etc. -- Behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation. Remember the watchman's answer, when he was enquired of, as
concerning the night: Watchman, what of the night? watchman, what of the night?
The Is. 21. 11, 12.
watchman said, the morning comes, and also the night, yea it hastens, and it
will quickly come upon you, and therefore (says he) if ye will enquire, enquire
ye, return, come, that is, do it speedily, least the night surprise you: O to
day, and while it is called to day (as the holy Ghost says) hearken to his
voice, else know, if you shall still despise the grace and mercy of God
inviting you to repent, you will be sure to find, and feel too, his power in
punishing you, for refusing to repent. Thus though you cannot convert your
selves, nor of your selves turn again to God, yet there are several things you
see, which you may, yea and ought, for to do, as in reference to this turn, and
which if you do not do, you will be found wholly without excuse, and
self-destroyers, and your blood will be upon your own heads, because you did
not do what you might. For you must not think God should do all, and you do
nothing; hence in Scripture conversion is spoken of, not only as Acts 11. 18.
2 Timothy 2. 25. etc.
God's work, as most truly and properly it is, but in some sense as man's, he
really endeavoring it, and making use of all ways and means Ezekiel. 33. 18.
Zach, 1. 3. etc.
prescribed to further it; not that we can turn our selves, but that we to our
utmost use the best means, and take the most effectual course, for to do, that
in some sense we may be said to do. And thus, though the work of conversion be
properly God's work, yet, as one well observes, it is sometimes ascribed to our
selves, that we should not be negligent; sometimes to Ministers and
instruments, to show we must not contemn their help; and sometimes to God, that
we may not be self-confident, or unthankful. And the great reason indeed why
sinners do not repent, nor turn from their sins to God, is not because they
cannot (though they cannot) but because they will not: for they think they can,
and yet will not, nay they will not try whither they can or no, nor use the
power which God has given them; they can do more than they do, but will not do
it, they are slothful and negligent, and will not set themselves to use all the
means they might; and besides, they are content with their Cannots, and
therefore they may thank themselves that they perish, and do not repent nor
turn to God. But for farther satisfaction as to this great point, I shall refer
the Reader to that excellent Tract of Mr. William Fenner, called, Wilful
impenitency the greatest self-murder, and shall here answer an objection that
may arise in our way, viz. this, that if we cannot convert our selves, nor turn
again to the Lord, why are we then so often called upon, and exhorted to this,
as if it was in our power? To this I answer: 1. It is true indeed, we cannot
turn our selves, no, we may as soon create a world as do it, the work of
Conversion is a greater work than the work of Creation, and man that cannot so
much as make one hair of his head black or white, nor add one cubit to his
stature, nor do the less, how should he do the greater? And therefore for any
to interpret those Texts, that call upon man to turn to God, as if it was in
man's power to convert himself, as the Papists, Arminians, and some others do,
it is to misinterpret and pervert the true sense and meaning of them. But 2.
though we cannot convert our selves, yet that we are so often exhorted, and
called upon to do that which is not in our power to do, viz. to turn to God, it
is not in vain.

For 1. these mind us and show us our duty, not our ability, what we are, and
ought to do, A praecepto ad posse, non valet consequentia, sed docet quid fieri
debeat, etc.
not what we are able to do; what must be done, not what we can do; they are a
measure not of our power, but point out to us our duty, which we once had
ability to, but wilfully deprived our selves of; but that does not hinder, but
that God may yet require his own.

2. They are to convince us of our impotency Si in manu nostra positum esset,
quicquid Deus requirit, supervacua esset, gratia Spiritus sancti.
and inability, that so in, and under the sense thereof, we might be humbled
and laid low, and look out for ability and help elsewhere; which had we of our
selves, the grace of the Spirit would be in vain, and of no use.

3. Though we cannot convert our selves, yet these exhortations, calls, and
commands, are not in vain, for God many times works in them, and by them, and
makes them effectual as to the work, as to turn sinners again; they are ways
and instruments, in and by which the Spirit puts forth his power, and comes
into the heart. As when God at first said, Let there be light, there was light,
and when Christ said to Lazarus, come forth, he came forth; thus God many times
by his Spirit, and grace, and the secret virtue and power thereof* is pleased
so effectually to operate in and by those means, as to make them effectual as
to that great work: so that while a man speaks to the ear, he many times speaks
to the heart, and does so accompany what is spoken, with his own power, as to
make it the power of God to conversion and salvation; as while Peter spoke, the
holy Ghost Acts 10. 44. -- 16. 14.
fell on them which heard the word, and as Paul was preaching, and Lydia
hearing, the Lord opened her heart. Thus such as are dead, attending on the
means of life, come to be quickened, and live, according to that, Hear, and
your Is. 55. 3.
soul shall live, etc. and God in speaking, does at once both direct what to
do, as also enable for to do it, calls and converts, counsels and makes to
obey, and comply, etc. says, turn, and he turns, and be converted, and converts.

4. Though we cannot convert our selves, yet Deus jubet quae non possumus, ut
noverimus quid ab eo petere debeamus. Aug.
there are several things, as you have heard, that we may do, as in reference
to conversion; for God does not exhort, nor call upon men as a company of
stocks and stones, but as such as are capable of the use of such means, and
directions, which he gives them.

5. If we understand these places of those already Acti agimus, and hoc been
agimus, quod a bono agimur.
turned and converted, they may cooperate in further turning, though they
cannot at first turn themselves; not begin it, yet being begun, they may and
ought to carry it on. A supernatural life being infused into the soul, we may
spiritually move, and being first acted and wrought upon by God, we may further
act, and work upon our selves.

6. Though we cannot convert our selves, yet if we seek to the Lord, he is both
able, and also ready and willing for to help us, he is God all-sufficient as in
and to himself; so at all times, and in all things, as to others, as he said to
Paul, his grace is sufficient for us, his accepting, free, and favoring grace,
as I said before, against our unworthiness, and his powerful operating grace
against our weakness, and his strength is made perfect in weakness, and he is
very ready to put it forth. Turn you at my reproof, behold, I will pour out my
Spirit unto you, etc. What he commands Prove. 1. 23.
in one place, he makes promise of in another.

CHAP. XII. Motives to turn to God.
INdeed to add further motives here might seem needless, there being so much
in the words themselves to move us to this, it being (as ye have heard, and had
it abundantly confirmd') the only way for a people to be saved, and that in
the largest sense, and utmost extent thereof: but that I may the more yet
prevail, as to that wherein we are all so infinitely concerned, both as to our
own and the Nations weal, I shall propound to your serious consideration these
following motives.

1. The equity and reasonableness thereof, how just, and right, and meet, and
equal a thing it is, that we should turn again to God, as Elihu bespeaks Job,
Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not
offend any Job 34. 31, 32.
more. That which I see not, teach thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do
no more. Surely, having by departing from God and his ways, done so great wrong
and injury both to God and our selves, what can be more meet, and matter of
greater equity, than that we should break off, and amend, and not go on still
to pervert our ways as we have done, especially his chastening hand being upon
us. See how the Lord argues, as to the equity and reasonableness of this, in
that famous place, Jer. 8. 4. Moreover thou shall say unto them, thus says the
Lord, shall they fall, and not arise, shall he turn away, and not return? In
the three first verses of this chapter, we have grievons judgments denounced
against the Jews, both dead and alive: such as were dead, though great ones,
should not be suffered to lie quietly in their graves. At that time Jer. 3. 1.
says the Lord, they shall bring out the bones of the Kings of Judah, and the
bones of the Princes, etc. and, death shall be chosen rather than life, v. 3.
by all the residue of them that remain, etc. And now the Lord the more to
manifest the equity of his proceedings in this severity toward them, declares
the folly and unreasonableness of their proceedings, running on headlong
without stop or stay, in those ways that tended to their utter ruin and
destruction; and the Lord reasons the case with them, Thus says the Lord,
shall they v. 4.
fall and not arise, shall he turn away and not return? Is there any man so
absurd, so witless, so void of sense and reason, who being fallen will not
willingly arise, or at least assay to get up, and be glad of such as would
offer him their help? or that having gone astray, would not gladly come again
into the right way? A man may indeed unawares, and through inadvertency, miss
his way and go astray, yea but will he not desire to come into his way again,
and be willing and glad to receive direction from those who would set him
therein? and why then do not this people do so? why, having fallen by their
sin, do they refuse to arise, or to be raised again, by those that take pains
with them to that purpose? and why, having wandered and gone out of the right
way, do they go on still pertinaciously in the same, refusing to return or to
be reduced? why does this people thus act? even quite contrary to the usual way
and manner of men in such a case. Thus the Lord makes application of this to
the people, Why then is v. 5.
this people slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? why, having gone out of
the right way, and being in a wrong way, so prejudicial to themselves, will
they thus still persist in it? they v. 6.
hold fast deceit, they refuse to return, I hearkened and heard; this shows
God's earnest desire of their repentance, being a phrase borrowed from men, who
are wont diligently to listen after what they much desire to hear; but they
spoke not aright, no nor acted aright, for it follows, no man repented him of
his wickedness, saying what have I done? they, it may be, complain^d what
others had done or did, but none said what have I done? every one turned to his
course, as the horse rusheth into the battle, that is, fiercely, fearlesly,
presumptuously, neither regarding their duty, nor danger, neither my command,
nor their own safety. Thus in stead of turning from evil, they still run
headlong, and with an impetuous eagerness into evil, and will not be curbed nor
restrained, but will on. And how unrighteous and unreasonable, and against all
equity is this? and hence wicked men are called unreasonable men, 2 These. 3. 2.
And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, who still go in
their sins without remorse, and refuse to return. And if sinners will not see
the equity of this now, of turning again to God, so as to return, they shall so
see and feel the iniquity of it hereafter, as to fill them with shame and
astonishment. O that they should be so sottish, so absurd and unreasonable, as
being fallen not to arise, as being out of the way not to turn into it again!
The sottishness and unreasonableness of this is such, and so great, that the
Lord (...)
in the very next verse, calls the very unreasonable creatures to witness
against it, and i^pannels as it were a Jury of Storks, and Turtles, and v. 7.
Cranes, and Swallows to condemn it. Yea the Stork in the heaven knows her
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the
time of their coming, but my people Ab irrationalibus auget accusationem,
etenim norunt volucres varietatem temporum, and nunc huc, nunc illuc
transvolantes, reperiunt natura quae sunt usui, etc. Theodoret.
know not the judgment of the Lord. The brute creatures do by a natural
instinct, know and betake themselves to what is for their good, and safety, but
my people (for so they will needs be called) know not the judgment of the Lord,
that is, they heed it not, at least so as to practice what the Lord out of his
Word has prescribed them for their good and safety; or they do not perceive,
though by all marks and tokens they might, what the Lord intends to bring upon
them, or atleast not so, as by repentance to prevent it. Those brute creatures
indeed, the Stork, and the Turtle, etc. they, when sharp weather is coming,
avoid it by flying where it is warmer; but my people they will persist, and go
on as they did, and rather dye and perish, than alter their course, and get
into a better state, get under the warm and comfortable beams of my favor; so
that this people act in a Sphere, and at a rate below Brutes; they were made
above them, but they make themselves inferior to them; God has put them under
their feet, and they set them as judges above their heads. O how woefully is man
degenerate, how wonderfully! even reasonless creatures act more reasonably than
they; for they when the season grows
sharp, and the weather cold and stormy, knowing if they abide where they are,
they are like to starve and perish with cold and hunger, they change their
quarters, and fly to some milder and warmer Region; but this people are so
sottish and senseless, that whatever storms of wrath and divine vengeance hang
over them, as ready to fall upon them, and overwhelm them, yet will not they
change their minds, nor manners, nor mend their ways nor works, but continue
the same they were, and go on to do as they did, say I, or do I what I will.
And hence says the Lord, how do ye say we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is
with us? Piscator reads it, how dare you? as if the Lord had said, with Quomodo
dicere audetis, Sapientes sumus, etc.
what face can ye say, we are wise? you wise? away for shame, say not so, do
not you talk of wisdom, who act below Storks and Turtles, etc. that have not so
much wit nor forecast as they, but are more unreasonable and senseless than
those reasonless creatures: you wise, when the very fowls of the air are wiser
than you? and you talk of the law of God, that act below the dictates of the
law of nature? O with what shame and confusion of face for ever will this fill
the faces of sinners another day, when they shall see and be forced to
acknowledge, that though reasonable creatures, yet they acted not with that
reason and equity, as the reasonless creatures did, yea the Stork, etc. We all
apostatized and ran away from God in Adam, but in Baptism we gave up our selves
to God again, we swear as it were fidelity to him, and yet we have gone again
away from him, fled from our colors, and run into his and our enemies camp;
and as nothing is more requisite, so is any thing more reasonable, or equal,
than that we should turn back again unto him, our true Lord and Master? It was
well said of her, not only in point of commodity, but in Hos. 2. 7.
point of equity, not only as being profitable, Hebr. (...) rectitudinem ejus,
i. e. resipiscentiam. Rectum enim est, ut homo de peccatis suis admonitus,
praesertim a Deo resipiscat. Pisc.
but as being right and reasonable. I will go and return to my first husband,
for then was it better with me than now. So of the Prodigal, Luke 15. 18. I
will arise and go to my father, etc. O we can never do what is just, and right,
and equal, and reasonable, unless we do this, turn unto God again. Hence this
is called man's uprightness, or man's equity, -- To show unto man his
uprightness. The Hebrew is, his rectitude, or Job 3^. 2^.
rightness, which Piscator retains, as that he judges best; understanding by
this rightness of man, his repentance, it being most right, just, and equal,
that man being admonished, and that by God himself of his sins, should repent
and turn to him.

2. The excellency and honourableness thereof. 1. In its own nature, it being a
grace, a Gospel-saving grace, and all grace is excellent. 2. In its Author, it
being of God, his work, his gift. 3. In its rise, and root, which is that
precious grace of faith. 4. In regard of the object, and that both turned from,
and turned to: for in repentance we turn from darkness, and turn to sight; from
sin and Satan, and turn to God, Conversionem ad Deum. Beza. Acts 20. 21 Psalm
95. 3. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
hence called repentance toward God, or as Beza renders it, conversion to God:
and such a God, a great God, and a great King above all Gods, the living and
true God, the blessed and only potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, upon whose head are many Crowns,
the most high God, possessour Genesis 14. 19, 20.
of heaven and earth; the God of glory, who is clothed with honor and majesty,
whose name alone is excellent, and is to be praised from Ps. 113. 3.
the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same; yea whose glorious name
is exalted above Neh. 9. 5.
all blessing and praise. Thousand thousands minister unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stand before him. Behold the Nations are Dan. 7. 10.
as a drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the Balance; yea
they are all before him as nothing, and they are counted to him less than
nothing and vanity. And Lebanon is not sufficient Is. 40. 15, 16, 17.
to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering. And to such a
God it is that we -- 10. 21.
turn, when we do indeed turn again, the remnant shall return, even the remnant
of Jacob to the mighty God. O Israel, return to the Lord Hos. 14. 1. Zach. 1. 3.
thy God, etc. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, turn Acts 14. 15.
ye unto me, etc. And we preach unto you (says the Apostle) that ye should turn
from these vanities to the living God, who made heaven and earth, etc. And it
is said of the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1. 9.
that they turned from Idols, to serve the living and true God. And, I will
arise, says the Prodigal, and go to my father, and what a noble, generous, and
excellent thing is that whereby we do this. Turn from sin and Satan to God, and
such a God, and our God and heavenly father; turn from misery to our felicity,
from the great and only true evil, to the chief good; from darkness to light,
from death to life, from earth, yea from hell, to heaven, from swine and husks
Luke 15. 18.
to bread enough in our fathers house, from feeding on ashes to feed on Angels
food, heavenly Poenitentia dicitur conversio ad Deum, inter quem and nos
dissidium faciunt peccata. Tossan.
viands; from among murderers to the God of mercies, from the crooked vile ways
of sin to the even and excellent ways of holiness, from ways of danger to ways
of safety, of trouble, to ways of peace, of bitterness, to ways of
pleasantness, of wasting and destruction to ways of weal and salvation; from
broken cisterns that can hold no water, to springs of water, yea to the
fountain of living waters; from a wilderness, and a land of deserts, drought,
and the shadow of death, to a fruitful refreshing Paradise. In a (...). Damasc.
word, from sin, which has in it nothing but guilt, and filth, and stain, and
torment, and curse, and death, and condemnation, to God, who is the sole and
sovereign spring and fountain of all good, of light, life, happiness, help,
comfort, consolation, salvation: and not only how equal, but how excellent is
this? yea, and this makes it not only our duty, but highest dignity to turn
again, it being to God, and such a God; from what is most vile, to an object so
infinitely worthy. It is best of all indeed not to sin, but next to repent, and
turn from sin to God, who Justin. Martyr.
is such a God the most high, and most excellent: -- they called them to the
most high. Hos. 11. 7.
5. In its fruits and effects, and in its end and issue. What excellent things
are those the Apostle reckons up, as following upon conversion? What fruit
(says he) had ye then in those things, Romans 6. 21, 22.
whereof ye are now ashamed, for the end of those things is death. But now
being made free from sin, and become servants of God, ye have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life. O what a blessed change, and what an
excellent turn is here? before servants of sin, now servants of God; before
fruit unto unrighteousness, now unto holiness; before, the end, death, now
everlasting life. 1. Here Is the excellentest freedom, to be made free from sin.
2. The excellentest service, to become servants to God. 3. The excellentest
fruit, fruit unto holiness: and 4. the excellentest end, and that is
everlasting life. O there is not nobler service performed, excellenter fruit
growing, nor a happier end to be attained, in heaven it self. And this follows
upon our being turned again, which makes at once the sinner happy, heaven
merry, hell sorry, the Devils sad, Angels glad, the Saints to rejoice on earth,
yea and all those celestial Heroes in Heaven; and how excellent must that needs
be, that does all this? and therefore to its difficulty oppose its excellency,
and excellent things are difficult, but much to be preferred before (...) --
Facilis descensus ad orcum.
things that are easy, but base, and vile. Job speaking of such as were base,
and acted vile things, he tells us they had no helper, or as the Job 30. 13.
Dutch, they needed no helper, that is, to execute their vile intentions: no,
the work was easy enough, they could do it of themselves, but it was base,
vile, mischievous, destructive work. But now to repent, and turn to God, and
honor him, and do good, is hard and difficult; here we need helpers, help both
from God and man: but how infinitely is the one with all its difficulty, to be
preferred before the other with all its facility? It is a thousand times more
eligible to be laboring for Diamonds, than lazing in the dirt; to be sweating
in a Golden Mine, than idling and at ease in the mire; to be toyling for
treasures, than toyling for straws; better is the straight gate and narrow way
that leads to life, than the wide gate and broad way, that leads to death.
Verae and salutaris poenitentiae fructus multiples. etc. Gerh.


3. The utility thereof, the profit, benefit, and commodities that accrue to
the sinner thereby; and these are so many as cannot be enumerated, and so great
as cannot be commensurated, so that if any should ask; what advantage then has
he that turns to God? or what profit is there of Repentance? I must answer as
the Apostle Paul does in another case, much every way. And when a soul turns
again indeed to God, it may be said, as Leah said when Gad was born, A troop,
or company comes. O how many mercies blessings, and benefits, come and throng
in then upon the convert? To turn from sin it is Clavis viscerum Dei.
(says one) a key to unlock all the chests of God's mercies, and a preservative
against all miseries. How many mercies are heaped up together, in Hos. 6. 1. 2.
Come, and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us,
he has smitten, and he will bind up. After two days will he revive us, in the
third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Here Is healing
and binding up, and reviving and raising, and then living in God's sight: and
v. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is
prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter
and former rain unto the earth: that is, we shall experimentally know, and
taste, and see, that the Lord is gracious, and he in his gracious accesses to
our souls will be the same to them, as the Sun, and the former and latter rain
are to the earth. And how comfortable, profitable, refreshing, and reviving are
these? And, Thus says the Lord of hosts, turn ye unto me, and I Zach. 1. 3.
will turn unto you: and how much is wrapped up in that expression, turn unto
you? that is, mercifully, favorably, graciously, turn my pleasant face to you,
lift up the light of my countenance upon you, vouchsafe you my special grace
and favor, be reconciled to you, and at peace with you, I will pardon you,
bless you, do good to you, multiply all blessings upon you, and remove all
evils and plagues from you, yea turn all into good unto you, so that you shall
find and feel, and abundantly experience, the sweet fruits, and blessed effects
of my turning to you. Thus, when God turns to us, all good turns, he being the
fountain thereof; heaven and earth turn, happiness turns, the creature turns,
the Angels turn, the Gospel, and all the glory, and promises, and privileges
thereof, yea a full and overflowing all sufficiency of all good turn to us, and
all evil turns from us, all that is evil indeed; for afflictions, if they abide
with us, they are turned into good, yea all now work together for good to us.
So that amidst ails we are now without evil, and amidst harms without hurt,
and though six and seven troubles throng us, not any the least evil touches
Job 5. 19. Ps. 25. 10.
us, but all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth. Thus when we turn to God
with a holy turn, God turns to us with a gracious turn; and when God turns to
us, all good is afloat toward us, and all evil is ebbing and hastening from
us, and all in heaven and earth will become turned for our good. Deuteronomy. 30. 3.
The Lord tells Israel, that if they shall return to the Lord their God, then
the Lord their God will turn their captivity, and have compassion on them, and
will return, etc. But let me a little more particularly and distinctly hold
forth some of the benefits of this turn.

1. This is the great blessing of the Gospel, even the blessing that Jesus
Christ himself, being raised up, and exalted by his father, is sent to bless
with, in the preaching and dispensing thereof. Unto you first, God having
raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every Acts ^.
26. (...), si vos converteritis, etc. So Syriack and Arabic. etc.
one of you from his iniquities. Some indeed read it, if you turn, or every one
of you turning, etc. and so make being blessed, an argument and motive to turn.
And this is a true and a good sense, that when we turn away from our
iniquities, though not by any strength of our own, that then Jesus Christ will
bless us. But first Jesus Christ must bless us in turning us, before he bless
us being turned; and therefore others render it, as here, in turning you, as
declaring the way and manner how Christ blesses, and this agrees well with the
word bless; for iniquity being that alone which brings the curse, the only way
to be blessed must needs be to be turned from it: and while people are not turned
from their sins, but still go on impenitently in them, they cannot be blessed.
Thus conversion is the great Gospel-blessing, and the way to be further, yea
for ever blessed; and it prevents the curse, which else we cannot evade. And he
shall turn the heart of the fathers, etc. Least I come and smite the earth with
a curse. Mas. 4. 6.


2. Upon this follows that great, and glorious, and inestimable mercy and
privilege of pardon, that mercy of mercies which makes (...), and the want of
which makes hell, yea which if not enjoyed, every thing else (as one expresses
it) even our very boards and beds, and fields, and houses, are but as an hell
to us. David having been for a while under the sense of God's cispleasure, for
his sins, but feeling at length the Sunshine of God's favor breaking forth
through the clouds upon him in this mercy, O how jowfully does he break out!
and how admiringly does he speak of the blessedness of those who partake of so
great a mercy, of so glorious a privilege! Blessed is he whose transgression
Ps. 32. 1, 2.
is forgiven, whose sin is covered, that is, by the Lord; for man must not
cover it, but acknowledge it. Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes
not iniquity, etc. Blessed, or, as others, O blessed, O happy, or O the
blessednesses, or O welfares the man! it is a joyful acclamation for such a
man's felicity. Dutch read it, right happy, or happy indeed, he is so indeed
whose transgression is forgiven, etc. We have here in several words the same
benefit repeated, because of the greatness of it; and though here is Autology,
yet not Tautology: for these several Metaphorical expressions are wonderfully
comfortable. 1. Sin is a burden, and the first word signifies an easing, or
taking away, and blessed is he that is eased of such a burden. 2. Sin is most
loathsome, and filthy in the sight of God, and he is of purer eyes that he can
behold or look on it, but with utter detestation and abhorrence, and the second
word notes a covering of it, and a^^^tting it out of his sight; contrary to
that, Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance. To set us, our selves there, is our happiness; but to set our
sins there, is our woe and misery, and there cannot be a greater: And cover not
their Neh. 4. 5.
iniquity, etc. 3. Sin is a debt, and the third notes a not imputing or
reckoning it; and what a blessed thing is pardon, that does all this? does sin
trouble as a burden, pardon eases, and takes it off? as loathsome, pardon covers
it; as a debt, pardon does not impute it; and this follows upon repentance:
this privilege of remission, upon the grace of conversion, not as the cause of
it, but as the way and order in which God will have it to behad. And hence we
find them joined together Luke 24. 47. And that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his name, etc. Acts 5. 3. -- To give repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sin, etc. -- And be Joh. 12. 40.
converted, and I should heal them. Mark has it, c. 4. v. 12. And their sins
should be forgiven them, which is the souls healing. That Is a full place Acts
3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. The
former of these words, repent, seems to import conviction and contrition; the
latter, conversion and amendment; one repentance of sin, or for sin, the other
repentance from sin. And this is to repent indeed, to do both, to bewail what
we have committed, and not go on still to commit what we have bewailed: and
what follows upon this? the Deleta, non ut non sint, sed ut non imputentur,
propter imputatam sponsoris nostri obedientiam. Tossan.
blotting out of our sins; that your sins may be blotted out, that is,
pardoned; our sins are in Scripture compared unto debts, and these are
registered as it were in God's book, and there stand upon record; and now the
Apostle tells them, that if they did repent, and were converted, these debts
should be blotted out, God's Metaphora sumpta a creditoribus, qui debita, vel
interveniente satisfactione, vel gratis remissa, delent.
book crossed, all scores quit, and that handwriting, which was against them,
should be cancelled; which is so choice a privilege, and mercy of mercies, that
this, if there was no more, might seem motive enough to put people upon
repenting, and turning to God, that your sins may be blotted out, when the
times of refreshing (...).
shall come from the presence of the Lord. There are, by the way, times of
refreshing or cooling, (as the Greek has it) to come to the people of God,
after the heat of their afflictions, and persecutions, here compared to fire.
As there 1 Pet. 4. 12.
remains a rest for the people of God, so a time of cooling and refreshing; and
who would not long for it, in such a dry scorching place, and weary land, as
this world is? It is a figurative speech, and a fit Metaphor, especially as to
the condition of those Regions which were so exceeding hot, and where workmen
being even spent with heat, did retire into the cool shades for refreshing; and
this refreshing comes from the presence of the Lord, that is, from his special
gracious presence, or from his face, that is, the shines of his face, the
bright beams of his favor, the light of his countenance, and whence else
indeed should it come? that being the very spring and fountain of all
refreshings, there they are, and thence they flow. In his presence is Psalm 16.
11.
fullness of joy, etc. And this refers to the last day; for that day, which
shall be a day of such heat and scorching unto others, shall be a day of
cooling and refreshing to all such as repent and are converted, and that of far
greater than of the coolest shade to the weariest workman, that is even spent
and ready to faint for heat. But how is it said, that your sins may be blotted
out then? are they not blotted out before? yes, the meaning thereof is, that
then ye may find, and feel, and experience the comfort of their being blotted
out; and while others sins stand still upon record, and therefore to be
accounted for, the red lines of Christ's blood may then (as it were) be seen
drawn over yours, the comfort of which at that day will be more than the
possession of many worlds; and however it will be the heat of the day to
others, who yet persist and go on in their sins, this will make it the cool of
the day to all such, and as the most refreshing shadow after heat, yea much
more refreshing. And thus Diodate interprets it, not (says he) that the
remission of sins is put off till then, but because it shall then be publicly
declared, and bring forth its full effect of life and glory; and they shall
then be openly acquitted Ut non veniat Deus vobiscum in judicium, sed eum tunc
propitium habeatis. Toss:
before Angels and men, and God shall not enter into judgment with them, but
show himself gracious and propitions to them. Many indeed read this latter
clause otherwise, viz. and the times of refreshing shall come, or that they
(...), and venient, vel ut veniant. So the Syriack and Arabic; and others, as
Luther, Camerarius. Illud (...) pro (...) accipiunt, etc.
may come, and so make it another motive to conversion; and when sinners do
indeed repent, and turn to God, then and not till then is it, that times of
refreshing do come to them from the presence of the Lord, their sins, which
alone did interpose, being now removed. Others think it a defective kind of
speech, and that something should be supplied, viz. that when those times of
refreshing come, you also Elliptica oration etc. ut cum venerint tempora
refrigerii, vos sentiatis refrigerium, etc. Arcular.
may be refreshed, you may share in them: as all that truly repent, and are
converted are sure to do. 3. Upon this follows divine favor, which is better
than life: then he is gracious to him, and he will be favorable unto him, and
he shall Job 33. 24, 26, 28.
see his face; and his life shall see the light, and -- we shall live in his
sight. But I do but mention Hos. 6. 2.
this, because I have spoken of it before. 4. Audience of prayer: a great
privilege, a choice mercy. It is one of God's Attributes, that he is a God
hearing prayer, O thou that hear prayer, Psalm. 65. 2. -- 66. 18.
and such experience him as so. If (says David) I regard iniquity in my heart,
then indeed the Lord will not hear my prayer: no, he will never be a
prayer-regarding God to a sin-regarding sinner; but when a sinner comes to hate
sin in his heart, and abandon it in his life, then he will hear him, and accept
him and his prayers. Now we know (said that man that was born Joh. 9. 31.
blind) God hears not sinners. Why? in some sense we are all sinners, we have
sin, and are subject to sin, and so God should hear no man; but we are to
understand it of such as are in a state of sin, as love, live, and lie in sin,
and make a trade of sin, and go on in sin without remorse, and turning to God,
and such God hears not, but their very prayer is an abomination. And when ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine Prove. 15. 8. -- 28. 9. Is. 1. 15
Prove. 1. 28.
eyes from you; yea when you make many payers I will not hear, your hands are
full of blood; they shall call upon me, but I will not answer, etc. But
repenting sinners God hears; Manasseh was a great sinner, yet being greatly
humbled, and becoming a convert, he prayed, and God was entreated, 2 Chronicles. 33.
12.
and heard his supplication, etc. So when Ephraim bemoaned himself, I have
surely (says Jer. 31. 18.
the Lord) heard him, etc. and, Then shall thou Is. 58. 9.
call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am.
What wonderful condescension of the great God is here! as if he should say,
what would thou have? or what should I do? whatever it be, I am here ready to
do it for thee, or to communicate it to thee. The Lord is nigh to such as are
of a broken heart, Ps. 34. 1^.
etc. and, If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves,
and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, etc. yea such
shall have audience, and acceptance, though never so mean and contemptible in
the eyes of the world. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not
despise their prayer. That Ps. ^02. 17.
which we render destitute, others read desolate; the Dutch, wholly stripped;
Piscator and Junius, of the most naked, or of the poor shrub; the Nudatissimi.
Jun. Pisc.
Hebrew word signifies such a shrub as stands alone in the wilderness,
worthless, and unregarded, (...)
liable to every blast, and to be trodden Of the much afflicted, or altogether
destitute, and made naked of all help: so the word imports.
down by every beast; it comes of a word which signifies, he was naked, and the
doubling of the two radical Letters imports the intension of the signification,
as most naked, and most destitute, and stripped quite bare of all help and Eorum
qui sunt veluti myricae. -- humilesque myricae. Virg.
comfort, and yet the prayers of such are not despised, but heard and regarded
of God. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will Is. 41. 17. 1 King. 8. 38, 39.
hear them, etc. and what prayer or supplication soever be made, though never
so weak, though but a sigh, and by any man that shall know the the plague of
his own heart: then hear thou in Ps. 34. 6.
Heaven, etc. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, etc. And this is, as
I said, a choice mercy, a singular privilege, and in this God much favors and
honors a poor creature, and thus the Lord promises it, and thus the Saints
speak of it. I will set him on high, and how? -- 91. 14, 15.
he shall call upon me, and I will answer him: and, The Lord will hear when I
call unto him, and -- 4. 3. -- 116. 1. -- 102. 18.
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, etc. And hence it is said,
This shall be written for the generation to come, that God shall hear the
prayer of the destitute, it shall be set down in a book, and recorded, and so
published. 5. Upon this follows a fitness and aptness to receive the Word, and
the impressions thereof; for upon Ezekiel. 36. 26.
true conversion the stony heart is taken away, and there is given a heart of
flesh, that is, a soft or tender heart, easily admitting or receiving the Word;
it being like Wax to the Seal, and like Gideon's fleece, drinking in the dew
thereof, or like soft earth to the rain; whereas the hearts of such as are
impenitent and unconverted, are as rocks, and steep stony places, which shoot
off all without any impression. Josiah humbling himself, and his heart being
tender, what an impression had the words of the Law upon his 2 Chr. 34. 27.
heart? the hearts of such open, and the Word goes in, and there it comes to be
ingraffed, which is a choice mercy; whereas the contrary is the greatest
judgment, as a stony heart, an hard heart, and such is every impenitent heart,
it receives no impression of God's Word nor works, it yields neither to
precepts nor promises, nor threatenings nor admonitions, nor reprehensions nor
persuasions, neither to judgments nor mercies. But they refused to hearken,
etc. Let favor Zach. 7. 11. Is. 26. 10. -- 1. 5.
be shown to the wicked, yet will not he learn righteousness, and why should ye
be stricken any more? etc. The natural man receives not the things of God, he
neither believes them, nor yields to them. There may be some slight superficial
Non credit, nec cedit.
reception for a little while, as is said of the stony ground, but it is not
solid nor deep, so as to enter, root, and abide. The Word may have place among
them, but it has not (as Christ told the Scribes and Pharisees) place within
them, and therefore they sought to kill him. Joh. 8. 37.
That which is observed in Printing, is very appliable and considerable here,
viz* that the Paper which is to be printed upon, is not of it self, as it is
dry, and stiff, and stubborn, fit to receive impression; and therefore to
render it fit, it is several times drawn through the water, and so being
thoroughly moistened, mellowed, and made soft, it becomes fit, and truly so it
is with our hearts, as they are by nature, and of themselves, and much more by
custom in sin, they are hard and stiff, and stubborn, very unfit to receive any
impression of God's truth; but being drawn as it were through the waters of
repentance, and so mellowed, and made soft, and tender, they become fit. Thus
the repenting Corinthians became 2 Cor. 3. 3.
Christ's Epistle, for their hearts being made tender, the Gospel was wrote upon
them with ease; and so the hearts of the Romans Romans 6. 17.
were cast into the Word as into a Mould, bearing the stamp and figure of it.
Solomon says, A reproof Prove. 17. 10.
enters more into a wise man, than a hundred stripes into a fool; his heart
opens, and yields to reproof. Salt enters not into a Stone, but it does into
flesh, and seasons it, and makes it savoury; and so do reproofs, which are as
Salt unto hearts of flesh; such sit down as it were at God's feet, and hear his
words, and they are willing and pliable, and their language is, Lord, what will thou have me to do? and, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, etc. 6. Upon this
follows inheritance among them which are sanctified. To open Acts 26. 18.
their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance,
etc. What an excellent thing is repentance here described to be, an opening of
the eyes, and a turning (as you have heard) the sinner from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, and then what inestimable benefits do
follow thereupon? not only forgiveness of sin, as you have heard, but
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Christ, that
is, a lot in the heavenly inheritance, in that inheritance of the Saints in
light, which now they are made meet for, being delivered from the power of
darkness, and translated into Col. 1. 12, 13.
the Kingdom of God's dear son, an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and
that fades not away, reserved in heaven, of which such glorious things are
spoken; which is of God's own preparing, Christ's purchasing, and that by no
less price than his blood, which has the glory of God, and where not only
Angels but God himself dwells, and resides for ever: and into this all true
converts have entrance ministered unto them, but no other shall or can, but are
without. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, and who Psalm. 24. 3, 4.
shall stand in his holy place? he that has clean hands, and a pure heart,
etc. The wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of Prove. 3.
35.
fools. And thus some interpret that in the Acts, 3. 19. That your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord, that is, that your sins being blotted Ut remissis peccatis vestris
recipiamini in coelum ad fruendum aeternis gaudiis, etc. Pisc.
out or forgiven, you may be received into heaven to partake of those eternal
joys, etc. And hence true repentance is said to be repentance unto life, and
repentance unto salvation, and therefore not to be repented of; not as if it
was the cause, or did in the least merit life or salvation, Acts 11. 18. 2 Cor.
7. 10.
for ipsae lachrymae lachrymabiles sunt, our very tears need washing, and our
repentance pardon, Non agit de causa salutis, sed eventu poenitentiae, and
ordinem ostendit, quod nimirum conversis donetur remissio, non securis, and
impoenitentibus. Tossan.
but as the end of it, and the way and means God has appointed to lead to it.
This is that Rainbow, which if God sees shining in our hearts, he will never
drown our souls.

Thus you see what a profitable and gainful thing repentance is, and I have the
longer stood upon this, because we are all for gain and profit. -- Who will
show us any good? and shall we not then be for that, which tends to so much
Psalm. 4. 6.
and so great gain and good, yea to all good, even the greatest. Art thou
enquiring after good? O he has showed thee here O man, what is good Micah 7. 8.
indeed, even that which the Lord requires of Job 22. 21.
thee, viz. for to repent and turn to him, for thereby good shall certainly
come unto thee. David prays, that God would show him a token for Psalm. 86. 17.
good, and here is a token for Good indeed, when God turns thee again to himself
for all good, for spiritual, and temporal, and eternal, for good every where
here and hereafter, on earth and in heaven, below and above, in our way and at
our journeys end, in our exile and in our own country, while we are abroad and
when we come home to our fathers house; for godliness (which is the very
essence of repentance) is profitable unto all things, having promise of the
life 1 Timothy 4. 8*
that now is, and of that which is to come. What man is he that desires life,
and loves many Psalm. 34. 12, 13, 14.
days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from
speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do good, etc. And O that God would
vouchsafe this token for good to England* to this Nation, and to the whole of
the Nation, to Court, and City, and Country, to every town, and fellowship,
and family, yea to every house, and heart! how would the Lord then give that
which is good, and glory should Ps. 85. 9, 12.
dwell in our Land, and we should be exalted and brought into an happy state
indeed! but never let any expect good, or talk of gain, or profit, that still
persist and go on in their sins, for such find no good, he that has a froward
heart, finds Pro. 17. 20.
no good, or a perverse heart, and that goes on Perversus animo non consequetur
bonum.
still to pervert his ways, he finds no good, he shall be sure to find and feel
evil enough, be filled Pro. 12. 21.
with mischief, but finds no good, he may, goods, but no good, no true good nor
gain, but such are all upon the losing hand, yea are all the greatest losers
imaginable; for such lose all true joy, peace, and comfort here, and Heaven,
and happiness, and God himself for ever hereafter, yea their own souls, and
what is a man profited, should he gain a whole world, if he lose his own soul?
Certainly then the sinners way and course, that yet persists and goes on in his
sins, is the most unprofitable way and course under Heaven, -- The way of
transgressors is hard, or Pro. 13. 15.
sharp, harsh, grievous, it may seem easy at present, Via praevaricatorum
aspera, duriter ^ Deo excipiuntur* etc. Cart.
but it will be sure to be found hard at last in the event, not only not
profitable, but pernicious, such shall be used hardly.

4. The absolute and indispensable necessity thereof. Our turning again to God
is not a thing arbitrary, or indifferent, but indispensably necessary. Is to be
blessed by Christ necessary? is pardon? is the favor of God? the shines of his
face, the light of his countenance necessary? is to be happy? in a word, is
heaven, is salvation, is eternal life, and inheritance among them that are
sanctified, necessary? is, not to perish everlastingly necessary? and if these
be not, what is? certainly and undoubtedly they are most necessary, and if so,
then is it to repent and turn to God indispensably necessary; for without the
one there is no attaining the other. There is a double necessity, 1. a
necessity in regard of God's 1. Necessitas praecepti.
command, the great God injoyns it, and calls for it, and that frequently and
earnestly; it may seem needless to mention places, there are so many every
where obvious, and therefore there is only one which I shall press and urge at
present, and that is Acts 17. 30, 31. And the times of this ignorance God
winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent, because he has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the Dei praecipientis majestas.
world in righteousness, etc. Here Is that which shows it indispensably
necessary, God's command, Bonum est poenitere? an non? quid revolvis? Deus
praecipit, etc. Tertull.
and the majesty and greatness of that God who commands it. Is it good (says an
Ancient) to repent, or not? why doubtest thou? God commands it, it is his will,
etc. Such was the state of those former times, that God is said to wink at
them, which may have a double interpretation, (...), pati, sinere.
and both are well worthy our weighing and considering; 1. as denoting God's
indulgence, he did not deal so severely with them sinning, but did patiently
bear with them, as though he had known nothing, or was not angry, etc. because
they had not those means and helps to keep them from sin, as others now in
these knowing times, there being then much blindness, darkness, and ignorance;
yet not as if there were any such times as God wholly winked at, in point of
justice, so as not to call them to account, but comparatively, he not so
severely dealing with them as with knowing times, but never so as to let them
wholly go unpunished, or not at all to call them to an account, for that was
inconsistent with his providence and justice; for though ignorance and darkness
may indeed abate and lessen the measure and degree of sin, yet not totally
excuse it. And what then are the sins of these knowing times, and days of so
much clear light, as we live in? how shall God wink at our sins, or how is it
that he has winked at them so long? O the infiniteness of his patience, that
he should bear with us so long, and not utterly consume us, who sin against
more light and love than ever Nation did! O when shall the riches of such
goodness, forbearance, and long suffering, lead us to repentance? But there is
another sense and interpretation (...) negligere LXX. usurpant pro indignari,
etc.
of these words, which some rather embrace, as more fully laying open the
meaning of the holy Ghost; and as most consonant to what follows, And the times
of this ignorance God winked at, that is, he regarded not, he had little
respect to them of those times, but let them go on in their sins, as it were
without check, or control, that is, he sent none among them to call and invite
them to better, but suffered them to walk in their own ways, and to go to hell
in their Acts 14. 16.
Idolatries; God did not manifest his will to to them, as he did to the Jews,
and thus the old Translation has it, God regarded not, Dutch reads it,
overlooked, or disrespected, lightly and slightly past them by, his eye was not
upon them for good, so as to provide for them, and send amongst them those that
should call and invite them to repentance, as he does now. The word is the same
that is used Acts 6. 1. and it signifies to despise, neglect, look over, or
besides, because their widows were neglected. So that to have an eye upon a
place or person, it being to manifest kindness and respect, this winking seems
to be Psalm. 33. 18. -- 34. 15.
opposed to favor rather than justice, viz. that God disregarded them,
overlooking them, or besides them, and not at them in mercy. And de Dieu, upon
the place, shows, that it signifies God's anger and displeasure against them,
and therefore hid the means of salvation from them: so that here not only is
God's command of repentance made known, but the goodness of God in pressing the
same, etc. And truly it is very sad in this sense, for God to look over, or
look besides a place or people, not so to regard times, and show that care of
them and respect toward them, as to send those among them that should call and
invite them to repentance. But England has nothing to charge God with, as to
this; if this be to manifest respect to a people, never had Nation clearer nor
fuller demonstrations thereof then we have had. And this sense and
interpretation of the words does best agree with the sequel, but now commands
all men every where to repent, and therein manifests more grace and favor; he
does not now leave nor let men alone to go on in their sins, and walk in their
own ways, as formerly, but many are now sent forth to call and invite them to
repentance, to reclaim sinners, and to reduce wandering prodigals, crying, Turn
ye, turn ye, and return, return. Repentance and remission of sins is now
preached in Christ's name, and many show here and there, and where ever they
come, that men should repent and turn to God, etc. So that now the great God
does not only command all men every where to repent, but the holy Ghost
specifies it here as a choice mercy, and singular favor and privilege, that he
does so, and that beyond what he vouchsafed to former ages, and the times of
this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent;
and truly, next to true repentance, and saving conversion it self, this is the
choicest mercy, and greatest and highest privilege, that God can betrust a
place or people with, and this is the clearest and amplest demonstration of
God's regard and respect to times that he can give, for God to send his
messengers up and down, here and there, in his name, to command, and invite,
and call upon people to repent, and turn to God, to cry as those Prophets of
old, Thus says the Lord of hosts, turn ye now from your evil ways, Zach* 1. 4.
and from your evil doings, etc. and, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for
why will ye die? and as that blessed Martyr, Repent O England, repent, repent:
this is the fruit of God's compassion 2 Chr. 36. 15.
on a people, and in this the tender mercy of Luke 1. 77, 78, 79*
God, yea the very bowels of his mercy do break forth, and display themselves;
and to despise and reject such mercy, to kick against such bowels, causes the
wrath of the Lord to arise against a people, till there is no remedy, for if,
says 2 Chronicles. 36. 16, 17.
Christ, I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin, that is, in
comparison, their sin Joh. 15. 22.
had not been so grievous as now it is, but they might have had some excuse,
because of their ignorance, but now they have no cloak or pretense for their
sin. Thus that the great and most high God commands us to repent, not only
should his sovereign authority therein awe us, and have a strong influence upon
us to obey, but the regard and respect also which therein he manifests to us,
and the care which he shows he has therein of our souls: and this is here
subjoyned as one reason why he now commands all men every where to repent, v.
31. because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. There is a day
of judgment set, a great and terrible day, in which God will judge the world,
and he has given assurance thereof to all men: and now God would have it well
with men at that day, that they might be found then in peace, and that it might
be a day of refreshing to them, and to that end he now commands them all every
where to repent, and to turn to him, without which he knows it will be a sad
day to them, a day of perdition and destruction: and therefore is he still
long-suffering toward us, not from slackness, but from a willingness that none
of us should perish, but that we should all come to repentance, and so be
saved. And what a great mercy, and singular kindness is it, that God has put us
into a capacity of finding good by repentance, by giving his Son to shed his
blood, and to lay down his life for our sins, without which all our repentance
could have availed us nothing. And shall not now God's authority, nor clemency,
his sovereignty, nor sweetness in commanding us to repent, prevail with us? but
shall we despise both his greatness and his goodness, his Majesty and his
mercy? what will this be, but after our hardness and impenitent Romans 2. 5.
hearts to treasure up to our selves wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. 2. There is a necessity, as a way
and means of our happiness and 2. Necessitas medii. Nisi agnitis peccatis,
seria cordis contritione pungamini, and vera fide a deo irato ad eum propitium
and in filio placatum conversi fueritis, vitamque emendaveritis, omnes simul
peribitis. Winckel.
weal, as that without which it cannot be but we must perish; and this Jesus
Christ himself, who is the Amen, the faithful and true witness, yea truth it
self, has twice averred. Luke 13. 3, 5. -- I tell you nay, but except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And again, I tell you nay, but except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. I tell you, who know full well who shall
be saved, and came to save, that except you repent, you shall not be saved but
perish; none indeed are saved for it, but for me and my merits sake, nor can
any be saved without it. Had Jesus Christ shed Seas of blood, he would never
yet save a sinner that he does not bring to repent of his sins. The Father and
Son never agreed nor resolved upon saving man in an absolute illimited way, but
in such a way and order, as in a way of repenting and believing, not as if
there was Quamvis Christus millies mortem obiisset, nullus tamen impoenitens
peccatorum condonationem ex illius morte consequetur, nec quemvis alium fructum
percipiet. Deutus.
any merit or causality in repentance, but as the way and condition, without
which (though not the cause for which) remission of sins and salvation cannot
be obtained. Thus Repentance is necessary, not only as God's command, but also
as a way and means and order, that God has ordained for remission and
salvation; so that though there is no causality, dignity, or merit in our
repentance, yet it is of that nature, that the holy Ghost must necessarily work
it in all those who are partakers of them, so as to qualify for them; so that
either we must repent or Aut poenitendum, aut pereundum.
perish, turn or dye, be converted or destroyed; either this must be done, or
we undone for ever. Ezekiel. 18. 30.
If indeed we repent, and turn from our transgressions, then the Lord has told
us, iniquity -- 33. 11.
shall not be our ruin, though it tends to our ruin, but unless we repent,
and turn, it will inevitably be so. If we still persist, and live, and lie Si
divinae miserationes nequeunt nos allectare, tum judica Dei nos terreant.
in our sins, we shall then certainly dye in our sins, and perish in our sins.
Hence says the Lord, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye
O house of Israel, implying, that 'till we do turn from our evil ways, we say
in effect we will dye. For the turning away of the simple shall Prove. 1. 31. --
11. 19.
slay them, and, he that pursues evil, pursues it to his own death. If thou
warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, he shall dye in Ezekiel. 3.
19.
his iniquity. Either we must be turned to God here, or separated from him for
ever hereafter; either be converted, or for ever excluded the Kingdom of
Heaven, and turned into hell: Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted,
etc. ye Matthew. 18. 2.
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. If Tertullian.
therefore thou be backward in thoughts of repentance, be forward in thoughts
of hell, etc. for we must turn, or for ever burn in hell. Thus conversion is
necessary, as a means to life and happiness, so that as life is a necessary
consequent of conversion, so death is an inevitable fruit and effect of the
neglect of it; so that I may say to you, as Moses sometimes said to that
people, See I here set before you this day life and good, death and evil: life
and all manner of good, if you obey, and repent, and turn to the Lord; but
death, and all manner of evil, if ye refuse; and I call Deuteronomy. 30. 15.
heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you
life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life that ye may live.
Why? life and death are the greatest and forciblest arguments in the world:
what will not a man give or do for life? Skin for skin, yea all that a man
has, will he give for his life. And death is the most formidable of evils,
called the King of terrors: we use to say, such a man is as earnest and intent
upon a thing, as if life and death depended upon it. Why truly life or death
depend upon our turning or not turning to God, life and death are in these
things, and accordingly such should our prayers, and cares, and endeavors be
in and about the same.

5. The gratefulness and acceptableness of it unto God, how pleasing, welcome,
and delightful it is to him, when a sinner does indeed repent and turn to God!
O with what joy and singular complacency does the Lord speak of Ephraim, as
turning from his Idolatries, and not going on as he had done to provoke him,
and wrong himself. Ephraim shall say, what have I any more to Hos. 14. 8.
do with Idols? I have heard him, and observed him, and that with a great deal
of joy and delight, as that I am glad of, and rejoice in. So I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself Jer. 31. 18, 19.
etc. that is, bewailing his sins; the Hebrew is hearing, I have heard him,
that is, attentively, pleasingly, delightfully, so as to take special notice of
him, and to have a singular regard to him, and now his bowels are troubled for
him, and he will surely have mercy on him. As God has a singular hatred and
abhorrence of sin, so Quemadmodum Deus summo odio habet peccatum, ita quoque
sum hominis poenirentia delectatur, per quam a summo malo ad summum bonum
convertitur. Gerh.
he cannot but be much pleased with repentance, by which the sinner turns from
it to himself, from the chief evil to the chief good, and it being that wherein
his own glory, and the sinners good is so much concerned. For thereby God is
honored, Jesus Christ sees of the travel of his soul, and is satisfied, the
Spirit ceases to be grieved as formerly, sin is pardoned, God's favor
recovered, Satan defeated, and the soul saved: how well was God pleased with
Josiah, his heart being tender, and he humbling himself before 2 Chr. 34. 27.
God, which he twice mentions, as being much taken therewith? And so Manasseh,
though so great a sinner, yet repenting, what respect had God to him? yea so
acceptable is this to God, that he had respect to it even in Ahab, so far as
temporally to reward it, though hypocritical, the more to encourage to that
which is true. And the acceptableness of this to God does further appear, by
his earnest invitings to it, longings after it, waitings for it, bearing so
long with sinners as in reference to it, his readiness to receive sinners upon
the first discoveries of it, and pardoning the hainousest sins upon it Psalm.
51. 17.
. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart O
God thou will not despise; and what is a broken heart, but a penitent heart, an
heart kindly melted, humbled, and in bitterness for sin, and this now is the
sacrifice of (...) Sacrificia Dei.
God. 1. Of God, to denote its singular excellency, it being usual in the
Hebrew to set out the excellency of a thing, by the addition of the name of
God, as the mountains and Cedars of God, etc. 2. It is called the sacrifices of
God, in the plural number, as denoting the peculiar gratefulness, and singular
acceptableness of this above all other. There were many sacrifices under the
Law, but none of them all so pleasing as this, nor any without this, this is
the sacrifice of sacrifices, and this God will not despise. But is that all?
no, there is more intended than spoken; the meaning is, Thou will highly esteem
and account thereof, it is the most acceptable and It is a (...).
endearedst frame under heaven, not only above all sacrifices, but above all
mere moral performances, and Pharisaical duties and perfections; this made the
poor Publican accepted, when the proud Pharisee was rejected. The spirit is the
best of man, and a kindly broken spirit is the best of spirits, for such a
spirit is ever a believing spirit: they shall look upon Christ, etc. Zach. 12.
10.
there is faith; and mourn for him, there is repentance; and faith wonderfully
pleases God, as highly honoring his Son, whom he so delights in, for it makes
to him, and leans upon him, and clasps fast to him, as its peculiar object; it
goes into the presence of God with him, and presents and urges him, and him
alone and his righteousness, and satisfaction, for acceptance and propitiation
of its sins, counting all but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of him,
and this exceedingly pleases the father, that his Son so dear to him, should be
thus honored in the Souls having recourse to him, and relying on him, and such
a soul seals to the truth of what the Word says, as concerning the greatness of
God, the vileness of sin, and the excellency, usefulness, and all sufficiency
of Jesus Christ, and the Lord cannot but have choice thoughts, and an high
esteem of such a frame. The heaven, he says, is his throne, and the earth is
his footstool, etc. but Is. 66. 1, 2.
to him will he look that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at
his Word, that is, not only with a look of bare intuition, but dear affection,
and gracious acceptance; yea such a one is the very home and habitation of God
himself, though so high and holy. For thus says -- 57. 15.
the high and lofty one, that inhabits eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in
the high and holy place, there is one of his dwellings; with him also that is of
a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones, there is his other: It is not said, the Angels
shall dwell with him, or grace, and peace, and joy only, though these are
sweet companions, but God himself, and where God dwells all good dwells, there
dwells light, life, joy, peace, comfort, happiness, yea heaven it self, and how
acceptable must he needs be to God, whom he thus honors.

6. The comfortableness of it to our selves, not only to others, but to our
own souls. It is very (...) Iniquitas, molestia, quae laborem and afflictionem
parit.
observable, that as the same word that signifies iniquity, signifies also
pain, and sorrow, as occasioning the same, and as being that whereof comes
trouble, grief, misery, and at last confusion; and hence some render it painful
iniquity, or sorrowful sin: so the same word in the Hebrew (...) doluit,
consolationem invenit.
that signifies to repent, and mourn for sin, signifies also to comfort, and
the reason may be this, because such repenting and mourning is the way to
comfort, and true comfort arises out of Verus poenitens de peccatis dolet, and
de dolor gaudet.
it, and follows upon it. Worldly sorrow indeed, and joy, are contraries, but
not godly, for these effect and help one the other: or 2. the reason may be,
because there is joy even in such sorrow, and not only does comfort follow it,
but accompany it. The true penitent grieves for his sins, and rejoices for his
grief; certainly there is an hundred times more true comfort in the sorrow of a
truly repenting sinner, than there is in all the mirth of a sinner, who yet
goes on in his sins: how refreshing are April showers to the earth, and so and
much more are true penitential tears to the soul, they do not only moisten and
mellow the soul (as it were) for the reception of the word, but occasion mirth.
Music sounds sweetest upon the waters, and sweetest is that joy that
accompanies such mourning. All true mirth is from a rectitude and right frame
of the soul, from a being well set and disposed, as that word implies made use
of by the Apostle James for being merry: Is any merry? the Greek is, is any of
a good or James 5. 13. (...) Aequo animo est aliquis?
right mind? or well disposed? is he right set or hung, as we say? implying
that all true mirth arises thence, and now, then and only then, that we repent
and turn to God; are our minds and hearts right, and in a right frame or
rightly hung or disposed. And therefore this must needs render our state
comfortable indeed, when hearts are at rights, and ways at rights, and besides
we are then turned to the God of all comfort, to the Sun of all refreshings,
and the fountain of all consolations, and therefore can no more want comfort,
than such as turn to the Sun light, or to the fountain water, or to the fire
heat; and as such sorrow is accompanied with joy, so shall it be turned and end
in joy, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall Matthew. 5. 4.
be comforted; that is, with a godly sorrow for sin; they that sow in such
tears shall be sure to Psalm. 126. 5, 6.
reap in joy, and they who so go forth weeping bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them. And then such
have infinite cause, matter, and ground of joy, as being blessed, as having Gods
favor, pardon of sin, audience of prayer, inheritance among them that are
sanctified, etc. yea over such God himself rejoiceth with joy, Zeph. 3. 17.
Psalm. 71. 21. lia. 61. 2, 3. ^^b 38. 26. etc.
Yea rests in his love, and joys over them with singing, and shall comfort
them on every side. Such Jesus Christ himself was anointed to comfort, and to
them belong the promises of comfort, ^sa. 65. 13.
and what cause and ground then have such to rejoice, and again to rejoice, Yea
to shout for joy; but till sinners repent, and turn to God, they have nothing
to do with joy, neither have they any true cause or ground for it, but we may
well say of their laughter, it is mad, and ^celes. 2. 2.
of their mirth what does it: such rejoice? as are in a state of perdition, and
in the very gall of bitterness? and whose portion, in the state they are in, is
nothing but wrath, and death, and woes, and curses, and horrors, and terrors,
and tearings a pieces, rolling garments in blood, Psalm. 50. 22. Hos. 13. 8.
and renting the caul of the heart, and devouring like a Lion. And sinners not
being sensible of this at present, does but aggravate their misery, and make
their condition the more lamentable, and is here any ground for mirth? and not
rather of grief and continual sorrow of heart; and well may we say to such as
the Apostle James, Be afflicted, and mourn, and ^^mes 4. 9.
weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness And
though in a right way and upon good grounds, we wish and desire comfort to all,
yet as to the state that many are at present in, we cannot wish them better
than trouble, as the way to peace, and Timorem plurimum.
grief, as the way to joy; as Bernard, once writing to one that he thought not
sollicitous enough about the judgments of God, wished him much Hos. 9. 1.
fear. Rejoice not (says God to Israel) as other people, for thou have gone a
whoring from thy God, etc. And however such may at present find pleasure and
delight in sin, and carnal mirth in their evil ways, yet let them know this is
but their disease, and from the distemper that is upon their souls: for were
their hearts right, they would cry out of the bitterness of what they now say
is sweet, and what pleasures are they but such as are common with beasts, and
of the brutish part, and but for a moment, and such as have a poisonous sting
in them, and death and damnation entailed to them, and such as will certainly
end in bitterness, if not mercifully here, dreadfully and eternally in hell
hereafter; and therefore be no longer enemies to your own comfort, in going on
still in your sins, but turn to the Lord, and then you shall experience true
joy and comfort indeed, and shall not lose your joys nor pleasures, but change
them for better, for spiritual, heavenly, and more refined. Would you not all
now have joy, and comfort, and be glad? which indeed is the very strength and
support of our spirits, and life of our lives, for what is life or any thing
else without comfort, this being, as one well expresses it, the Spring of our
year the light of our day, the Sun in our firmament, for the joy of the Lord is
your strength, and a merry heart does good like a medicine, yea such a one has
a continual feast, and would you have so? O then turn to God; we who are
Ministers are called helpers of others joy, and we would be glad to be so, but
never can we be so indeed, till we become helpers of your conversion, and
instrumental in bringing you to God, and turning you to him, and then, and not
'till then, do we become helpers of your joy indeed, yea and of our own too in
yours, and then may we say, Go thy way, eat thy bread with Eccles. 9. 7.
joy, etc. In the transgression of an evil man there Prove. 29. 6.
is a snare, but the righteous does sing and rejoice.

CHAP. XIII. Some further Motives to turn to God.
1. LET us consider, that while we refuse, or neglect to do this, we forget our
selves: and hence when people turn to the Lord, they are said to remember. All
the ends of the world Psalm. 22. 27.
shall remember, and turn unto the Lord, etc. It is a Prophecy of the
conversion of the Gentiles* who turning to the Lord, are said to remember but
whom, or what should they remember? why in general, themselves, and their own
interest, how much they were concerned therein more particularly, some refer it
to what immediately goes before, They shall praise the Lord that seek him, and
their heart live for ever, that ^. 36.
is, through the manifestations of his favor be filled with spiritual joy,
this being indeed the living of the heart, as the contrary is its dying; 1 Samuel
25. 37.
Cogitabunt de suis peccatis and miscriis, et considerata Dei misericordia,
tandem serio expetent opem, and remedium suorum vulnerum, i. e. convertentur.
Moll.
or live a spiritual life here, and an eternal hereafter: and remembering this,
they shall turn to the Lord; or 2. They shall remember their sins, the number
and nature of them, how many and great they have been, and their misery by
reason of them; what wrong by their sins they have done to God and their own
souls: He that sins against me wrongeth his own soul; and, they shall
remember me, etc. because I am broken with their whorish heart, etc. Or 3.
remember how Ezekiel. 6. 9. Zach. 10 9. Prove. 8. 36.
much this is their duty, as also its equity, excellency, etc. and also how
great God's goodness and mercy, and riches of grace, are to such as do indeed
turn; or they shall remember God's patience, and the riches of his goodness,
and forbearance, and long-suffering toward them, how long he has born with
them, though every day angry with them, and provoked by them, as it is said of
the Israelites, that about forty years God suffered their manners in the
wilderness, or he bore them as a burden; their froward Acts 13. 18.
and untoward carriages, were as an heavy (...)
burden is to a man, or as the peevishness and unquietness of a sucking Child
is to the Nurse, etc. Now this they shall remember, and despise Romans 2. 4.
those riches of goodness no longer, but be led by them to repentance, etc.
Thus there is very much, which if we did but remember, and seriously consider,
might put us upon turning to God; and how long shall we forget God and our
selves, and our own concerns, and our own and the Nations weal. O that at
length we might all remember, and turn to the Lord, especially considering the
loud cries we have had to it alate, not only from God's Word, but his works,
his judicious proceedings: why? whom should we remember, if not our selves? or
what, if not our own good? we are bid not to forget to do good to others, and
shall we forget that which makes so much for our own good? We would that God
should remember us, yea and he does, or it would be quickly sad with us, and
shall not we remember him, nay our selves, but in refusing to return forget
both? The Psalmist complains, his heart was so smitten, etc. that he forgot to
eat his bread, that was sad and strange, Psalm. 102. 4.
but this is sadder; for that can but famish the body, but this the soul; that
can but bring to the grave, but this to hell. The wicked shall be turned into
hell, and all the Nations that forget -- 9. 17.
God, and forget themselves, to turn to him, and therefore let us no longer
forget our selves, but in turning to the Lord show at length that we remember
both our selves and him; and the Lord remember us, that we may at length thus
remember both our selves and him, which till we do, we forget both.

2. We not only forget our selves, but while we yet go on in our sins we are
not our selves, but (as it were) besides our selves; not only out of our way,
but are, as it were, out of our wits; not only gone off from religion, but
right reason: for to turn to the Lord is every way so much our concern, and so
infinitely for our good, that were we but our selves, or in our right minds, we
could not but resolve upon it, as it is said of the Prodigal, that as soon as
Luke 15. 17*
ever he came to himself, he presently resolved to arise and go to his Father;
so that before he was not, it seems, himself: no more are any, till they repent
and turn to God, but are and Matthew. ^. ^. (...) resipiscite.
act as mad men: and thus much the Greek word, made use of by the Holy Ghost
for repentance, does import: it signifies to be after wise, or to recover
wisdom after folly, to recover ones wits, and come to himself and a right mind.
All the ways of sin, are ways of folly, ways of silliness and madness, and they
stamp him to be so, who persists in them; hence as in Scripture the godly, the
true convert, is every where called wise, and prudent, so the wicked and
impenitent, foolish, simple, silly. Sin, especially persistency in sin, being
pure folly and madness. How long ye simple ones will ye love Prove. 1. 22, 32.
-- 22. 3.
simplicity? The turning away of the simple shall slay them. The simple pass on
and are punished: Job. 5. 2. Prove. 14. 9. Eccles. 9. 3 etc.
and envy slays the silly one. Fools make a mock at sin, etc. and madness is
in their heart, etc. And they act indeed as such, as simple silly ones, as
fools and mad men, and as such as are not themselves, nor in their right minds,
for 1. they cut as it were and gash and wound themselves, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Prove.
8. 36. -- 1. 18.
pierce themselves, yea offer violence to their own souls, and love death, that
is, act at that rate, as if they loved death; so they are said to lie in wait
for their own blood, to despise -- 15. 32.
their own souls, to love cursing. And do not Psalm. 109. 17.
these act fillily and madly? shall we count him besides himself, that offers
violence but to his own body, and not him much more which offers it to his own
soul, yea destroies his own Prove. 11. 19. etc.
soul; that pursues what will be his own death? Whosoever commits adultery
with a woman, -- 6. 32.
it is said he lacks or is void of understanding. How wise soever he may
think himself, or may be in wordly affairs, he has not the least spark of true
spiritual wisdom, but is besotted, mad, Demens, Pisc. Junius, etc. Stultus
terque quaterque. Remus.
so Junius, Piscator, and others, read it: He acts not only against the
dictates of Religion, but Reason: and why? because he destroys his own soul,
his own life says Diodate before men, and his own soul before God; he is a
self-murderer, a soul-murderer, and he himself, and not others, is the proper
cause of his own ruin: and is not he void of understanding, is not he mad? if
not, who then is? others read it, he that would destroy his own soul, let him
do it: but who, except a mad man, or one out of his wits, would do that? 2.
They strike at others, even at God himself, fight against him, for he
stretches out his hand against God, and Job 15. 25, 26.
strengthens himself against the Almighty. He runs upon him, etc. and this
without cause, nay notwithstanding the greatest reason to the contrary. what
iniquity have your Fathers* Jer. 2. 5. etc.
found in me? and what have I done unto thee? etc. and are these themselves?
But I do but name things. 3. They are not at all affected with their own
misery, nor the greatest wrong they offer to themselves or others. They are in
their blood, in the very gall of bitterness, under God's wrath and curse,
vassals of sin and Satan, and guilty of eternal damnation, and in as great
danger of it, as a Traitor apprehended is of being executed; and yet they are
not at all affected therewith, but make light of it. They say, they Rev. 3. 17.
are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, when they are
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: as mad men, you know,
fancy sometimes strange things of themselves, as that they are some great
persons, when it is quite otherwise. And though by going on still in their sins
they offer to themselves the greatest wrong, casting themselves as it were into
the water, and into the fire, and piercing themselves through with many
sorrows, yea offer the greatest wrong even to God himself. They do not only
transgress his Law, cross, and oppose, and thwart his will, darken his glory,
affront his majesty, but strike at his very being, etc. and yet all this is but
a light matter with these. Is it a light thing (says God) that they do so Ezekiel.
8. 17. Is. 57. 4.
and so? implying, they thought it so, and against whom (says he) do ye sport
your selves? etc. And is not this madness, and folly, for any to offer such
wrong to themselves, yea to God himself, and yet make light of it? what to
sport with poison? to make a recreation of destruction, a mock of self-murder,
nay of God-murder, Peccatum est Deicidium.
as much as in them lies? why, if such be not fools, and Bedlams, and besides
themselves, who are? I do not mean natural fools, but spiritual, which of all
are the greatest; certainly he that goes about with a whistle, a coat, and a
babble, is in a far better case than such. It is a sport, but to whom? to a fool
to do mischief. Prove. 10. 23. -- 26. 18, 19.
And, As a madman, who casts firebrarnds, arrows, and death, so is the man
that deceives his neighbor, and says, am I not in sport or in jest? in play?
sad play, like that of those young men, who thrust their swords in one another
sides. 2 Samuel* 2. 14, 16
4. They provoke, and wage war even with God himself, enter the lists as it
were with him, and is not this madness and folly? for is he a match for them?
what, weakness contend with strength, impotency with omnipotency? a thistle
with a Cedar? thorns with a consuming fire? a weak worm with an almighty God?
Do we (says the 1 Cor. 10. 22.
Apostle) provoke the Lord? are we stronger than he? or do we think to carry it
against him? as if he had said, what desperate folly and madness is this? for
is it not he that forms the mountains? etc. As if a man should run Amos 4. 13.
himself against a stone-wall, or set his shoulder to a wall of brass. The Lord
wonders at this folly: Do they provoke me to anger says the Lord? do they not
provoke themselves to the confusion Jer. 7. 19.
of their own faces? As if he had said, what madness is this, for who are like
to have the worst of it? am I a match for them? Let the potsheards strive with
the potsheards of the earth, Is. 45. 9.
but woe to him that strives with his maker. The Jer. 10. 7.
King of Nations is to be feared, that appertains to him, not to be fought. For
further discovery of this madness and folly, read these, and other the like
places: 2 King. 10. 4. Job 41. 8, 9, 10. Prove. 16. 14. Psalm 2. 1, 2, 3, 4,
etc. Luke 14. 31, 32. Psalm. 76. 7. Job 9. 4. 5. They being fallen refuse to
arise, and though going on in sin, they are quite out of their way, (every step
in sin being so) as the Lord has often out of his Word told them, yet they
refuse to return; and the Prophet Jeremiah has long since said what such are.
-- They have refused to return, therefore I said, surely these are poor. How
poor? poor in wit, for he adds, they are foolish; but of this I have
occasionally spoken before. 6. They recompense evil for good, and that even
Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
to God himself, he loads them daily with his benefits, and they daily load him
with their sins, and foolish people and unwise, thus to requite the Lord, etc.
This is such folly and madness, that the Lord calls the Heavens and the Earth
to bear witness of. Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, for the Lord has
spoken; I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled Is. 1.
2, 3. Jer. 18. 20. Prove. 19. 6. Romans 2. 4.
against me. The ox knows his owner, etc. Shall evil be recompensed for
good? To him that gives gifts, every man is a friend, or despisest thou the
riches of his goodness, etc? For which of his kindnesses do you deal thus with
God? 7. They are taken up, and trouble themselves, about trifles, about small
matters, and in the mean time neglect matters of greatest moment, as their
souls, and the great concerns of them; as if one condemned to dye, should be
taken up about his repast, and neglect to sue out his pardon; or as that woman,
whose house being on fire, hasted to fetch out the lumber, but forgot the child
in the cradle, etc. but I cannot enlarge. 8. They prefer things that are base
and vile before things of greatest worth and excellency; as if a man should
prefer dross before gold, pebles before pearls, dirt before diamonds, who would
but say such were fools and Idiots. When an Heir is impleaded for an Idiot, the
Judge commands a Counter, or an Apple, together with a piece of Gold, to be set
before him, to try which he will choose, and if he choose the Counter or Apple,
he is cast for an Idiot, a natural fool. And this casts all such to be
spiritual fools and Idiots, who yet go on in their sins, because they prefer
the creature before the creator; self, yea sin and Satan before God; broken
cisterns, before the fountain of living Jer. 2. 12, 13.
waters; emptiness and vanity, before fullness and all sufficiency; Swines
husks, before the bread in their fathers house; hell before heaven, and the
base sensual pleasures of sin, that are but for a season, before pardon of sin,
and the pleasures that are at God*s right hand for evermore, etc. 9. They
pretend to such an end, and such a place, as to heaven and happiness, but never
go in the way, nor make use of the means that lead to it: and what a silliness
is that? 10. Whereas they might be the Lord's freemen, they suffer themselves
to be the vilest slaves and vassals, even of sin and Satan, who seek their
destruction, rather than their subjection; and what madness and folly is this
to be at their beck and command? to ride them, and run them, and do with them
what they please; to do their wills; and at their will; if they say, go, they
go, or come, they come, or do this or that, they do it, as the servants of the
Centurion: and were men themselves, or in their right minds, would they do
this? no, they would suffer themselves no longer to be taken captive by such at
their will. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 25,
26.
if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
truth, and that they (...) sanitate mentis recepta, etc. Beza.
may recover themselves, or return to themselves, the word signifies to grow
sober again after drunkenness, and so to be restored to ones senses: and from
the body it is applied to the mind, and Translatio a corporis sensu ad animum.
Per resipiscentiam homines ante captivi Diabolo, ex ejus vinculis elabuntur,
and ita, ante aegri mente, sanitatem mentis recipient. Toss.
when is this? when sinners by repentance extricate themselves out of the snare
of the Devil, who before were taken captive by him at his will. Thus you see,
and that several ways, that such as still impenitently go on in their sins, do
not only forget themselves, but are besides themselves; and as ever we would
approve our selves other, we must repent and turn to the Lord. Remember this
(says God) and show your selves men, Is. 46. 8. and if ever we would show our
selves men, and not beasts, in our right minds, and not mad, wise, and not
still out of our wits, we must be sure we be such as to turn to God; for till
then, whatever we, or others may think, according to what God and his Word
judges, we are no better, yea and we shall see, and say of our selves shortly,
as being no other, we fools Wisd. ^. ^.
accounted his life madness, etc. But now we see, and well perceive, that he
was wise, but we were the fools: And the sinners furious reflection upon this
his own wilful folly and madness, and the woeful misery he has brought upon
himself thereby, is that which Divines call the worm of Conscience. Oh that
therefore this folly might appear to sinners now, before it be too late! that
so getting timely cured of it, they may not forever perish in it.

3. Let us consider, these are times of turning: 1. Of sinful turning in regard
of men: O how strangely are many turned! some to one strange opinion and way,
and some to another: how many have turned away their ears from the truth, and
are turned to fables, to vain 1 Timothy 6. 5.
janglings, to dotings about questions, to perverse disputes, etc. and this is
all the turn of many; and others are turned, but it is aside after Satan, and
their own lusts. Some are turned 1 Timothy 5. 15.
Atheists, others Papists, Antinomists, Anabaptists, Quakers, Ranters,
Arminians, Socinians, etc. and how many Apostates; they are turned indeed, but
it is with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to wallowing in the mire. 2
Per. 2. 22.
Yea how many turn any thing, every thing, but what they should, and any way
but the right: and now so many turning with evil turns, let us turn with an
holy good and gracious turn; and so many turning out of the way, let us turn
into the way; shall others turn after Satan, and not we to God? they to hell,
and not we to heaven? they after vanity, and not we to our felicity? they after
their lusts, and not we to the Lord of life and glory? 2. Of judicial turnings
in regard of God: for how many strange turnings and changes has he made alate
amongst us, turning many out of their places, employments, livelihoods? How did
he turn our peace into war, and our health into sickness? Did he not in one
year, in and about this City, turn above an hundred thousand to destruction?
turned them into their Craves, out of their short homes into their long ones,
turned them from the living to the dead, from living wights to be dead corpse,
and companions of the worms? How many families did he lay wast, and make
desolate all their company, changed their countenance, Job 14. 20.
and turned the beauty of their visage into grisly deformedness, and sent them
away, as Job speaks? yea has he not turned our City into an heap, our famous
City into ruins? We were, as I said, scarce got out of one fire, which
devoured our persons, but another devours our estates and habitations; as if
God was resolved to consume all, and to leave nothing of us standing or
remaining. And shall not both these fires refine us? if not, what fire may we
expect next, I leave that to you to judge. O how many did God on a sudden, and
unexpectedly, and at once, turn out of all, out of their beds, out of their
houses, out of their shops, out of their estates, out of their tradings, out of
their ease, out of their enjoyments! and shall we not yet be turned from our
sins? How did he bring down them that dwelt on high, yea the lofty city laid it
low, he laid it low even to the ground, If. 25 2. -- 26. 5, 6.
and brought it even to the dust, so that the foot might tread it down, even
the feet of the poor, and steps of the needy. How did he turn that City Lam. 1.
1.
into solitariness, that was full of people, and made her sit as a widow, that
was great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces? yea stained all
her glory, and changed her beauty and bravery into deformity? And London, once
the glory of the world, is turned and hurled into confufed heaps of dirt and
rubbish. And after so many turnings shall we not yet turn to God? and turn from
sin to holiness, and from our security to godly fear? O after so many turns let
there follow one turn more, and that as the happy fruit and effect of all the
former, and as that which God designed in them, and intended by them, even a
turn unto the Lord, and out of those paths, the end of which will certainly be
hell and damnation. Surely the time past may suffice as to what tends so much
not only to God's dishonor, but is so contrary to our own weal, and works our
own woe, that grieves our best friend, and gratifies our worst enemy, etc. But
as if it was not enough, shall we go on still? as if we were resolved not to
turn from sin, 'till God t^rn us into hell. O turn at last, and the longer thou
have gone on in evil ways, see that the higher time it is to turn now. He goes
far (we say) that never turns, and why then do thou not now turn after so
many turns, that God has made, and all to further this turn. Let me say to
you, as sometimes Pharaohs servants said Exodus 10. 7.
to him in another case, How long shall your sins be a snare to you, and to the
Nation, let them go, before England be utterly destroyed? or care you not
though all England be destroyed, so your sins may live; or as if thou had not
treasured up unto thy self wrath enough against that day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, will thou still through the
hardness and impenitency of thy heart, go on to treasure up more? God forbid.

4. Consider, nothing less than this can speak you sound Christians indeed, and
so such as shall be saved. 1. Not parts nor gifts, though never so eminent, no,
it must be what is more 1 Cor. 12. 31.
excellent, etc. 2. Not outward privileges; as having been baptized, and often
admitted to the Lord's Table, and having been constant hearers of such and such
able Ministers, and it may be entertainers of them into your houses, and at
your tables, and having had frequent converse with them, and it may be of good
esteem with them; this may be, and yet you never be sound Christians, no, it
must be true conversion that speaks you such. The Apostle speaking of the Jews,
tells us, they were all under the cloud, and 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
passed through the Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in
the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink, etc. and yet with many of them God was not well pleased, for
they were overthrown in the wilderness. You may have vision, whiles it fails
from others, and have bread whiles others starve; your fleece may be wet whiles
others is dry, and may be as Goshen, whiles others are as Egypt, and yet be far
from being good Christians. How great were the privileges of the Jews, yet all
were not Israel Romans 9. 4, 5. Gal. 6. 15.
which were of Israel; for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, that is, in Christ's Kingdom, so
as to speak us such as are true Christians, and entitled to the Kingdom,
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, i. e. no outward
privileges whatsoever, for under these two Synechdochically are comprehended
all; by circumcision all those of the Jews, who stood much upon circumcision,
and by uncircumcision all those of the Gentiles, as Baptism, the Lord's Supper,
etc. but a new creature, or a new creation, that is, regeneration, saving
conversion. Our Savior tells us, that the children of the Kingdom should be
cast into utter darkness, etc, i. e. they who were within the Matthew. 8. 12.
external Covenant, and seemed to be of the Kingdom, partook of the
privileges, and made account they were the children of the Kingdom, they bore
themselves up high; but all these did not speak them to partake of the grace of
the Kingdom. We read of others that did eat and drink in Christ's presence, and
such in whose Luke 13. 26.
streets Christ himself taught, they heard him, and at their tables entertained
him, and had ordinary converse with him, and yet no better than workers of
iniquity. 3. Not mere morality or civility, carrying it fair in the world; for
these, though commendable in themselves, come short of conversion, and rested
in, they are but beautiful abominations, a smoother way to hell, and such are
but as wild beasts tamed, or tied up, their natures not being changed, etc. 4.
Not forms or professions of godliness, shows of holiness, and being as it were
varnisht over 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
with specious semblances of sanctity, when there is nothing but rottenness
within, etc. 5. Not (...) quasi (...), i. e. sapiens, gnarus, peritus, (...),
scire.
merely knowing much: for the Devils know so much, as that they have their name
from knowledge, and yet they are Devils still: and so men may be very knowing,
but not practicing answerably to their knowledge, be no better than Jam. 4. 17.
Luke 12. 46.
Devils incarnate, and their knowledge but aggravate their sin, and increase
their stripes. 6. Not going on in a formal way of duties, and in a constant Is.
58. 1, 2, 3. Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. Luke 18, 12.
customary course of performances, for this many have done, and may do, yea be
much in extraordinary duties, and yet never be true Christians, because never
sincere converts. 7. Not Pharisaical Matthew. 5. 20.
righteousness, for Christ has said, except our righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; and yet these were very exact, and went very far, and it was
commonly conceited among the Jews, that if but two in all the world went to
heaven, one should be a Scribe, and an other a Pharisee. They going far in
outward works, 1. of piety, made long prayers, 2. of charity, gave much alms,
3. of equity, tythed Mint, Annis, and Cummin, 4. of curtesy, invited Christ
often to their tables; and yet but hypocrites, because they wanted a sound work
of conversion upon their souls. 8. Not being of such a sect or party, nor
simply of such a Church, or Society, or Congregation, or way, or judgment, or
opinion, or being hearers of such or such Ministers, or such a ones people, or
the like, though I fear too too many lay too much stress upon these in these
days; as if they must needs be good Christians, and true Saints, because they
are in such a way, and of such a Church, and such a Congregation, and adhere to
such a party, and are hearers of such Ministers, and such a ones people: as in
the Apostles time, how many did bear themselves up with this, I am of Paul, and
I of Apollo, and 1 Cor. 1. 12. 13.
I of Cephas; one he cries up Paul, and his preaching, and bears himself up as
being his disciple, and one of his people; another he cries up Apollo, etc.
another Cephas; but what says the Apostle, Is Christ divided, was Paul
crucified -- 3. 3.
for you, or were you baptized in the name of Paul? and whereas there is among
you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? For
while one says, I am of Paul, and -- v. 4.
another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal, etc. The Apostle Jude speaks of
some in his days, who separated themselves, and yet were sensual, Jud. 19.
not having the spirit, etc. they were destitute of true grace, and the Spirit
of regeneration, as appeared from fleshly lusts having the upper hand and rule
in them. And the Prophet Isaiah speaks of some which said to others, Stand by
your selves, come not near to us, for we are holier Is. 65. 5.
than you, and yet were a smoke in God's nose, very loathsome unto him. But let
not any here mis-construe what I say, for I do not speak against fellowships,
or societies, but I would not have any simply take up in this, for it is not
this, but sound conversion that speaks a Christian. Judas was of the best
fellowship that ever was, of that very society that Jesus Christ himself and
the Apostles were of, one of the twelve, and yet for all that a Devil, as Jesus
Christ himself declares, Joh. 6. 70. Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of
you is a Devil? See, here is one of the very society of Christ himself, and his
Apostles, and yet a Devil; a strange expression, but that we know who said it,
i. e. of a devilish nature, one of his children: and if there was a Devil among
those that were of the very fellowship of Jesus Christ himself, and his
Apostles, we had need look about us, for what fellowship or society can there
be under heaven, whereof people may be, and yet not be Devils incarnate? How
fair soever they may carry it outwardly, as Judas no doubt did, insomuch that
when Christ told them, one of you shall betray me, they questioned among
themselves who it should be, no more suspecting Judas than themselves. Joh. 13.
21, 22. And therefore I beseech you let none bear up themselves, nor lay so
much stress on this; it is sound conversion that must speak you sincere
Christians, and not being of such a way or society. Jer. 7. 3. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, amend your ways and your doings: and, v. 4.
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord are these, they pointed (as it were) with the
finger to the temple of the Lord; why, we have the Temple, and the
Temple-worship, etc. but not amending their ways, all were but lying words. For
the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink Romans 4. 17.
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, etc. The purest
Churches may have impure members, and the most orderly congregations disorderly
persons; and among real Saints may be such as are but painted sepulchers; and
though they have the Euge and approbation of men, yet may they have the Apage
and disallowance of God, and all his holy Angels. It was a notable speech
uttered long since by an English Christian of a reformed Church in the
Netherlands; We have the good orders here, but you have the good Christians in
England; O that it could be said so still: and did (says a learned godly Divine
now with the Lord) the servants of Christ know what it is to live in reformed
Churches with unreformed spirits, under strict order with loose hearts, how
forms of Religion breed but forms of Godliness, how men by Church discipline
learn their Church postures, and there rest, they would pray as hard for purity
of heart, as purity of ordinances, without which it matters not much what
judgment or persuasion, or society a man is of; for however he may be a zealot
in bearing witness to what he likes best, yet he may be bad enough in the
witness of his own conscience. It is a grand design of the Devil, when men will
needs look after religion, to make them believe, that to be of such a Church or
party is to be religious, and to trust to that in stead of godliness; and how
many do so! but this being but an house built on the sand, when the rain
descends, and the floods Matthew. 7. 27
come, and the winds blow and beat upon it, it will fall, and great will be the
fall thereof. Among even the Virgins themselves, i. e. those who bore the name
of Christians, and had Lamps, made fair professions, are found foolish ones,
such as though they had lamps, had no oil, no true grace, and therefore are not
owned by Christ, but shut out of heaven. 9. Not having religious parents, or
relations, nor having been brought up in godly families. This is indeed a
mercy, and may prove helpful, but speaks not you good, unless you experience a
saving work of grace upon your own souls Isaac's goodness did not make Esau so,
nor Elie's, Hophni and Phinehas, etc. It is said of Christ's brethren, for Joh.
7. 5.
neither did his brethren believe in him; their being so near allied to Christ,
did not make them believers, and yet if any kin or alliance would have done it,
Christ's might. Two (says Christ) shall be in one bed, the one shall be taken
and the Luke 17. 34. etc.
other left. Think not then to say within your Math. 3. 9.
selves, we have Abraham to our father, for except you have the faith of
Abraham, it will nothing avail you. It is said of one John of Valois, that he
was Son, Brother, Uncle, Father of a King, and yet himself never King. There
may be found some good even in the worst families, and some bad in the best, as
is sadly experienced. We read of Saints in Caesar's household, and of sons of
Belial in Elie's. 10. Not what the Apostle declares, Hebr. 6. 4, 5. as having
been Perceperant aliquam cognitionem veritatis Evangelicae, viz. de Christo,
and glorioso illo adventu futuro. Tossan.
once enlightened, i. e. with common illumination, having tested of the heavenly
gift; some tastes, but they were but tastes, not let down, as it were, etc. being
made partakers of the holy Ghost, i. e. in regard of more common gifts which
were much imparted in the primitive Church; having tasted the good word of God,
i. e. felt some sweetness Magnum est discrimen inter electos and vete
credentes, and inter (...), qui obiter quaedam dona Spiritus gustarunt quoad
notitiam and professionem, non autem vere and efficaciter regeneratisunt, etc.
Tossan.
in the promises of the Gospel, so as to hear it with joy; and the powers of
the world to come, some glimpse of heaven, or some flash of hell, upon the
conscience, or some tastes of the joys of heaven, as Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. Now
these seem great things indeed, but they must be better than these that speak
us Christians indeed, and accompany salvation, as the Apostle expresses it,
even saving conversion, true faith, and unfeigned love, etc. v. 9. But beloved
we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation,
though we thus speak. For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor
of love, which you have showed toward his name, etc. And therefore never let
any rest, or take up in these or the like, for it must be more than all these
that must speak you true Christians, even sound conversion, which therefore
never rest' till you do attain to.

5. This is that which all call and cry to us for. God in his Word he every
where calls for it, and Jesus Christ he came from heaven to call Matthew. 9. 13.
to it, and still by his Ministers calls for it; this Church and Kingdom call
for, City, Country, towns, families, bodies, souls, estates, liberties, lives,
relations, little ones, all as to the weal of them; and this the Gospel, and
all that is near or dear to us call for, yea and all God's dealings and
dispensations, mercies, judgments, smiles, frowns, words, blows, the sinfulness
of the the times, and the sickliness of the times, the sword which did eat the
flesh, and drink the blood of so many thousands, and the pestilence which
walked in darkness, and destroyed at noon day, doing execution continually,
causing thousands to fall at our side, and ten thousands at our right hand,
laying wast whole families, and making burying work 'till scarce room to bury
in, sweeping away in one year, in and about the city, so many thousands; and
this that dreadful fire calls for, which in a few days reduced so famous a city
into ashes. O how often has the Lord smitten us, and that with sore smitings,
such as have not been in our days, nor in our fathers Joel 1. 2.
days before us! such droughts, such winds and storms, such a pestilence, such
a fire, such grievous gripes, whereby multitudes were so suddenly swept away,
above four thousand three hundred in one year, and many the year after! Yea the
Lord has smitten us with sorer smitings, spiritual, smitten us in our
Shepherds, solemn assemblies, in our delectable things, with famine, in many
places not of bread, but of hearing Amos 8. 11, 12.
the word of the Lord! etc. And what do all these strokes mean? or what is
their language, and what do they call and cry for? surely for this, that we
repent and turn to God; this Micah 6. 9.
is their voice to the city, and to the country, to all sorts high and low,
rich and poor, great and mean, to all, from him that sits upon the throne,
to him that goes by the hig-way side. And shall we not hearken to so many loud
calls and cries! how then should God hearken to us?

6. This is that which, when God's judgments are in the earth, he looks for,
and counts upon, Is. 26. 9.
viz. that then the inhabitants of the world will Per castigationes divinas
adpoenitentiam adducuntur. Pise.
learn righteousness, i. e. learn to amend their lives. This they then should
and ought for to do, and if ever God counts upon it, they will do it then, his
judgments being means thereof. They in their trouble did turn unto the Lord,
etc. 2 Chr. 15. 4. Hos. 5. 15. Ps. 119. 67. 2 Samuel 24. 29.
and, in their affliction they will seek me early. Absalom sent for Joah once
and again to come unto him, but he would not come, but when he set his corn on
fire then he ran, etc. and shall not we to God, when he has set first our
bodies as it were a fire, and then afterward our houses and estates? This he
expects, and shall we still frustrate his expectation? shall he count upon it
in vain, and when for our own weal? what may we think then, but that he will
frustrate ours, and while we look for peace, no good come, Jer. 14. 19.
and for a time of healing but behold trouble?

7. This is that, which the want of, is the great matter and ground of God's
complaint, and of his controversy with and against a people; not so much their
departures, as their refusals to return. This is that which roles so much in
his thoughts, as that he knows not how as it were to digest it; to do evil is
bad, but still to persist in it, that is saddest and worst of all. How often
does the Lord complain of this, five times at Amos 4. 5, 6, 8, etc.
least in one chapter; that though he had sent Hos. 7. 9, 10, Is. 1. 4, 5. --
9. 13.
such and such judgments among them, yet had they not returned unto him, and so
in many other places besides. We are ready indeed to Jer. 5. 3. -- 8. 4, 5. --
6. 28, 29. etc.
complain of God's punishments, but he of our impenitency, and his matter of
complaint is the saddest, impenitency under judgments, being a thousand times
worse than the judgments themselves; and sinners not returning, far more sinful
than all their sins besides. And let not the Lord then still have cause of this
sad complaint against us, after such a multiplicity of rods that he has
scorged us with alate, for what height of defection will that argue? and how
greatly will it incense his displeasure?

8. Not turning to God when he smites, puts him upon greater severities, yea
makes him resolve Lev. 26. 18. -- 21. 29.
upon final ruin. How often does he threaten See also Ps. 7. 12, 13.
in Leviticus, that if they would not reform, he would yet punish them seven
times more, and Is. 9. 12, 13, 14. Ezekiel. 24. 12, 13. Job 9. 4. Prove. 11. 21.
etc.
bring seven times more plagues upon them; yea he tells them, they should eat
the flesh of their sons, and their daughters (sad meat,) but God will overcome
when he judges, and the stoutest sinners must not think to carry it against
him; But God Psalm. 68. 21.
will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one that
goes on still in his trespasses. Those in Amos for all those judgments
inflicted on them not returning unto the Lord, he resolves therefore, thus will
I do unto thee: Amos 4. 12.
what? why worse than ever I have done yet, I will take a severer course, and
come with my last and heaviest stroke: or the Lord hereby Durius nunc tecum
agam, quia cogit me tua obstinatio, and ultimam poenam infligam, absque ulla
mitigatione, etc. Calv. in locum.
would the better (as some think) decipher out to them the dreadfulness of this
stroke, it being such as could not be expressed, and therefore wraps it up in
silence, and leaves it to them to think what it might be. Thus it is not so
much sinning but persisting still in sin, and that notwithstanding God's
judgments, that brings final ruin, this seals the stone of destruction upon
nations, and persons. And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds,
etc. Seeing thou our God have punished* us less than our iniquities deserve,
Ezra 9. 13, 14.
and have given such deliverance as this; should we again break thy
commandments, etc. would not thou* be angry with us 'till thou have consumed
us, so that there shall be no remnant, nor escpaing? When winds sent to fan and
cleanse, lie without success, then must be expected a dry wind from the
wilderness, not to fan Jer. 4. 11.
nor to cleanse, but utterly to lay wast: and for God to resolve that his eye
shall not spare, neither will he have pity, but to say as he did of those Jews,
cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth; such as are for death to
death, and such as are for Jer. 15. 1* 2.
the sword to the sword, etc. This brought final ruin upon Israel, and after
upon Jerusalem, and so has done upon other nations, as Germany, which Brentius
expounding upon Is. 9. 12, 13. foretold. And how can we think but it will bring
the same upon England, unless we speedily return? It was a notable speech of a
friend in a letter out of New England to one here; Our hearts are full of fears
for Old England, and that which makes us fear most; it is that God's
visitations bring forth no better fruit, than increase of sin: we may fear lest
that God should visit seven times more, the Lord give repentance and turning to
God, that God may in mercy turn to his people, etc. And how can it be
otherwise, this being the great end of God in all his judgments, whether
public or private, to reduce people to himself; and for God to lose his end,
and smite in vain, how sad is it? and it being also a magnifying of the
creature, that he will debate with Job. 7. 17, 18.
it, which Job admires that he should condescend so low, as not only to speak
but strike, and so make use of all ways and means to reclaim. And Amos 4. 6.
I also have given you cleanness of teeth, and want of bread, etc. as if the
Lord had said, And in that also I have not been wanting neither in words nor
blows, neither by speaking nor smiting, and to have all slighted, and nothing
regarded? And besides, this, it is God's last remedy, he speaks once and again,
yea often, and when that will not do, he strikes, and that with gentler, and
then severer strokes, but when these will not do, he rejects: moreover God then
in a more special manner, commanding sinners to return, And if they be bound in
fetters, and holden in cords of Job 36. 8, 10.
affliction, then he commands that they return from iniquity, etc. and yet
they not returning, what does it argue but stubborness and rebellion? and what
is it, but to contemn God, and his rod? as if we cared not what he did in the
world? yea what is it, but to bid as it were open defiance to heaven, or as if
we bid him do his worst; and God knows not how as it were to bear such any
longer, they are such a burden to him, and therefore resolves to ease himself
of them. -- Ah I will ease me of mine Adversaries, Is. 1. 24.
etc. this makes* sin rebellion, and out of measure sinful, when though God
afflicts, sinners will still hold fast their sins, and though they cannot hold
fast other things, as their health, strength, estates, liberties, relations,
outward comforts, yet they will hold fast them, and not let them go whatever
goes; and though God does then as it were hedge up sinners ways with thorns, yet
they break through. This was that which set such a brand and Emphasis of
disgrace upon Ahaz, that all might observe and take notice of: And in the times
of his distress, yet did he trespass more against the Lord, this is 2 Chr. 28.
22.
that King Ahaz. And so will the Lord say another day of others, this is that
man, that woman, that family, that people, that person, who when God afflicted,
yet trespassed more and more; and this does so incense God's wrath, as to blow
it up into a consuming flame, and such a flame as shall not be quenched. And
therefore Jer. 4. 4.
what now remains, but that with all seriousness and earnestness we forthwith
set our selves to and about this great work and concern, both of our selves,
and the Nation, that with all vehemence we implore it, and with our utmost
endeavors prosecute it, making use of all ways and means whereby we may attain
it* and not stand it out still, 'till inevitable destruction overtake us; else
we must take what follows, we must either remove our sins, or God will for ever
remove himself and his mercies.

CHAP. XIV. To encourage one another to turn to God.
AND this work now being so blessed a work, and of such infinite importance,
let us encourage one another unto it, let us say as those in Hosea, come and
let us return unto the Hos. 6. 1, 2.
Lord, for he has torn and he will heal us, etc. as if they had said, And this
it is the wisest course we can take, it being our own happiness and good, and
not God's, who is all-sufficient: as if a man be warmed and refreshed by the
Sun, he is benefited himself, but not the Sun; and if a man drinks of the
fountain, he profits himself not the fountain; so God needs not our conversion,
if we turn, what does it advantage him? not at all; the profit and advantage is
our own, and upon this account he desires it, not for any need he has of us,
but for the need we have of him. And shall we not then encourage one another to
this? and say as those in the Lamentations, Wherefore does a living man
complain? a Lam. 3. 39* 40*
man for the punishment of his sins. Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord, etc. As if they had said, What do we complaining, who are
yet living? it is sad indeed with us, but it is a mercy it is no worse, that
our Bodies are not in the Grave, and our Souls in Hell* for whatever is on this
side Hell is Mercy: and alive, and complain? and when for the punishment of
Sin? the evil of punishment being little to the evil of sin, the bitterness for
sin, to the bitterness in sin: one strikes at us, the other at God; one at the
Creature, the other at the Creator; the one at what is finite, the other at
what is infinite; and the worst that punishment does, or can do to us, is
little to what Sin does to, or against God: the Sinner gives worse gall and
wormwood to God to drink, than he does to the Sinner; hence the Church resolves
to bear the indignation of the Lord because she had sinned against him; and
hence, says the Micah 7. 9.
Lord, to a people who would plead with him about his proceedings, as if he had
been rigorous toward them: Wherefore, says he, will ye plead with me? plead
with me? Come then, Jer. 2. 29.
says God, and I will plead with you, and stop your mouths with one word; I
will say but this, and it is enough for ever to silence you, for ever opening
your mouths more against me. Ye all have transgressed against me, says the
Lord, and do but sit down and seriously weigh what you have done, in doing
that, and against whom you have done it, and there is enough to silence you. As
to what ever I have done to you, it is little to what you do against me; and, O!
that Sinners would but consider this. Ye have transgressed against me, and Is.
43. 24.
thereby what have ye done? even broken my law, crossed and contradicted my
will, darkened my glory, griv'd and embitter'd my Spirit, turned the back to
me, and not the face, and wearied me, and made me even to serve, though a God
of such infinite majesty, and shall we now complain, or plead with the Lord?
no, let us rather encourage one another to return: come and let us return. We
read indeed of other comes, encouraging comes to that which is evil, and
destructive, and these have been too too much the Comes of England, which has
made things come to that pass as they are. Come ye, Is. 56* 12.
say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink,
and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundantly. Come, and Jer.
18. 18.
let us devise devices against Jeremiah, etc. come, and let us smite him with
the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words, etc. Come, and let us
lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for Prove. 1. 11.
the innocent without cause, etc. But these are hellish pernicious comes, and
have occasioned so many great and heavy judgments to come upon us, one on the
neck of another: let us therefore now at length change our comes, and let them
be, come and let us repent, come and let us turn again unto the Lord, come and
let us amend our ways and our doings, and get our hearts and ways right with
God, that so things may be right with us: come, and let all our other strifes
end now in this, who should be first herein, in turning to God, and so in
promoting our own and the Nations weal. Others are striving for worldly
precedence, but let us for spiritual, and it is no pride here to go one before
another, but he is humblest that goes first. And these are blessed comes and
calls indeed, to call one another to the most high, to encourage one another to
turn to God the chief good, and to come off from sin so exceeding evil, yea the
greatest and chiefest and indeed only true evil, and the cause of all other
evils, which is it self a punishment, yea the worst of punishments, the work of
the Devil, and worse than hell and Devils, and all other evils whatsoever,
which threw down Angels to hell, and has more evil in it than all the Angels in
heaven have good; which was Christ's great work, in coming into the world, to
save from, and which nothing but his blood can make Matthew. 1. 21. Hebr. 9. 22.
expiation of; which not only offends and dishonours, and offers the greatest
injury to the blessed God, but exceedingly wrongs our selves, our own souls,
which debases, distresses, defiles, befools* hardens, destroys, spoils our good
things, is the sting of our evil things, robs us of our joy, peace, safety,
separates from God the chief good, and brings horrors of conscience here, and
to eternal Is. 59. 1, 2.
perdition hereafter; which may have a moments pleasure, but an eternities
torment. And can we do better than to encourage one another here, to come up to
so great a good, and to come off from so great an evil? Do others encourage one
another in evil matters, and not we in what is so good? to quit sins, and the
Devil's, Psalm. 64* 5.
and hell's quarters, murderers quarters, our deadly enemie's quarters, which
seek our blood, and the destruction of our precious souls, and to come into
heaven's quarters, into God's and our friends quarters. O who would not
encourage here, and say, come, and let us return unto the Lord, and so betake
our selves to the only way of our own and the Nations weal? And O that it was
once come to this, that so both our own and the Nations utter ruin might be
prevented, which God professedly declares, yea swears he has no pleasure in. We
read of those indeed who were ready to cast such a calumny upon God, as if he
took pleasure in their death; for they said, -- if our transgressions and our
sins be upon us, and Ezekiel* 33* ^^*
we pine away in them, how then should we live? etc. as if they had said, What
do you tell us of living, or prophecy of life, when we find the quite contrary
that we are dying? Now as to this God vindicates himself, asserting the clean
v. 11.
contrary by an Oath: Say unto them, as I live says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live, etc. As death is indeed an act of justice, punishing the impenitent, so
it has the nature of good in it, and so it is pleasing to God, who is just as
well as merciful; but as it is merely the creatures ruin and misery, so he
delights not in it, and to this he swears. Indeed God cannot lie, and so his
word might be enough, O beatos no^, quorum causa Deus jurat; O miseri nos, si
non juranti Domino credimus* Tertull.
but the more to confirm what he says he is pleased to swear, and happy we, for
whose sake God swears if we believe, but miserable we, if he shall swear and we
yet not believe him; and further, to show his unwillingness that we should dye,
he doubles his invitation to turn, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for
why will ye dye O house of Israel. And this ingemination, as it shows our
dullness and love to our sins, and loathness to leave them, so a vehemence and
intention of spirit in God, there being much life, spirit, and affectionateness
in sueh expressions, and it shows also a necessity of compliance; for that
cannot but be a matter of great weight, that we are so often invited to, such
Scripture ingeminations not being vain, but the more words from God the more
weight, and what is doubly pressed must needs be doubly our duty, and that which
we are doubly engaged to. Surely as it shows God desires it much, so that it
concerns us much, and what indeed can concern us more than that? which unless
we do, we as certainly perish as the Lord lives. And what goodness and
condescension is it in the great God, that he should so earnestly and so often
invite us to that which is so much for our own good; and that though he cannot
be bettered nor made happier by us, yet that our salvation should be so dear to
him: and therefore let us set to it our selves, and encourage one another all
we can, looking up to God for help, for though we can turn away, Ps. 119. 176.
Hos. 13. 9.
we cannot of our selves turn again; we can wound, but not heal our selves;
throw our selves down, but not raise our selves up; loose our selves, but not
reduce our selves.

CHAP. XV. To see to it, that our turning to God be true and real.
AND let us not only encourage one another to turn to God, but be sure our
conversion be sincere. 1. Let there be a sound conviction of sin, and a kindly
compunction for it, with a through aversion from it to the Lord, both in heart
and life, in inward principles and outward practices, there being a change both
of the disposition, and affection, and love to sin, within, and of the
conversation without, and these depend one upon another. For 'till the
conscience be thoroughly convinct of sin, how should the heart be kindly
contrite for sin? and 'till the heart be contrite for sin, how should it
forsake or turn from sin? and 'till it do turn from sin, how should it turn to
God? And 2. let this turn be such as is of God, as also unto God, quite Jer. 4.
1.
through unto him, and not to any thing below him, or on this side him. O how
sad is it to suffer shipwreck near the haven, to turn toward God, and yet
never to reach nor take up in God, as our true and proper center! to come up
out of Egypt, and yet never to come into Canaan! not to be far from the Kingdom
of God, from heaven, and yet to fall short of it, and to be turned into hell!
3. Let it be such as arises from faith. 4. Let it be hearty, with all or the
whole heart; no part of the heart here being reserved for sin, but the whole
heart inclined one way, and that to God: as it is said of good King Josiah, 2
King. 23. 25.
that like unto him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with
all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, etc. Indeed the
heart is the main, and what is done Quod cor non facit, non fit.
here, unless it be with the heart, it is not done. And in what should we be
hearty indeed, if not in what we do to God, and in what tends so infinitely to
our own good? 5. Let it be universal. 1. As to the subject turning, the whole
man, body and soul, and all the faculties of the one, and members of the other,
complete as to parts, though not degrees, as to extension though not
perfection; in every part, though but in part. As the Air in the dawning, is
light in eevery part, though but in part; else if any one part be unturned, we
shall (as one expresses it) with our whole go to hell, and therefore as all of
us, and in us, is turned away from God, never let us rest till all be turned
again to God. 2. As to the object, turned from, and turned to, from all sin to
all that is holy and righteous, from every false and crooked way to every true
and right way; for as there is no Brook so small, no River Ps. 119. 101, 128.
so little, but if a man follow it, it will bring him to the Sea, so there is no
sin so small, but if a man Optima poenitentia est nova vita. Luther. Poenitere
a malis, and abstinere a malis.
addict himself unto it, and still follow and pursue it to the end, it will
certainly bring him to the dead salt Sea of eternal horrors, and everlasting
torments. And therefore let us turn from all sin, and every evil way to the
contrary good; and give me leave here to instance in some few particulars, as
from our pride and haughtiness of mind, to humility and lowliness of mind. It
is very sad, and bodes ill, that though Trade decays, and men's estates are
lower, yet men's minds are still high. How many are poorer in purse, but not in
spirit? their means is less and lower, but pride and luxury rather greater and
higher; as if though God humble them, they were resolved not to be humbled.
From our garish flanting, and immodest attire, and that allures to wantonness,
(the great sin of these times,) to what is sober and modest, and becoming such
as profess godliness, and the fear of the Lord. Tamar's apparel made Judah to
Genesis 38. 15.
take her for an harlot, and however such (says one) may be honest, yet such as
are honest, will hardly take them to be so, because they lay themselves and
others open to temptation. Augustus Vestitus ins^^nis, ac mollis, superbiae
vexillum est, and luxuriae nidus. Hieronymus.
Caesar was wont to say, that stately and light Apparel was the banner of
pride, and nest of luxury; and if (says one of the fathers) women adorn
themselves, so as to provoke men to lust after them, though no evil follow upon
it, yet those women shall suffer damnation, because they offered poison to
others, though none would drink it. A very Heathen could say, Cultus magna ubi
cura, ibi magna virtutis incuria. Cato.
where there is great care of dressing, there is little care of goodness: but
now Professors themselves think it little or no fault to be as garish in their
Apparel as others, and to follow every foolish strange upstart fashion,
exceeding in their apparel beyond their calling, and above their means, etc.
but let such read and weigh these and the like places. Is. 3. 16. etc. Zeph. 1.
8. 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. Romans 12. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 14. etc. From our
excess and riot, and prodigious luxury, to temperance and sobriety; from all
filthiness, uncleanness, and obscenity, to purity, chastity, and possessing our
vessels, that is, our bodies, in sanctification, and honor, and not in the
lust of concupiscence, even 1 These. 4. 4, 5.
as the Gentiles which know not God. From our profanations of God's name and
day, to the sanctifying of the same; from our carelessness and security, to
godly fear and Christian vigilance; from our earthliness to heavenly
mindedness, our covetousness to contentedness with such things as Heb. 13. 5.
Romans 12. 11.
we have; from our lukewarmness, indifferency, and formality in the things of
God, to zeal, fervency, and ardency of affection. From our slightings and
despisings of God's ordinances, to the setting of an higher value and esteem
upon them; from our licentiousness to more strictness, and barrenness and
ingratitude, to greater thankfulness and fruitfulness. From our divisions,
strifes, and contentions one with another, to union and indearedness of
affection one toward another; from our animosities to unanimity, from our rash
and harsh censurings, and judgings of others, to judging our selves; from our
frowardness and fierceness, to gentleness and meekness; from our deceitfulness
and fraudulency, to faithfulness and sincerity; from our self-seekings, and
lookings every man to his own things, to self denyings, and looking every man
also to Phil. 2. 4.
the things of others; from our harshness, churlishness, and uncharitableness,
to kindness and readiness to do good; from speaking evil, or 1 These. 5. 15.
rendering evil for evil to any man, to show all meekness, and follow that which
is good, unto all; from all error, heresy, and strange doctrines and
opinions, to the form of sound 2 Timothy 1. 13.
words, and the faith once delivered to the Saints; from fickleness and
unstayedness in the truth Jude 3.
, to establishment, etc. In a word, from what ever is offensive, and
displeasing to God, and prejudicial to our selves or others, to whatever is
pleasing and acceptable to God, and profitable to our selves and others. And
indeed the very essence of repentance lies in this, in our turning with our
whole man from all sin, with grief and hatred of it, unto God, and all that is
good; but while we condemn sin with our tongues, if yet we regard and take
pleasure in any sin in our hearts, we are far yet from God, yea abominable to
him. 6. Let our turning to God be from right principles, and upon right
grounds, spiritual grounds, as in the name of Christ, in his Col. 3. 17.
strength, and as looking for acceptance both of our persons, and repentance,
in and through him, and his merits, mediation, and satisfaction. So let it be
in conscience of his commands, and out of love to God, because we love God,
therefore let us fear any longer to displease him, and turn to him, that we may
no longer offend nor provoke him. It is said of Luther, that having heard Staupi
a grave Divine say, that that was kind repentance, which began from the love
of God, ever after the practice of repentance was sweeter to him. So out of
hatred to sin, as an enemy to God and his glory, and our own souls good, and
because of that repugnancy and contrariety that there is in it to God, and his
holy nature and law. 7. Let it be for right ends, as the glory of God; this
must be the main and chiefest end. If whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we
do, we are 1 Cor. 10. 31.
to do all to the glory of God: how much more when we repent, and turn to God
must that be, that he may be glorified? 8. Let it be speedy, Gather your selves
together, etc. before the decree Zeph. 2. 1, 2.
come forth, before the day pass, etc. O how does the Lord long, and is as it
were in pain and travel 'till it be! 'till we leave our sins, and turn to him!
-- O Jerusalem, will thou not be made Jer. 13. 27. -- 14. 14.
clean? when shall it once be? and, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? and, how -- 31. 22.
long will thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? and, -- how long will
this people provoke Numb. 14. 11.
me? and, how long will it be e're they believe me, etc. And shall we make God
long still in vain, and be as it were in pain and travel? Why God will do that
which others will not do: They say if a man put away his wife, etc but thou
have Jer. 3. 1.
played the harlot with many Lovers, yet return again to me says the Lord. A
man will hardly entertain a servant that seeks to him in his old age, that
refused his service all his life before, and Nulla poenitentia seria, est
unquam nimis sera. Ambr.
how should God? and yet he will, if sincere, and true. But though true
repentance be never too late, yet late repentance is seldom true, for men's sins
then rather leave them, than they their Pecoata ipsos deserunt, non ipsi
peccata, etc. Ambros.
sins; and such a cessation from sin, is not repentance for sin, and therefore
take we heed of delays, whereby we do more strengthen sin, harden our own
hearts, and give Satan stronger hold, and fuller possession. Had we a thorn in
our foot, or a mote in our eye, would we delay to get them out? and is not the
guilt of sin worse in the soul? Certainly, a man had better lie under the
weight of all the mountains in the world, than under the guilt of one sin; we
are bid not to withold good from the owners thereof, Say not to thy neighbor,
go and come again Prove. 3. 27, 28.
and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by thee. And shall we still
withdraw or withhold our selves from God, whose own we are in many respects,
and who, when he comes to us, comes but for his own? and shall we detain still
from him what is his own? which we do, while we still refuse to turn to God,
and lock up our selves as it were in the Devil's hold. But let us remember we
are the Lords, we are bought with a price, and he is not only our owner, but
our Creator and Benefactour; and it is well for us we have so good an owner,
and so kind a Lord, and let us not then withhold our selves a moment longer,
from him, but yield our selves to him; for is there any safety but under his
wings, any happiness but in his presence, any peace without his pardon? etc or
can we be holy and happy too soon, blessed too soon, pardoned too soon? in the
love, in the heart of God too soon? under the shines of his face, in the light
of his countenance too soon? free, Libertas bonum inestimabile. Nulli been
venditur auro.
and from under the vassalage of sin and Satan too soon? especially, freedom
being so desirable, and such an inestimable good. Who would not be, sui juris,
free? The Rabbis have a saying, that if the heavens were parchment, and the
Sea ink, it could not sufficiently contain the praises of liberty; how much
less of spiritual liberty? of being made free from sin, so as to become
servants to God, and have our fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life, to be freed Nec beliua saevior ulla, quam servi rabies. etc.
from his slavery, who is a slave himself, and no slavery to the service of a
slave. It was Canaan's curse*, that he should be a servant of servants; Genesis 9.
25.
and are not our sins the very gangrenes, and plague-sores of our souls? the
utter enemies of our peace, safety, and felicity, which still distemper and
disquiet us, and shall these be retained still, or can they too soon be
abandoned? 9. Let it be daily, constant, and continual, for we daily sin,
continually transgress, and therefore are still to be daily acting repentance;
and there being still sin and corruption in us, we are still daily and
continually to be turning from it to the contrary good: we daily wash our
hands, Quia semper peccamus, semper poenitentiam agere dehemus. Hier.
and cleanse our houses, and so let us by repentance, our hearts, of those daily
infirmities we fall into. We are still letting in sin, and therefore by
repentance should be still pumping it out. This might occasion that saying of
Tertullian, that he was born to nothing else but repentance: for we having
brought upon our selves a miserable necessity of sinning daily and continually,
what can we be more born to, than to Dominus dicendo poenitentiam agite, omnem
vitam fidelium poenitentiam esse voluit. Luther.
be repenting daily and continually? 10. Let it be more and more increasing,
and persevering to the end, not only our daily course, but 'till we have
finished our course; not resting in this, that we were once turned, but still
daily more and more turning from all iniquity, and practicing the contrary
duties of Christianity. If conversion be good, certainly the more the better,
and the fullest is best: we should get more and more changed and turned into
the Lord's image, from glory to glory, etc. and every day get 2 Cor. 3. 18.
nearer heaven and salvation then other. It is said of Julius Caesar, whose
warlick exploits were so Nilque putans factum, dum quod super esset agendum.
famous, that he still went forward, thinking nothing done (as it were) while
any thing was yet to be done. So let us with Paul, forgetting Phil. 3. 13.
those things behind, reach forth to what is yet before, and take we heed of
Apostasy from God, and 2 Pet. 2. 22.
his ways, and having known the way of righteousness, of turning from the holy
commandment, to the crooked ways of sin; for what was this but to bring as it
were an evil report upon God and his ways, and to make as if his ways were not
such as the Scripture declares them to be, yea and as if the ways of sin were
better, and to be preferred before them; for having tried both, such as more
eligible, turn to the other again, and what a dreadful thing is it to bring as
it were an evil report upon God and his ways! It is said of those that brought
but an evil report up on the Numb. 14. 37.
land, that they died by the plague before the Lord; but what will become of
those, who bring as it were an evil report upon the Lord himself, and his ways,
and make as if there was iniquity in him, and hence says the Lord, what
iniquity have your fathers found in me? etc. and, O my Jer. 2. 5.
people what I have done to thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? testify
against me. As if the Micah 6. 3. etc.,
Lord had said, you make as if I had done so and so unto you, but what have I
done? plead the cause with me, what have you to lay to my charge, or object,
speak and I will answer, I am willing to submit my ways to scanning, and to
bring my proceedings with you to a trial. For your better conviction put in
your Bill of complaint against me, etc. O the wonderful condescension of the
great God to poor sinners! as if he had said, Your own consciences, which I
appeal to, cannot but say that I never dealt ill with you, but on the contrary
well with you, for I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you
out of the house of servants, etc. and, Have I been a wilderness to Israel, a
land of darkness; etc. O with what confusion will this fill the hearts of such
another day? All (says the Prophet Jeremy) that forsake Jer. 17. 13.
thee shall be ashamed, and therefore how good is it for us, as to draw near to
God, so to keep still with him, if we know when we are well: for whither should
we go from him? 1 John 2. 28.
And now little children abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have
confidence, and not be ashamed at his coming.

CHAP. XVI. To prove God by turning unto him again.
AND let us now, by such a turning as this, but prove God, and see if he will
not bless us, and do us good. There is indeed an unlawful Deuteronomy. 6. 16.
proving of God, which is called a tempting of him, and forbidden; but this, of
proving God, in doing our duty, and in returning to him, he puts his people
upon. Bring you (says he) all Mal. 3. 10.
the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and
prove me now herewith says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the
windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room to
receive it, etc. i. e. Do you but return to me, as he exhorts them more
generally v. 7. and do your duty, and try me therewith, if I will not bless and
prosper you. And what wonderful condescension is here, that the great God, even
the Lord of Hosts, Dignatio stupenda.
should call upon such as we are, to prove him, to make as it were an
experiment upon him, and, as if he should say, Do it but this one year, and
if it do, hold on; if not, afterward do as you please. O that the great God
should condescend so low, as to deal with such as we are, in so familiar a way,
as not only to prescribe a remedy for our relief, but invite us withal to
prove his goodness and faithfulness therein, and that with a kind of oath -- if
I will not, which is Promission confirmatur juramento. Si non aperuero, etc.
non ero deus, etc. Pisc. O immensam, and nullis nec Angelorum nec hominum
linguis satis depraedicandam clementiam, O vero nos miseros, si tantam dei
gratiam contemnimus, ipsi tergum obvertentes, etc. Winkelm. in locum.
to be supplied with something else, as, let me not else be believed hereafter,
or I will not be God, etc. with reverence be it spoken; and what admiration in
the highest degree does this call for? and let not only men on earth, but all
the Angels in Heaven forever admire and adore this so wonderful condescension,
that the great God should thus put himself upon the proof and trial, and that
by such as we are, and that with an oath, if he do not what he promises, if we
do but what he commads: and who indeed have ever thus proved him, and have not
still found him merciful? yea, and faithful in his promise. The Lord appeals to
Jehoiakim, as concerning the experience his good father Josiah, upon trial, had
had of his goodness and bounty upon his obedience of his commands, causing it
to be well with him, when he did well: Shall thou reign (says God) because Jer.
22. 15, 16.
thou closest thy self in Cedar? that is, do thou think (as the Dutch expound
it) to make thy Kingdom strong and lasting against the threatenings of God,
because of thy stately and brave Cedar buildings. Did not thy father eat and
drink, that is, live quietly and comfortably, and do judgment and justice, and
then it was well with him. v. 16. He judged the cause of the poor and needy,
and then it was well with him, etc. As if God had said, I do appeal to thee,
was it not thus? and did he not thus prove it to be? but v. 17. Thine eyes and
thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and but for to shed innocent
blood, and for oppression, and for violence to do it. Sad, that the eyes and
heart of so great a person should not be but for such things, no better
employed! and how could such a one expect it should be well with him? So may
God say, search the Scriptures, turn over those sacred Records, and see if you
can find there any that ever turned to God, and it was not well with them, that
ever truly repented, and repented that they repented, or were sorry that they
turned from their sins to me, or with whom it was not far better with than
before. O what exceeding joy, and wonderful sweet peace of conscience have they
had upon their turning from their evil ways, that they would not have been
without for a world! And here I might produce several instances, as concerning
Israel, Ephraim, Niniveh, and others; so the prodigal, he upon coming to
himself, resolves, by returning to his father, to prove his clemency, and how
does he find it? exceeding great! for it is said, that when he was yet a great
way off, his Luke 15. 17, 18, 20. etc.
father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed
him, etc. And indeed never was there yet Nation, people, or person, that did
prove God, so as unfeignedly to turn to him, but found him very gracious.
Remember Job 4. 7.
I pray thee (says Eliphaz to Job) who ever perished being innocent, or where
were the righteous cut off? So who ever perished being truly penitent? or when,
or where, was a returning sinner cut off? no, never any such finally perished,
let any produce an instance if they can. The word of the Lord is tried, it is
upon good Psalm. 18. 30. -- 12. 6.
proof found to be most true, without the least dross of deceit. And thus Jesus
Christ is said to be a tried stone, i. e. upon trial found most firm, and
precious, fit and fully sufficient to bear up all that build upon him; and thus
he is a stone of proof, as we say armor of proof, i. e. a stone thoroughly
proved, that will certainly stay by, and stay up, all that by faith rest and
rely upon him, amidst whatever storms may make head against them, and that
while others fickle stays and refuges of lies, which they fondly relied on, are
swept away. And thus God as to his goodness and faithfulness, which he
manifests to such as truly turn to him, is a well tried and experienced God,
and so will ever be, as has been heard, so shall it be seen, and as it has
been told, so shall it be found, and much more. Indeed the Lord proves us, and
that several ways, sometimes one way, sometimes another, sometimes with health
and prosperity, and sometimes with sickness and adversity, etc. But what
pitiful sorry creatures do we upon trial show our selves to be? and how much do
we fail his expectations, and what he promises to himself concerning Quasi
dicat, omnia tentavi media, sed lusi oleum, and operam, nec bonis nec malis
estis curabil^s, etc. Pareus.
us? so as that he is even at a stand with us, and knows not what (as it were)
to do to us, as he says of Ephraim, O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? etc.
for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away,
etc. Hos. 6. 4. A most pathetical expostulation, as if the Lord had said, I
have several ways tried you, and made several assays upon you, sometimes one
way, and sometimes another; sometimes by my word, and sometimes with my rod;
one while prospering you, another while afflicting you, etc. and after all I
profess I am even at a stand concerning you, and you show your selves such, as
that I know not what to do to you. Your goodness, if any, what is it? but as
the morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away, it is but a mere flash,
an outside, fickle, unconstant nothing, and you unsteady and deceitful. So it
is said of the Israelites, that the Deuteronomy. 3. 2.
Lord led them forty years in the wilderness to prove them, and to know what
was in their hearts, whether they would keep his commandments or no: and what
upon proof did he find them, even an awker'd, untoward, perverse people? they
gave God indeed good words, made him fair promises, spoke well, but acted ill,
and quite -- 5. 27, 28.
contrary to what they pretended. God said indeed, Surely they are my people
children that will Is. 63. 8, 9, 10.
not lie, so he was their Savior, etc. But they Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit, etc. When Jesurun waxed fat, then he
kicked, and when lean, he murmured. It is said, God left Hezekiah 2 Chr. 32. 31.
to try him, to know all that was in his heart, and how much pride, and vain
glory, and ingratitude was there found there? God many times lays us low, and
what large promises do we make, if he will but restore us, which many times the
Lord does; but what false deceitful creatures do we show our selves! and so we
think, if we had but such and such mercies, how would we improve them: but it
is quite otherwise upon trial, so before affliction comes, we think many times
we have a good measure of faith and patience, and christian courage, and
submissiveness to the will of God; but upon proof how little does it appear to
be? But now it is come upon thee and thou faintest, it touches thee Job 4. 5,
6.
and thou art troubled, etc. thus surely men of low Psalm. 62. 9.
degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie, to be laid or being laid
in the balance: that is, put to the trial, they are altogether lighter than
vanity, i. e. vanity being laid in one scale, Sensusest, si homines ponerentur
in una lance bilancis, vanitas vero in altera, tum comperirentur leviores esse
qu^mvanitas. Pisc.
and all they together in the other, vanity would yet outweigh them, and be
found weightier than the weightiest of them. By a ^ye we are to understand
false and deceitful; and as men of high and low degree comprehend all sorts of
men, so vanity and a lie, all sorts of deceitfulness and uncertainty. But God
now, he upon proof is ever found what his Word declares, and what he promises
to be; yea, such as make proof of him, find him to be better, and more than
what they expected him to be. Joshua when he was Josh. 23. 14.
now going the way of all the earth, he appeals to all Israel, that not one
thing had failed of all the good things God had promised, all came to pass, and
not one thing failed thereof. And Solomon declares, as concerning his father
David, that 1 King. 3. 6*
God had showed him great mercy, and kept for him great kindness, according as
he walked before him in truth and in righteousness, etc. and David Psalm* 119.
65.
himself says, thou have dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according to thy
word. And O that England, that we of this Nation, would at length, by true
conversion, but prove God, and see but what would be the effect and issue
thereof, if he would not bless us, and cause it to be well with us; we have
tried others, and other ways, and upon proof found them vain and ineffectual. O
that at length we would but try here, if not for our own sakes, yet for the
sake of the Nation, or at least of our little ones; if we have no regard to our
selves, nor any other, yet at least let us have respect to them, that they may
be saved, which are or should be so dear to us, and which we especially should
seek the good of, because while so little they cannot seek it themselves, and
that when we have served the Lord in our generation, they may continue after us
to stand up in our stead. These Ezra had a Ezr. 8. 21.
special regard to, in that fast he proclaimed at Domino parvuli maximae curae
sunt, nec dubium Deum saepius ur^ ibus maximis pa^cere, propter multitudinem
infantium, etc. Winck* in loc.
the river Ahara, it was to seek of him a right way for them, and their little
ones: Yea what a singular respect has God himself to such, how have his bowels
even yern'd toward them, and shall not ours? you know what he said to Jonah,
And should not I spare Niniveh that great City, wherein are more than sixscore
thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left,
that is, young children and infants. And shall not Parents have a tender
respect to such? can ye endure to see the evil else that is like to come upon
them? do but read, and seriously weigh what the want of turning to God has
brought upon others little ones, Lam. 2. 11. -- 4. 10.
and shall this move us nothing? O that something Hos. 13. 16. Ezekiel. 9. 6.
or other might prevail but to try! what not try what is purposed for our own
weal! why? the Lord you see is pleased to put himself to the trial, prove me,
and shall we refuse, when as never yet any proved him thus in vain? O did we
but truly and unfeignedly repent and turn to God, we should then see what was
the power and prevalency thereof, and we should meet with such proofs of God's
favor and goodness, as would fully convince us that all the while we refused
to do it, we for sook our own mercy, and from Hag. 2. 19.
that very day would the Lord bless us: and let us all set our selves to this,
as belonging to all, and as being the concern of all, both old and young, high
and low, rich and poor, great and mean, noble and ignoble, for are we not all
turned away from God? and is it not every ones concern to live and be happy,
and be saved? or is it only poor and mean ones concern? and besides, with God
there is no respect of persons, but Romans 2. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
he being the absolute and sovereign Lord over all, all are alike bound to own
his authority, and obey his commands, of which this is one of the chief, -- but
now commands all men every where to repent, and such by reason of God's
bounty Act. 17. 30.
have greater obligation to this duty than others, so as to be exemplary, else
the greater is their sin, and the greater will be their punishment, and Majora
beneficia, majora flagitia, majora supplicia.
death will shortly level all; so that though now there be difference of men as
to these things here, as there is (as one well expresses it) of Counters while
the Merchants account lasts, some standing for pence, some pounds, some
hundreds, some thousands; and so of Players, while on the Stage, some going for
rich, some for poor, some for Princes, some for Peasants, etc. and so of Trees,
while growing in the Forest, some being Oaks, some Elms, some Brambles, etc.
yet when the account is over, the play ended, the trees cut down, especially
burnt to ashes, there will be no difference at all, no more will there be after
death, and when all shall appear before God, etc. And therefore how should all
attend this, and apply themselves to it to their utmost? Christ says, be
zealous and repent, and surely Rev. 3. 19.
had we any zeal for our own and the Nation's good, we would repent: and O that
England unfeignedly repenting and turning to God, might at length become an
example and monument of God's goodness to all such as shall do so, both to the
Nations abroad, and to the generations yet to come at home, that so all, in
England, might see how gracious the Lord is to such; and we might have cause to
make our boast of him, Lo this is our God, we have returned to him, and he has
saved us, and we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation; and let others
come, and do as we have done, and they shall prove God to be the same in his
goodness as we have, that whereas it Jer. 7. 12.
was said before, Go to London, as sometimes to Shiloh, and see what I did for
the wickedness thereof, what a sweeping plague, and after that a dreadful fire
I sent among them; so it may be said now, God and see, upon their turning again
unto me, what my goodness has been to them, and what blessings I have
multiplied upon them, and how graciously I have turned to them. And truly but
in such a way to expect God's goodness, it is but to tempt him, yea to provoke
him, and how dreadfully does the Lord express himself against such! when a
sinner shall bless himself Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19, 20* etc.
in his heart, and say, he shall have peace, though he walk in the imagination
of his heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; the Lord will not spare such a
one, but his anger shall smoke against him, and all the curses in God's book
shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven,
etc. And if we in stead of turning to God, shall, by going on in our sins,
still provoke him, what can we expect, but that his soul should loath us, and
that he should even utterly forsake us, and cast us out of his presence, which
Jer. 23, 33. etc.
he threatens as the sorest burden; and though we build statelier and fairer
houses, that he should say of us, as sometimes of Edom, They shall build, but I
will throw down, etc. and they Mal. 1. 4.
shall labor but for the fire, as some render that Hab. 2. 13. Behold, is it
not of the Lord of hosts, that the people shall labor in the very fire, or for
the fire; so that what they build shall be consumed Pro igne. Iun. Pisc. etc.
by the fire: and has it not been so as concerning some houses already? and
was it not of the Lord of hosts, by his determinate counsel, and as an act of
his righteous judgment, that when so famous a City was on fire, they who
labored to quench it, labored in that sense but as it were in the fire, that
is, to no purpose, and wearied themselves for very vanity. And if we shall
still persist in our sins, how justly may we fear that all that is reedified
may be but for the* fire again, or that some heavier judgment may yet befall
us, which may reach not only to our houses and estates, but our very limbs and
lives. But if we shall indeed turn again to God, and he be pleased but to cause
his face to shine, what a famous renowned City may we not yet then expect to
see, even a City sought out, or sought to, or after, that is, exceeding
desirable, and Isa. 62. 12.
not forsaken; and not only a safe but a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that
shall not be taken down, etc. when it shall become a City of truth and
righteousness, a faithful City, and righteousness lodge in the midst thereof,
and holiness written upon it to the Lord; then shall that song be sung indeed,
we have a strong City, Salvation -- 26. 1.
will God appoint for walls and bulwarks, etc, yea then will he own it, as his
rest, and his rest shall be glorious, and upon all the glory shall be a -- 11.
10. Psalm. 46. 4.
defense, and there is a river, the streams whereof shall then make it glad,
even the special gracious protecting presence of the most High; and whereas it
was said before this is the City to be visited, that is, with woes and plagues,
now it shall be said, this is the City to be blessed, to be honored, to be
visited, but with loving -- 85. 9. etc.
kindness and tender mercies; and then shall glory dwell in our land, and the
Lord shall give that which is good, and mercy and truth shall meet together,
and righteousness and peace kiss each other; yea mercy shall surely then (as
the Psalmist expresses it) be built up forever, that is, -- 89. 2.
remain and abide upon us, and ours, forever, one pile of mercy, as it were,
upon another, till the building be completed, till it reach to heaven, to that
building of God, that house not made with hands eternal in the heavens. Thus
the work of mercy being begun, shall be carried on, as when the foundation of
some famous structure, is laid by some able skilful artificer, to which it
seems an illusion, so will God not leave this blessed pile half finnished, but
perfect and complete the same. Thus we have built up houses, but then God
himself will build up mercy, and that shall uphold us and our houses, and
England shall be set as a pattern of blessing and blessings, as is said of
David, For thou have made him most blessed for ever: the Hebrew is, -- set him
blessings, i. e. as some, beset him with blessings; as Psalm. 5. 12. and 32. 10.
replenished him, etc. or, as others, put him to be blessings, that is, to
impart them, or to be a blessing, as is said of Abraham, and others, Genesis 12.
2. Is. 19. 24. Ezekiel. 34. 26. etc. or Psalm. 21. 6.
rather, as others, to be an example of blessing, (...) Pones eum
benedictiones. Hac loquendi formula exprimitur tam uberem bonorum copiam
affluere ei, ut merito benevolentiae divinae exemplar esse possit, etc Calv.
and blessings, that is, so blessed and replenished with blessings, as to
become worthily an example to others thereof. And so shall England become, upon
its return to God: as it is said of Ephraim and Manasseh, In thee shall Israel
bless, saying, God make thee as Ephriam, etc. so, as England; the Lord bless
thee as he has blessed his people there, (whereas others have been an example
of God's curse, as Zedekiah and Ahab, The Lord make thee as Zedekiah, etc.) and
then from that very time that we do indeed Gen, 48. 20. Jer. 29. 22.
turn again to God, and are reformed, the name of the City, and Country too,
shall be the name of that City, Ezekiel. 48. 35. as that wherein our chief good
and happiness shall consist, Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there.

CHAP. XVII. Motives to seek the face or favor of God.
COnsider 1. how excellent it is, so as David Psalm. 36. 7.
admires it. How excellent is thy loving kindness O God, etc. It cannot be
expressed, what is there in heaven it self that exceeds it, whom have I in heaven
but thee? And they shall see -- 73. 25. Rev. 22. 4.
his face, etc. Life is precious, the preciousest thing in Nature; but the
favor of God, as has been hinted, is more precious, it is life even in Ps. 63.
3.
death it self, as that blessed Martyr Mr. Bradford answered, when profer'd
life, if he would recant, Life (said he) with God's displeasure is worse than
death, and death in his favor is true life.

2. How honorable, what indeed more honors? Since thou wast precious in my
sight thou Is. 43. 4.
have been honorable. From that very time that a soul finds favor with God,
you may write it down as happy, so truly honorable, but there is no true
honor 'till then, it being God alone, and his favor, and grace, that creates
that; this, as I hinted before, is the crowning mercy, -- with favor will thou
crown him. It is observed of Ps. 5. 12.
the Rainbow, that of it self it is but a common vapor, but that which gilds
it, and as it were enamels it with so many radiant colors, it is the Sun, by
shining upon it; and so all the gildings, all the beauty, glory, and luster
that is upon any, it is from the shines of God's face, from the beams of his
favor and grace, and without this, man, though in honor, is yet but vile, and
like Psalm. 49. 20.
the beasts that perish. -- And the earth shined with his glory. It is the
grace and favor of Ezekiel. 43. 2.
God, (which he counts his glory,) that makes to shine such lumps of earth as
we are. It is spoken as the great honor of the seven Princes of Persia, and
Media, that were next to the King, Hest. 1. 14.
that they saw his face; those Persian Monarchs were seldom seen of any, it was
a piece of state they took upon themselves: and if it was so much honor to see
the face of an earthly Monarch, what honor is it to behold the face of God! As
for me I will behold thy face in righteousness. Psalm. 17. 15.
This is that badg of honor that differences the Saints from all others, and
is not only the happiness, but glory of heaven it self, and of those Angels
and blessed Heroes that reside there. I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence
of God: and, I say unto you, that in heaven Luke 1. 19. Matthew. 18. 10.
the Angels do always behold the face of my father which is in heaven. This is
spoken of as the grearest honor the creature can be advanced to in heaven, and
what greater honor then can there be on earth?

3. How comfortable, nothing comforts like it, nor any thing, truly, without
it. Its better than wine, yea turns even water into wine, it gives songs in
the night, and in the grossest darkness causes to arise light; and this alone
in all troubles is the choicest cordial, no Bezoar, Pearl, Alkermes, nor other
cordial, can comfort like it: hence the Prophet David, a man inspired by God,
of all cordials, makes choice of this, Let I pray thee thy merciful kindness
Ps. 119. 76.
be for my comfort etc. or, let it be for to comfort me: where should it be? O
let it be by Ad consolandum me.
me, let it be with me, as my cordial, to cheer and revive me. Such as are
subject to faint, use to have their cordials by them, now Lord, says David, let
me have this, and none indeed to Ostendit nihil esse quod dolorem abstergat,
donec propitium sibi Deum sentiat. Calvin.
this; this was it made Oecolampadius, when he was near death, putting his hand
upon his heart, to say hic sat lucis, here is abundance of light, that is, of
unspeakable joy; and Mr. Bol^on, I am by the wonderful mercies of God, as full
of comfort as my heart can hold; and another to cry out, O the joy, the
unspeakable joy I find in my soul; and another, my cup runs over, etc. this
will comfort, when other the choicest cordials cannot, nor will not, and that
in the most disconsolate estate, but nothing in times of distress can comfort
without it, because nothing can supply the want of it. It is said, In the light
of the Kings countenance is life, and his favor is as a cloud of the latter
rain, and as dew upon the grass: and what then is the light of Gods
countenance? his favor? how much more comfortable and refreshing must that
needs be? -- Thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance. O one cast of
that is more comforting, than the wealth of a whole world. When Cyrus had once
given a cup of Gold to one, and a Kiss, in token of special favor, to another,
he to whom the King had given the Cup, told him, that the Cup he gave him was
not so good gold as the Kiss he gave to the other, etc.

4. How profitable; nothing makes more for our profit, it being the main, and
that which is the very root and wellspring of all good: but of this I have
occasionally spoken something before, and shall be the briefer therefore now:
what will or can God withhold from those he loves? Surely, those his heart is
set upon, his hand cannot but be open to. Ps. 84. 11. The Lord God is a Sun and
shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly: and why not from them? why is his hand so open
to them? because they have his heart, the Lord loves them, his countenance
beholds them. Ps. 85. 1. Lord, thou have been favorable to thy land, (says the
Psalmist) and what then? thou have brought back their captivity, forgiven their
iniquity, covered their sin, taken away thy wrath, etc. The father loves the
Son, and has given Joh. 3. 35. Is. 43. 4.
all things into his hands. -- I have loved thee, therefore will I give men for
thee, and people for thy life, etc. Moses had asked very much of Exodus 33. 16.
God, and yet goes on to ask more. And what says the Lord? I will (says he) do
this thing v. 17.
also that thou have spoken As if the Lord had said, I can indeed deny thee
nothing, I have done (it is true) much already, but I will do this also: why?
for thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name, that is, I have
taken special and particular notice of thee, and thy name, as one whom I
singularly favor, and I will v. 19.
make all my goodness pass before thee, etc. O what will not God do for. such!
Hence Moses Exodus 33. 13. -- 34. 9.
often makes use of this argument, if I have found grace in thy sight, etc. The
favor of God is all good, every mercy radically; as the displeasure of God is
every judgment: that is, it is productive of all good, of each mercy: when a
soul has this good, which is the chief good, it has that good from which all
others spring, and therefore may write under it, and cut out from it, any other
whatsoever, all particular mercies and goods being but the favor of God, as it
were specificated, and brought as it were into this or that particular mercy or
good; so that such a soul may say of all its other mercies and goods, this, and
that, and the other is the favor of God. So that the Soul that has it, has all
good, all mercies, in the fountain, and root, and wellspring of them; it has
that which produces and procures all good, and remedies all evils. Hence says
the Angel to Mary, Fear not Mary, for Luke 1. 30.
thou have found favor with God; there is no cause why such a soul should
fear, either the want of any good, or the feeling of any evil, the favor of
God being as a Sun in reference to the one, so as a shield in reference to the
other, and so every way sufficient.

5. How necessary; it is indeed the one thing needful? is life necessary? this
is life, yea better than life, and all true life is so much in it; that a Soul
is but dead without it, it being more the life of the soul, than the soul is of
the body. The Sun is not so necessary to the world, rain to the earth, as the
favor of God to the soul, the displays whereof are as the morning, and as the
rain, the former and the latter rain unto the Hos. 6. 3.
earth. Is to be happy necessary? the favor of God is our happiness; and look
as we cannot but be happy with it, whatever our state otherwise is, so we
cannot but be miserable without it. As it cannot but be day when the Sun
arises, though the Stars disappear, but it cannot but be night though they do
appear if the Sun be set; so it is as to the displayings or withdrawings of
God's face and favor.

-- Thine absence was my hell,
And now thou art returned, I am well. Herbert.

And hence for this cause the Angel salutes Mary as being blessed, because
highly favored. Luke 1. 28. Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is
with thee, blessed art thou among women. In a word, if to be truly happy, so
far as we are capable here, and to be fully happy hereafter be necessary, then
this is so, as that wherein consists both happiness in its initiation here, and
in its full consummation in heaven.

CHAP. XVIII. To endeavor the Conversion of others.
THere is only one thing further I have to add, and then I shall conclude:
viz. that this turning again being of such infinite concern unto all, that
being turned again our selves, we would endeavor our utmost, to be
instrumental therein to others: and the rather, that thereby we may show our
gratitude, for God's vouchsafing so great a favor to us. And truly, next to
the conversion and salvation of our own souls, we cannot busy our selves to
better purpose, not only as to their, and our own comfort and benefit, but the
good of the whole; so that this is every ones concern: for as one sinner, still
going Eccl. 9. 18.
on in his sins, may much hinder, so one sinner being turned again may much
further the Genesis 13. 32.
good of the whole. And who knows, whether one or a few sinners more being
turned again, may not help to make up that number, which being found, God may
be pleased for their sakes to spare the whole? But the great argument I shall
chiefly make use of at present, is that of the Apostle James, which is somewhat
the same indeed with that in the Text, but more amplified, Brethren, if any of
you do err from the truth Jam. 5. 19, 20.
i. e. in opinion, or practice, in faith or manners, and one convert him, that
is prove instrumental therein, making use of all ways and means subservient
thereunto; and here that is ascribed to the instrument and means, which is
properly God's work, because God in and by those means Verbum servandi ad
homines transfertur, non quod authors sint salutis, sed Ministri. Calvin.
works, and conveys a blessing: And any one, etc. for this work is not limited
to Ministers only, but belongs to others in their places, and stations, yea to
all, who some way or other may be helpful therein. The Apostle Peter speaks of
husbands being won by the conversation of their wives 1 Pet. ^. ^.
, now here is the duty, and then follows the dignity and commodity, v. 20. Let
him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall
save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. What weight is
there here in every word? even such as may quicken our desires, and raise our
endeavors to the highest pitch; and it is observable, that with this golden
sentence the Apostle shuts up his whole Epistle, there being no work as more
excellent in it self, so more acceptable to God, nor profitable to our selves
nor others, for whoever is instrumental therein. 1. He shall save, and that is a
Animam per Synecdochen, and (...), neque enim a falute excluditur corpus. Prsc.
good work, Jesus Christ came to save. 2. A soul, not an estate, or life,
though it is somewhat to save them, but a soul; indeed the body's saved too,
but the soul as chief is specified only. A soul, that is the main, and indeed
the man, the jewel, called our principal one, They pursue my soul Job 30. 15.
in the Hebrew it is, as you may see in the Margin, my principal one, so called
for its pre-eminence; Dutch read it, my Noble; others Princess, or excellent
one; David calls it his darling Ps. 22. 20.
, a soul which is so precious, more worth than a world, and which Jesus Christ
himself set so high a value upon, as to lay down his life, to save, and which
if a man should lose, it would Math. 16. 26.
profit him nothing, though he should gain the whole world, as Jesus Christ,
who best knew the worth of Souls, has declared, and which being once lost is
irrecoverable, for what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? O nothing
can be given here, though it was many worlds, so as to avail any thing; for as
the loss of the soul is incomparable, so it is irreparable. A soul, which being
safe all is safe and for the salvation of one of which, there is joy among all
the Angels Luke 15. 10.
in heaven. 3. A soul from death, that is (...). Pisc.
, eternal death, the second death, and this is death indeed, in comparison of
which the other death, viz. temporal, deserves not the name of death. 4. Hide a
multitude of sins. Some refer this to his sins that converts, God being very
gracious Efficiet ut Deus tegat, etc. ignoscit enim resipiscentibus, etiamsi
plurima gravissimaque peccata admiserit.
to such a one, etc. But others, (and better) to the sinner converted; for he
being instrumental of his conversion, proves so also of the covering, or
pardoning of his sins, so as not to condemn or hurt him, which is indeed man's
blessedness, and a very glorious privilege, as was hinted before: and what a
blessed thing is it to be instrumental herein, in covering another sins, yea
multitudes! Certainly this is more than if a man could be instrumental to
another of compassing for him an whole world, and to get one of such debts
discharged toward God, is more than ten thousand Talents unto man, and let him
now that converts a sinner from the error of his way know, yea and consider
this, to his comfort, and to his own and others encouragement, in so good a
work, and so as to give glory to God, for putting so great honor and dignity
upon him; and who would not lay out their utmost endeavors here, to save, and
to save a soul, and from death, yea eternal death, and to cover sin, yea a
multitude of sins? But the more yet to engage in so good a work, consider we,

1. Jesus Christ died to save souls, and shall not we contribute our utmost
endeavors? etc.

2. Others seek to pervert, yea subvert and destroy souls, and not we to
convert and save them? are they factours for the Devil, and Hell, and not we
for God and Heaven? etc.

3. This is one great end of God's converting us, and of giving us his Spirit,
it is to further the conversion of others: the manifestation Ut Ecclesia inde
fructum percipiat. Calv.
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit with all, that is, others, for
their good and benefit, and not to be idle, but to be made use of for 1 Cor.
12. 7.
common service. Christ says to Peter, and when thou art converted, strengthen
thy brethren; Luke 22. 32. Acts 10. 38.
and he himself being anointed with the holy Ghost, it is said, he went up and
down doing good; and so should we, and not receive the grace of God in vain,
nor have Talents, to keep them laid up in a napkin. I have read of an old man,
who Pau^^m sepultae, distat inertiae, celata virtus. Horat.
being converted himself, was so zealous and industrious this way, that he
brought above forty to seek out for heaven, that before had no more care that
way, then as if they had been a company of beasts, and this is indeed divine
labor, heavenly travel, blessed employment indeed, to covert souls, etc.

4. This it is an high honor, yea the highest, to be instrumental in so
blessed a work, herein we are workers together with God, and join in (...). 2
Cor. 6. 1.
fellowship with him, and what an honor is that? certainly it is a more
glorious and honorable exploit to convert souls, than to subdue Countries and
Kingdoms, vanquish Nations, yea than to exercise the vastest Dominions. To
rescue a soul from eternal death, there is nothing Nihil praestantius, aut
magis optabile, quam animam eripere ex morte aeterna, etc.
(says Calvin) more honorable, more desirable. We see how much Christ values
giving but meat to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, but how much more precious
to him is the salvation of the soul, than the life of the body.

5. It is a point of great wisdom, yea of the greatest, He that wins souls
is wise, that wins Prove. 11. 30.
them to God and his ways. I, he is a wise man indeed, truly wise, greatly
wise, write him down as so, for he approves, and makes it appear he is so
indeed; it is as if Solomon had said, There is a great deal of talk of wise men
in the world, but when all is said as can be said, he is the wise man that wins
souls, not he that wins the world, or wins so much wealth, as the world thinks,
but souls, because they are so precious; one soul being more worth than a
world, yea many worlds, and therefore it is greater wisdom to win a soul, than
a world, and had Paul won but one soul, he had therein approved himself wiser
in winning that one soul, than Alexander the Great in conquering the whole
world, yea had it been many worlds This is the wisdom that makes the face to
shine here, and such shall shine Eccles. 8. 1.
forth as the Sun for ever hereafter; and of this wisdom may we say, The Gold
and the Cristal Job 28. 17, 18. etc.
cannot equal it, etc. and the price of it is above Rubies, etc.

6. It is an evidence of sincere love; and indeed Vera benevolentia, maxim in
mutua salutis cura, consistit: amorenim vult ei, qui amatur, omne bonum, maxim
salutem. Pareus.
there cannot be a greater, nor clearer. Who ever truly loves another, he ever
undoubtedly aims at, and endeavors his good, and especially his chiefest good,
and what can that be but his conversion and salvation? and as ever therefore we
would manifest the sincerity of our love to others, it must be by endeavoring,
by all possible ways and means, their conversion, and so their salvation. Thus
Paul made appear the sincerity of his love to Israel, his hearts desire and
prayer to God for Israel being this, that they Romans 10. 1.
might be saved. And so David to his son Solomon, he tells us he was his
father's son, so were Prove. 4. 3, 4, 5, etc.
others, but he in a special manner was so, being singularly loved, and of such
a one we use to say, he is his father's son; and how did he manifest the truth
of his love? why, he taught me also, and said unto me, let thy heart retain my
words, etc. Get wisdom, get understanding, etc. And we can never approve our
selves sincerely to love others, but in this way, for if to love be to desire
and endeavor the good of those we love, how can it consist with the neglect of
their chiefest good? And that this is to love, a very Heathen saw; To love
(says he) is to desire good (...). Arist.
things for those whom we love, and according to our utmost ability to
endeavor to accomplish them; and what good things, to conversion and
salvation? and therefore while we neglect these, we do but indeed hate, whom we
may pretend to love. Many Parents they think they love their children; why?
because they cocker their children, and provide well for them as to the world,
and allow them high fare, and fine clothes, and it may be, can tumble in silver
and gold, but such in the mean while, neglecting their souls, and the means
appointed by God for their conversion, and salvation, they show plainly
Peremptores potius quam parents.
they do not in truth love them, but rather hate them, and so will be found and
accounted of at the last day. And how well may such Jud. 16. 15.
children say to their Parents, what Delilah sometimes said to Sampson, in
another case, How can ye say ye love us? when your hearts desires and prayers
are no more to God for us, that we may be converted and saved? when you neglect
our souls, our jewel, our darling, our principal one, and take no more care of
our chief good, our spiritual and eternal good, of that, which if we should
fall short of, it would avail us nothing, though you should all your days
gather Pearls for us, or could procure the gain of a whole world for us. The
Lord commands, Thou shall Levit. 19. 17.
not hate thy brother in thy heart; and how is this prevented? Thou shall in
any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him; so that not to rebuke, not to
use those ways and means appointed by God, for to reclaim and reduce thy
brother when he sins, is to hate him, for thereby the guilt of his sin is
still suffered to be upon him, to his soul's ruin, which to suffer, as it is
hatred in thee, so the sorest judgment upon thy brother.

7. Consider others unserviceableness till they be converted, they are
altogether unprofitable, Romans 3. 12. Ezekiel. 15. 4, 5.
like that Vine branch in Ezekiel that was meet for no work, and that girdle
hid in Euphrates, that was good for nothing; and like Salt Jer. 13. 10. Matthew.
5. 13.
which has lost its savor, and is fit for nothing but to be cast out and
trodden under foot. And should we not do our utmost to get others out of such an
estate, that is so unprofitable? wherein they neither can please God, nor truly
profit themselves or others, wherein all their works even their best, are but
dead works, and their Omnis vita infidelium peccatum.
whole life sin; and is this an estate to let them lie in, to let them alone
in? God forbid. That Is very observable to this purpose which Paul says of
Onesimus, viz. that in time past, i. e. all the Philem. 10. 11.
while, before his conversion, he was unprofitable, but after his conversion
then profitable, profitato Philemon, yea to Paul himself, before profitable to
none, neither to himself nor others, but now to all, to master and Minister,
and now he (...), dicit nunc ta^^messe planc, qualis vocatur.
answers his name, which he never did before, to which the Apostle seems to
allude.

8. Beasts if fallen, or strayed, and so in danger Exodus 23. 4. Deuteronomy. 22. 4.
to perish, were to be helped and reduced, and not men? not souls? does God
take care of beasts, would he have us keep them from perishing, and not much
more men? souls? but shall we let them alone in the errors of their minds, and
in the corrupt practices of their lives? to stand or fall, sink or swim, live
or dye, no matter what? what uncharitableness, cruelty, and hard-heartedness
would this argue? etc. and therefore upon all these considerations, let us lay
out our selves to the utmost, as to so good and blessed a work, making use of
all possible ways and means as may further the same, as instructions,
exhortations, admonitions, reprehensions, exemplary conversations, etc. and
with, and to all, let us be sure to join our fervent prayers and earnest
supplications, for unless the Lord comes in with his help, and makes successful
what we do, what can it avail: if the 2 Kings 6. 27. Genesis 9. 27.
Lord help not, as that King said to the woman, how should we help? God shall
persuade Japhet, etc. -- It is of God that shows mercy -- and Romans 9. 16.
-- as God gave to every man: else had we the wisdom of Angels, what would it
avail without God? and therefore we must address our selves to the most High,
and cry unto him, who as he has performed this for us, can also for others;
but of this I have occasionally spoken something before, and therefore shall
not enlarge here; and as we should endeavor this unto all, as occasion serves,
so more especially to our relations, and those whose good, we have stronger
obligations upon us, than ordinary, for to seek, as we who are Ministers (whose
proper work in a more special manner it is) in reference to our people, and so
Parents in reference to their children, and all relations in reference to each
other; yea, if children be converted themselves, and their Parents as yet
unconverted, they should in a special manner endeavor their conversion; only
what they do they are to do in an humble way, and to manage it after a
reverent manner, as beseems that honor that is due to Parents from their
children. It is controverted by some, whether children may not be instrumental
of greater benefit to their Parents, than they have received from them? and
certainly if they prove instrumental, as to their conversion, they may; for to
be instrumental of regeneration, and a spiritual birth, is far better than of
generation, and a natural birth; and to be instrumental to an happy, glorious,
and eternal life, than to a miserable, mortal, and momentany life, and
therefore all should do their utmost herein; and what the Church of the Jews
said of the Church of the Gentiles before their calling, that should we say of
our relations, we have such and such relations Cant. 8. 8.
as are not as yet turned to God, nor brought home to him, what shall we do for
them, it grieves us much for their sakes, because of the state they are as yet
in, what shall we do to get them out of it? let us contribute even all we can,
to our utmost, as to their conversion. The Israelites were Paul's brethren and
kinsmen according to Romans 9. 1, 2, 3.
the flesh, and what great heaviness and continual sorrow in his heart had he
for them? and how earnest was he for the conversion of them? My hearts desire
(says he) and prayer to God for Israel -- 10. 1.
is, that they might be saved, that his natural Salutem eorum mirum in modum
expetere testatur, and pro ea sedulo ad Deum vota facit.
relations might become spiritual, and those so near in nature, and bonds of
consanguinity, might be so in grace, and bonds of sanctity; that they might be
happy, as well as himself: it was not that Israel might become great in the
world, or have plenty and prosperity in their streets, or have the Kingdom
restored to them from the Romans, but that they might be converted and saved,
for this it is his soul travels, and is so exceeding sollicitous. The word we
render, desire, is (...).
very emphatical, and notes a marvelous strong intention of spirit, and
solicitude of soul, together with a complacency therein, and an earnest study
for the accomplishment thereof. His soul (as he elsewhere expresses it) did
greatly even long after Phil. 1. 8.
them all in the bowels of Jesus Christ; and so should ours after the
conversion and salvation of others, especially our relations, and what the
Apostle says of husbands and wives, that we may say of others, And what know
thou, O 1 Cor. 7. 16.
wife, whether thou shall save thy husband, or how know thou O man, whether
thou shall save thy wife? So, what know thou O father, or mother, whether
thou shall save thy child? etc. There Is hope thereof, if we be not wanting
therein, and what we do here to relations or others, we should take care to do
it wisely, having respect to the different state of those with whom we have to
deal, and accordingly dealing with them: as the Apostle Jude exhorts, And of
some have Jude 22. 23.
compassion, making a difference, and others save with fear, pulling them out
of the fire. As if the Apostle had said, you have to deal with several sorts,
some are weak, others wilful, some pliable, others refractory, and accordingly
deal, as each ones temper requires, either with mildness, or Commiseramini, i.
e. ex misericordia reprehendite, and officii admonete humaniter, etc. (...). i.
(...), hoc est, terrendo eos per denunciationem judicii Dei, nisi resipiverint.
Pisc.
more sharpness, so as any way to win them, with gentler means, or more severe;
and others save with fear, that is, say some, lest their precious souls should
everlastingly miscarry, more worth than whole worlds; or rather, this fear may
respect the way and manner of saving them, as if the Apostle had said, save
them any ways, though never so severe, get them to heaven though by the gates
of hell. O, souls are so precious, and hell so terrible, that no way or course
here, that God or man can take, can be too severe; so that to save here with
fear, is as much as by fears, that is, by frighting them, by making them
afraid, by setting before them the terrors of the Lord, and telling them of
the 2 Cor. 5. 11. Matthew. 3. 7.
wrath to come, by denouncing God's fearful judgments against them, if still
they go on in their sins, and showing them how that there is but a step between
them and hell, etc. pulling them out of the fire. Sinners who still persist
impenitently in their sins, are as it were in the Jam. 3. 6.
fire, being set on fire of hell, and as it were in the suburbs of eternal
fire, and therefore says the Apostle, Asperitatem necessitas exousat, quod
aliter servari nequeant.
pull or snatch them out. Such are not easily or gently to be dealt with, but
hastily and violently to be pulled out, as a man would do one that is in the
fire; and what does he do in such a case? does he stand to becken to him with
his finger? or leisurely to hold forth to him his hand? no, his present danger
calls to him, to act at another rate, and after a more speedy and forcible
manner, even with that violence, as it may be to pluck an arm, or other limb
out of joint. Why, it is to save life, and the person will be burned else, and
therefore he uses in such a case the greatest violence; and so should we with
those, who will not otherwise be won: so that pulling out of the fire, may be
understood Eleganti utitur Metaphora, nam ubi est incendii periculum, violenter
capere non dubitamus. Calv. in loc.
here, as men use to pull out of the fire. And thus the Apostle James labored
to save wicked and refractory rich men. Jam. 5. 1, 2. etc. and John the
Baptist, the Scribes and Pharisees that generation of Vipers, Matthew. 3. 7. and
the Cretians being fierce and refractory sinners, thus Paul Titus 1. 13. (...),
severe and acrite^, vel praecise. Gall. Vivement.
bids Titus to endeavor to save them, Rebuke them (says he) sharply, or
severely, the Greek is cuttingly, or to the quick, it seems an allusion to
Surgeons, who to cure the wound cut to the quick. Thus considering the
disposition of the offender, and the quality of the offense, some offending of
weakness, others of wilfulness, we are accordingly with wisdom and discretion
for to deal; more gently with some, and more roundly and roughly with others,
still in all making God's glory, and their conversion and salvation, our main
end and drift. And though we should meet with many discouragements, it may be
with mocks, and scoffs, in the faithful discharge of this our duty, yet let us
not matter it, but remember we work for souls, and for their conversion and
salvation; and the gaining of one soul is more and better than the gaining of
whole Kingdoms and Empires; and though we should not see that fruit we so much
desire, and endeavor for, yet doing our duty, let this comfort us, that our
judgment is with the Lord, and our work with our God. Is. 49. 4.


The Conclusion of the whole.
AND thus I have now, through the good assisting hand of God upon me, (to whom
for ever be the praise) finished my Discourse of these words, words of as great
weight and importance as possibly can be imagined; words, as I said at first,
so seasonable, and so sovereign, for they do contain in them, the very platform
of a peoples or a person's weal, and their only true and right way of being
saved. And O that now the Lord would bring us into this way! which, if yet he
has any delight in us, he will; and which that he may, I have only two things
to request, and I have done. 1. That what is here so seasonably, though not so
accurately, held forth, may not only be heedfully read, but seriously weighed,
and carefully and conscientiously improved; that having searched and found that
so it is, that this is England's, and so any other Nation's, or people's, or
person's, sole and sovereign way of being saved, we would hear it, and
practically know it for our good, and as that, than Job 5. 27.
which, nothing is more our own, nor the Nations interest, or concern. And 2.
that as what is here dictated, I have my self sent and followed with prayers,
(and I with I could say with my tears) into the world; so it may be accompanied
also with others prayers, even the prayers of all, into whose hands it shall
come. That the Lord may be pleased to bless and succeed the same, so as to
accomplish that good work, and to effect that great and blessed cure, it tends
to, and is designed for, even to turn us again to the Lord God of Hosts
repentingly, that so he may turn to us graciously, and cause his face to shine.
And let us now (and so I shall conclude) pray, and pray again, yea and again,
as the Church and people of God do here, v. 3. Turn us again O God, and cause
thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. v. 7. Turn us again O God of hosts,
and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. v. 19. Turn us again O Lord
God of hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved, and let all that
love and desire their own, or the Nation's weal, say, Amen and Amen.

O Lord, the God of Hosts, do thou
Turn us again to thee:
Cause thou thy face to shine on us,
And saved we shall be.
FINIS.

