PROPOSITIONS to the POPE, FOR THE Proving his Power of Remitting Sins, and
other Doctrines of his Church, as Principles destroying Souls in Darkness, and
undeterminable Death.
To Fabius Guisius, Pope, at his Palace in Monte Cavallo in Roma.

POPE of ROME, It is not unknown, that for the space of three Years, wanting
less than seven days, I was held in most cruel Bonds under thy Hands; where By
the mighty power of God I was borne, and carried through ignominious, and
opprobrious scoffs and mocks, threats of Death diverse ways, and of perpetual
Slavery oftentimes: Besides other times most cruelly, and inhumanely tortured,
bruised, and exceedingly wounded in my fleshly Body; for none other cause (the
God of Righteousness knows, and that of God in all men's Consciences in that
City of Rome can bear me witness, which saw my Conversation from the first, to
the last of my Imprisonment) but honestly, simply, and purely, for
Righteousness sake, viz. because I Exhorted All men to Repentance; and warned
them in Season, to take heed to their ways, lest a sore Evil should come upon
them; I say, for this love of my tender Soul, toward Thine, and their Souls
and Bodies, was I so inhumanely requited, both by Thee and Them, which the
Righteous LORD of Heaven knows, and Thou in thy Conscience know it; as
many others of the Heads, Rulers, Priests, Doctors, Friars, Jesuits, and
People of Rome do know the same thing; and after many Wrongs which I bare, and
bruises, and wounds that I suffered, shut up in a Room, where there was scarce
a Breathing place, chained in Irons, mocked of the Wicked, because my natural
eyes could see neither visible Sun nor Moon; where moreover, I was tempted with
the World, and proffered all the Pleasures which ever my Heart could desire, so
that I would be, but as thy Priests were, which daily tempted me unto Idolatry.
(I say) all which I suffered, until at length my Innocent patient Soul had
worn out, and overcome, all the Cruelty toward me, which was Exercised upon
me, by the Unreasonable Hands of Sinners: and that the Lord arose to plead my
Cause for me, and stirred up such, as I neither desired, nay, nor in the least
outwardly knew, to appear in my Behalf; and made some of his Servants to offer
up their lives for my Redemption, which were known to be freely sacrificed in
Rome; for whose Love unto me, they were also Imprisoned by Thy power, until
the Lord's Arm delivered us out of such Unreasonable Hands, who, below the Law
of Heathens, stood not openly to show us any cause of our Sufferings.

Yet, after all this, (though I am a man wholly given unto my God, having given
all things else unto Him who made them) if it were the will of my Father,
commanding me unto Silence, and to sit down as him that is Dumb, and never to
open my Mouth, nor lead on my Pen on Paper, to Remonstrate the things that are
past, concerning my Suffering days, verily, I should Obey, and say, Good is
the Will of my God, who teaches me Subjection. But being commanded unto this
thing, I can of a pure heart, in the sight of my Almighty God, say, that I
write not to take a Revenge of my Cause, having committed Vengeance unto him
that repayeth in Righteousness. (whom, I pray for mercy, to be manifested unto
you All, having a long time stood in the Gap for Rome; with many Tears,
offering my Life for the Inhabitants of that City; which the God of Heaven
knows, and that I can at a moment dye, to serve them all, in the way wherein
my Father leads me) But O Pope, for thy Souls sake, and the peoples Souls
sakes, which have a dependence upon thy Power, I am constrained to write this
time unto thee in this manner, showing, that in the Name and holy Fear of the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who has led me in my Pilgrimage, by his Right
Hand of Power, and pleaded my Cause with my Enemies, by reigning down fire from
Heaven upon them, and by diverse Judgments in Rome, whilst there the people
oppressed my Innocent Soul with Cruelty; which may (as is needful hereafter) be
more at large spoken of. I propound it unto Thee, (as being the HEAD of that
people, which are called the Roman Catholic Church) to Constitute, Order, and
Appoint, one hundred of thy Chiefest and Profoundest Jesuits or Doctors of
Divinity, (so called by thee) to give me a fair, open, and public Meeting, in
England, Germany, France, Italy or Turkey, (viz.) in the most expedient place,
for the advantage of the Glory of God (who Created the whole earth for that
end) as a way may be made to attain a License from the Powers of the said
Nations, to effect the said Meeting. I say, choose thee thy hundred, or more
persons for thy defense, and in the Name of the Lord God, and in his Counsel, I
shall stand in the face of a Nation, or many Nations, to prove to that of God
in every Conscience upon the face of the Earth, That thy pretended power, of
Remission of Sins, is of the old Serpent the Devil, drowning Souls in the Lake
of Hell and Perdition.

1st. By the time of the coming in of Popes. 2dly. By the manner of choosing
Popes. 3dly. By the matter of the precepts of Popes. viz.
First, That the Doctrine of teaching people to pray unto the Virgin Mary, is
damnable, drowning the Soul in the pit of Hell.

Secondly, That the doctrine of teaching the people to call on more Advocates,
Mediators, and Intercessors, Than looking upon the One MEDIATOR JESUS, is of
the pit of darkness blinding, and binding Souls in the blackness of the night
of death.

Thirdly, That the Invention of Pictures and Images in your Worships, is of the
destroying Spirit, of the power of Darkness, chaining Souls in the Pit.

Fourthly, That your manner of Consecrating Waffers, Wine, and Water, praying
upon Beads, worshipping in Idols Temples, your diverse Friars Garments, and
Titled Orders, your observations of Days, and Meats, your Penance and
Processions are not of God; but contrariwise of the Spirit of Delusion,
Heresy, Deceit, and Iniquity, which drowneth Souls in perdition.

For which Cause, if thou love the Salvation of Souls, more than their
Damnation, through a Covetous end of an Earthly Kingdom in thy Heart, then I am
sure Thou will not scruple, to send such persons as Thou may appoint, to
Meet me according to this Proposal; which else, All Nations will see thy Cloak
to be Rent Asunder, and no longer able to cover and hide the Abominations which
are concealed under Thy Skirts: for except Thou sendest me an Answer, or
causest an Answer to be sent unto me, in the space of Four Months after the
Date of this, then must I Manifest it unto All Nations, as far as it can be
conveniently Spread, even unto the ends of the Earth; which, until then, I may
not do, that Thou may Know, that my End, is not to Infamize Thee, and Thy
Authority, but Righteously to Glorify the Lord God Almighty, my Holy Father of
Life.

Who am called the English Quaker, that was Prisoner in Bedlam of Rome, and
also outwardly named

LONDON, the 20th day of the 7th Mon. called September 1661. JOHN PERROT.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, in the 4th Month called June, 1662.


