THE Royal Martyr: OR, THE LIFE and DEATH OF KING Charles I.

ROMANS 8. -- more than Conqueror. Bona agere, and mala pati Regium est.
LONDON, Printed by J. M. for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty.
MDCLXXVI.

BEATAM ETE^NA^

CLARIOR E TENEBRIS

CAELI SPECTO

ASPERAM AT LEVEM

^^R^STI TRACT^

In Verbo ^uo Spes mea

MUNDI CALCO

SELENDIDAM

AT GRAVEM

(...) sculp
Alij diutius Imperium tenuerunt, nemo tam fortiter reliquit. Tacit. Histor.
Lib. 2. c. 47: p. 4.17.

TO THE KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY CHARLES II. By the Grace of God KING of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc.
May it please Your MAJESTY,
SO Clear and Indisputable is Your Majesty's Title to the following Papers,
that to prefix any other name before them, were a boldness, next door to
sacrilege. They had the honor, when first published, to attend the Works of
Your Majesty's Royal Father of blessed Memory; the greatest part of which
Impression (collected with great Cost and Care) having in the late
Conflagration perished in the common flames; I was ambitious by reviving this
Piece, to do some honor to the Memory of so Great a Prince, and that the world
might see how far Truth and Justice and a better Cause is able to hold out,
under the most prosperous Triumphs of violence and oppression, and that when
Villains may be suffered so far to prevail, as to despoil Majesty of all
advantages of Power and Greatness, it can at the same time be secure in the
comforts of its own innocence and virtue. That Heaven would bless Your Majesty
with a long Life and a prosperous Reign, with all the blessings of this, and a
better world, is the hearty and incessant prayer of

Your Majesty's most humbly devoted Subject and Servant, Richard Royston.

CHARLES R.

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Our loving Subjects of what Degree, Condition or Quality soever within
Our Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, or any of Our Dominions,
greeting.
Whereas We have received sufficient Testimony of the Fidelity and Loyalty of
Our Servant Richard Royston of Our City of London Bookseller, and of the great
Losses and Troubles he has sustained for his Faithfulness to Our Royal Father
of blessed Memory, and Our Self, in the Printing and Publishing of many
Messages and Papers of Our said Blessed Father, especially those most Excellent
Discourses and Soliloquies by the name of (...). Know ye, That it is Our Royal
Will and Pleasure, and We do by these presents Grant unto the said Richard
Royston, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the sole Printing and
Publishing of the said Messages, Papers and Discourses contained in the Book
Entitled Reliquiae Sacrae Carolinae, and of all or any other the Works of Our
said Royal Father, with other Papers and Declarations concerning Our said Royal
Father, in any Volume or Volumes whatsoever. Of which Our Grant and Royal
Pleasure We will and require all Our loving Subjects to take notice; And that
none of them presume to print, or cause to be printed, vended, or put to sale
the said Book Entitled Reliquiae Sacrae Carolinae, or any part of the said
Papers or Works of Our said Royal Father, within these Our Realms and
Dominions, or any of them, whether Printed within these Our Dominions, or
Imported from Foreign Parts, contrary to Our express Pleasure herein declared,
without the License and Consent of the said Richard Royston, his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, under such Penalties as are by the Laws and
Statutes of this Our Realm imposed upon such Persons as Imprint, Import, Vend,
or Put to sale unlicensed and prohibited Books; Any Privilege, Custom or Usage
to the contrary notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the nine and twentieth day of November, in
the twelfth year of Our Reign.
TO THE READER.
IN these Papers, READER, thou have a short Account how this best of PRINCES
Lived and Died; a Subject that was fit to be writ only with the point of a
Scepter: none but a Royal Breast can have Sentiments equal to His Virtues, nor
any but a Crowned Head can frame Expressions to represent His Worth. He that
had nothing Common or Ordinary in His Life and Fortune, is almost profaned by a
Vulgar Pen. The attempt, I confess, admits no Apology but this, That it was
fit that Posterity, when they read His Works (for they shall continue while
these Islands are inhabited, to upbraid Time, and reproach Marble Monuments of
weakness) should also be told that His Actions were as Heroic as His Writings,
and His Life more Elegant than His Style. Which not being undertaken by some
Noble hand, (that was happy in a near approach to Majesty, and so could have
taken more exact measures of this Great Example for Mighty Kings, rendered it in
more full proportions, and given it more lively Colors) I was by importunity
prevailed upon to imitate those affectionate Slaves, who would gather up the
scattered limbs of some great Person that had been their Lord, yet fell at the
Pleasure of his Enemies, burn them on some Plebeian Pyle, and entertain their
ashes in an homely Vrn, till future times could cover them with a Pyramid, or
enclose them in a Temple; by making a Collection from Writers and Persons
worthy of Credit, of all the Remains and Memoires (I could get) of this
Incomparable Monarch: Whose Excellent Virtues though they often tempted the
Compiler to the Liberty of a Panegyric, yet they still persuaded him to as
strict an observance of Truth as is due to an History: For he praises this King
best who writes His Life most faithfully, which was the Care and Endeavor of

Thine, Rich. Perrinchief.

MAJESTY IN MISERY: OR, An Imploration to the KING of KINGS.

MAJESTY in MISERY: OR, An Imploration to the KING of Kings.
Written by his late Majesty King CHARLES the First, during His Captivity at
Carisbrooke Castle, Anno Dom. 1648.
GREAT Monarch of the World, from whose Power springs
The Potency and Power of Kings,
Record the Royal Woe, my Sufferings sings,
And teach my tongue, that ever did confine
Its faculties, in Truths Seraphick Line
To tract the treasons of thy foes and mine.
Nature and Law, by thy Divine Decree
(The only Root of Righteous Royalty)
With this dim Diadem invested me,
With it, the sacred Scepter, Purple Robe,
The Holy Unction, and the Royal Globe:
Yet am I levelled with the life of Job.
The fiercest Furies, that do daily tread
Upon my Grief, my Gray Dis-crowned head,
Are those, that owe my Bounty for their Bread,
They raise a War, and Christen it, The Cause,
Whilst sacrilegious hands have best applause,
Plunder, and Murder, are the Kingdoms Laws;
Tyranny bears the Title of Taxation,
Revenge and Robbery are Reformation,
Oppression gains the name of Sequestration.
My Loyal Subjects who in this bad season
Attend me (by the Law of God and Reason)
They dare impeach, and punish for high Treason.
Next at the Clergy, do their Furies frown,
Pious Episcopacy must go down,
They will destroy the Crosier, and the Crown.
Churchmen are chained, and Schismatics are freed,
Mechanics preach, and Holy Fathers bleed,
The Crown is crucified with the Creed.
The Church of England does all Faction foster,
The Pulpit is usurpt by each Impostor,
Ex tempore, excludes the Pater Noster.
The Presbyter and Independent Seed
Springs with broad-blades; to make Religion bleed,
Herod, and Pontius Pilate are agreed.
The Corner-stone's misplac't by every Pavier;
With such a bloody method, and behavior,
Their Ancestors did crucify our Savior.
My Royal Consort, from whose fruitful Womb
So many Princes legally have come,
Is forced in Pilgrimage to seek a Tomb.
Great Britains Heir is forced into France,
Whilst on his Father's head, his foes advance,
Poor Child! He weeps out his Inheritance.
With my own Power, my Majesty they wound,
In the King's Name, the K. himself's uncrown'd:
So does the dust, destroy the Diamond.
With Propositions daily they enchaunt
My Peoples ears, such, as do Reason daunt,
And the Almighty will not let me Grant.
They promise, to erect my Royal Stem,
To make me Great, to advance my Diadem,
If I will first fall down, and worship them;
But for refusal they devour my Thrones,
Distress my Children, and destroy my bones,
I fear they will force me, to make bread of stones.
My Life they prize at such a slender rate,
That in my absence, they draw bills of hate,
To prove the King, a Traitor to the State.
Felons obtain more privilege than I,
They are allowed to answer, e're they dye,
It Is death for Me, to ask the reason, Why.
But Sacred Savior, with thy words I woo
Thee to forgive, and not be bitter to
Such, as thou know do not know what they do.
For since they from their Lord are so disjointed,
As to contemn those Edicts he appointed,
How can they prize the Power of his Anointed?
Augment my Patience, nullify my hate,
Preserve my Issue, and inspire my Mate,
Yet, though We perish, bless this Church and State.
THE LIFE OF Charles I.
CHARLES I. King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, was the Son of James VI.
King of Scots, and Anne his Wife a Daughter of Denmark. By His Father descended
to him all the Rights (together with their blood) of all our Ancient both Saxon
and Norman Kings to this Empire. For the Lady Margaret, Sister and sole Heir of
Edgar Atheling the last surviving Prince of the English Saxons, being married
to Malcolme Conmor King of Scots, conveyed to his Line the Saxon, and Margaret
Daughter of Henry VII. married to James IV. did bring the Norman Titles and
Blood. From this Imperial Extract He received not more Honor than He gave to
it. For the blood that was derived to Him elaborated through so many Royal
veins, He delivered to Posterity more maturated for Glory, and by a constant
practice of Goodness more habituated for Virtue.

He was born at Dunfermeling, one of the principal Towns of Fife in Scotland,
on November 19. [ Anno 1600.] in so much weakness, that His Baptism was
hastened without the usual Ceremonies wherewith such Royal Infants are admitted
into the Church. Providence seeming to consecrate Him to Sufferings from the
Womb, and to accustom Him to the exchange of the strictures of Greatness for
clouds of Tears.

There was no observation nor augury made at His Birth concerning the sequel of
His Life or course of Fortune (which are usually related of such whose lives
have different occurrences from those in others of the same state.) Either the
fear of His Death made those about Him less observant of any Circumstances
which curious minds would have formed into a Prediction, He appearing like a
Star that rises so near the point of his setting, that it was thought there
would be no time for calculation. Or He being at distance by His Birth from the
Succession to the Crown (Prince Henry then having the first hopes) made men
less solicitous to enquire of His future state, on whom, being born to a
private Condition, the Fate of the Kingdom did not depend.

But in the third year of His age, when King James was preparing himself to
remove to the English Throne, a certain Lord of the Highlands, though of very
great age, came to the Court to take his leave of him, whom he found
accompanied with all his Children. After his address full of affectionate and
sage Advice (to which his gray hairs gave authority) to the King; his next
application was to Duke CHARLES [ Anno 1602.] (for in the second year of His
age He was created Duke of Albany, Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Ross, and Baron
of Ardmanock) whose hands he kissed with so great an ardencie of affection,
that he seemed forgetful of a separation. The King, to correct his supposed
mistake, advised him to a more present observance of Prince Henry, as the Heir
of his Crown, of whom he had taken little notice. The old Lord answered that
he knew well enough what he did, and that It was this Child (who was then in
His Nurses arms) who should convey his name and memory to the succeeding ages.
This then was conceived dotage; but the event gave it the credit of a
Prophecy, and confirmed that opinion, That some long-experienced souls in the
world, before their dislodging, arrive to the height of prophetic Spirits.

[ Anno 1603.] When He was three years old He was committed to the Care and
Governance of Sir Robert Cary's Lady, as a reward for being the first Messenger
of Queen Elizabeth's death, whose long life had worn the expectation of the
Scottish Nobility into a suspicion, that the Lords of England would never
acknowledge her to be dead as long as there was any old Woman of that Nation
that could wear good clothes, and personate the Majesty of a Queen.

[ Anno 1604.] In the fourth year, after He had wrestled with a Fever, He was
brought in October to the English Court at Windsor, where on January 6.
following, having the day before been made Knight of the Bath, He was invested
with the Title of Duke of York, and in the sixth year [ Anno 1606.] was
committed to the Pedagogy of Mr. Thomas Murray, a person well qualified to that
Office, though a favourer of Presbytery.

Under this Tutor, and consined to a retiredness by the present weakness of His
body, He was so diligent and studious, that He far advanced in all that kind of
Learning which is necessary for a Prince, without which even their natural
Endowments s^em rough and unpleasant in despite of the splendor of their
Fortune. His proficiency in Letters was so eminent, that Prince Henry taking
notice of it, to put a jest upon Him, one day put the Cap of the Archbishop
Abbot, (who was then, with the Prince and the Duke and other of the Nobility,
waiting in the Privy Chamber for the King's coming out) on his Brother's head;
adding, that If He continued a good Boy, and followed His book, he would make
Him one day Archbishop of Canterbury. Which the Child took in such disdain,
that He threw the Cap on the ground, and trampled it under His feet with so
much eagerness, that He could hardly be restrained. Which Passion was afterward
taken by some overcurious as a presage of the ruin of Episcopacy by His Power.
But the event showed it was not ominous to the Order, but to the Person of the
Archbishop, whom in His Reign He suspended from the administration of His
Office.

[ Anno 1611.] In His eleventh year He was made Knight of the Garter: and in
the twelfth Prince Henry dying November 6. [1612.] He succeeded him in the
Dukedom of Cornwall and the Regalities thereof; and attended his Funeral as
chief Mouraer, on December. 7.

On the 14. of February following He performed the Office of Brideman to the
Princess Elizabeth His Sister, who on that day was married to Frederick V.
Prince Elector Palatine; the gayeties of which day were afterward attended
with many fatal Cares and Expenses.

His Childhood was blemished with a supposed Obstinacy: for the weakness of His
body inclining Him to retirements, and the imperfection of His speech rendering
discourse tedious and unpleasant, He was suspected to be somewhat perverse. But
more age and strength fitting Him for manlike Exercises, and the Public hopes
inviting Him from His Privacies, He delivered the world of such fears: for
applying Himself to action, He grew so perfect in Vaulting, riding the great
Horse, running at the Ring, shooting in Cross-bows, Muskets, and sometimes in
great Pieces of Ordnance, that if Principality had been to be the reward of
Excellency in those Arts, He would have had a Title to the Crown this way also;
being thought the best Marks-man and most graceful Manager of the great Horse
in the three Kingdoms. His tenacious humor He left with His retirements, none
being more desirous of good counsel, nor any more obsequious when He found it;
yea, too distrustful of His own Judgment, which the issue of things proved
always best when it was followed.

[ Anno 1616.] When he was sixteen years old, on November. 3. He was created
Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester and Flint, the Revenues thereof being assigned
to maintain His Court which was then formed for Him. And being thus advanced in
Years and State, it was expected that He should no longer retain the Modesty
which the shades of His Privacy had accustomed Him unto, but now appear as the
immediate Instrument of Empire, and that by Him the Favors and Honors of the
Court should be derived to others. But though Providence had changed all about,
yet it had changed nothing within Him; and He thought it glory enough to be
great without the diminution of others; for He still permitted the Ministry of
State to His Fathers Favorites: which gave occasion of discourse to the
Speculativi.

Some thought He did it to avoid the Jealousies of the Old King, (which were
conceived to have been somewhat raised by the popularity of Prince Henry, whose
breast was full of forward Hopes) For Young Princes are deemed of an impatient
Ambition, and Old ones to be too nice and tender of their Power; in which
though they are contented with a Successor (as they must have) yet are afraid
of a Partner. And it was supposed that therefore K. James had raised Car and
Buckingham, like Comets to dim the luster of these rising Stars. But these were
mistaken in the nature of that King, who was inclined to contract a private
friendship, The Duke of Lenox and the Earl of Arran in Scotland.
and was prodigal to the objects of it, before ever he had Sons to divert his
Love, or raise his Fears.

Some that at a distance looked upon the Prince's actons, ascribed them to a
Narrowness of Mind, and an Incapacity of Greatness: while others, better
acquainted with the frame of His Spirit, knew His prudent Modesty inclined Him
to learn the Methods of Commanding by the practice of Obedience; and that being
of a peaceful Soul, He affected not to embroil the Court (and from thence the
Kingdom) in Factions, (the effects of impotent minds) which He knew were
dangerous to a State, and destructive to that Prince who gives birth unto them;
that therefore He chose to wait for a certain, though delayed, Grandeur, rather
than by the Compendious way of Contrasts get a precocious Power, and leave too
pregnant an Example of Ruin.

Others conceived it the Prudence of the Father (with which the Son complied)
who knew the true use of Favorites was to make them the objects of the
People's impatience, the sinks to receive the curses and anger of the Vulgar,
the hatred of the querulous, and the envy of unsatisfied ambition: which He
would rather have fall upon Servants, that His Son might ascend the Throne free
and unburthened with the discontents of any. This was the rather believed,
because He could dispense Honors where and when He pleased; as He did to some
of His own Household; as Sir Robert Carry was made Lord Carry of Lepington, Sir
Thomas Howard Viscount Andover, and Sir John Vaughan Lord of Molingar in
Ireland.

[ Anno 1618.] The evenness of His Spirit was discovered in the loss of His
Mother, whose death (presaged, as some thought, by that notorious Comet which
appeared November. 18. before) happened on March 2. Anno 1618. which He bewailed
with a just measure of Grief, without any affected Sorrows, though She was most
affectionate to Him above all her other Children; and at her Funeral He would
be chief Mourner.

The Death of the Queen was not long after followed with a sharp Sickness of
the King: wherein his Life seeming in danger, the consequences of his Death
began to be lamented. Dr. Andrews, then Bishop of Ely, bewailed the sad
condition of the Church, if God should at that time determine the days of the
King. The Prince being then only conversant with Scotch- men, which made up the
greatest part of His Family, and were ill-affected to the Government and
Worship of the Church of England. Of this the King became so sensible, that he
made a Vow, If God should please to restore his health, he would so instruct
the Prince in the Controversies of Religion, as should secure His affections to
the present establishment. Which he did with so much success, as he assured the
Chaplains who were to wait on the Prince in Spain, that He was able to moderate
in any emergent disputations (which yet he charged them to decline, if
possible.) At which they smiling, he earnestly added, that CHARLES should
manage a point in Controversy with the best-studied Divine of them all.

[ Anno 1619.] In his 19. Year, on March 24. which was the Anniversary of King
James's coming to the Crown of England, He performed a Justing at White Hall,
together with several of the Nobility, wherein He acquitted Himself with a
Bravery equal to His Dignity. And on the Sunday following, attending His Father
to the Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, and to the Service in the Quire, He showed
as much humble Devotion there, as he had manifested Princely Gallantry in his
Justs, admired and applauded by the People for His accomplishments in the Arts
both of War and Peace: That He could behave Himself humbly toward His God, and
bravely toward His Enemy; pleased with the hardiness of His Body, and ravished
with His more generous Mind; that the pleasures of the Court had not softened
one to Sloth, nor the supremest Fortune debauched the other to Impiety.

[ Anno 1622.] Confident in these, and other evidences of a wise conduct, the
King (without acquainting his Council) sends the Prince into Spain, there to
contract a Marriage with the Infanta, and as a part of the Portion, to recover
the Palatinate, which His Sisters Husband had lost, and was by the Emperor
canteld to the Duke of Bavaria and the King of Spain. And herein He was to
combat all the Artists of State in that Court, the practices of that Church,
and put an issue to that Treaty wherein the Lord Digby, though much conversant
in the Intrigues of that Council, had been long cajoled.

To that place He was to pass Incognito, accompanied only with the Marquess of
Buckingham, Mr. Endymion Porter, and Mr. Francis Cottington, through France;
where, to satisfy His Curiosity, and show Himself to Love, He attempted and
enjoyed a view of the Court at Paris, and there received the first Impression
of that Excellent Princess who was by Heaven destined to His chaste Embraces.
Satisfied with that sight, no lesser enjoyments of any pleasure in that great
Kingdom, nor Vanity of Youth, which is hardly curbed when it is allied to
power, could tempt His stay, or a discovery of His Greatness; but with a speed
answerable to an active body and mind, He out-stripped the French Posts which
were sent to stop Him, although that King had intelligence of His being within
his Dominions immediately after their departure from the Louvre.

The certain news of His safe arrival at Madrid drew after Him from hence a
Princely Train, and raised the Censures of the World upon the King; As being
too forgetful of the Inhospitality of Princes to each other, who, when either
Design, Tempests or Necessity have driven their Rivals in Majesty upon their
Coasts without a Caution, they let them not part without some tribute to their
Interest: and a fresh Example of this was in the King's own Mother, who seeking
refuge in England with her Sister Queen Elizabeth from a Storm at home, did
lose both her Liberty and Life.

This none daring to mind the King of, his Jester Archee made him sensible, by
telling him, He came to change Caps with him. Why, said the King? Because
(replied Archee) Thou have sent the Prince into Spain, from whence He is never
like to return. But (said the King) what will thou say when thou see Him come
back again? Mary, says the Jester, I will take off the Fools Cap which I now
put upon thy head for sending Him thither, and put it on the King of Spain 's
for letting Him return.

This so awakened the King's apprehension of the Prince's danger, that it drove
him into an exceeding Melancholy, from which he was never free till he was
assured of the Prince's return to his own Dominions, which was his Fleet in the
Sea: and that was not long after. For notwithstanding the contrasts of his two
prime Ministers there, Buckingham and Bristol, (which were sufficient to amaze
an ordinary prudence, and disturb the counsels of so young a beginner in the
Mysteries of Empire, and the Arts of experienced Conclaves;) the impetuous
attempts of the Spanish Clergy, either for a Change of His Religion, or a
Toleration of theirs; the Spleen of Olivares, whom Buckingham had exasperated;
He so dexterously managed the Treaty of Marriage, that all the Articles and
Circumstances were solemnly sworn to by both Kings. By a Civil Letter to the
Pope (which His Enemies Malice afterward took as an occasion of Slander) He
procured a civil return, with the grant of a Dispensation; baffled the hopes of
their Clergy by His Constancy in his own Profession, and vindicated it from the
odious aspersions of their Priests, by causing our Liturgy to be translated
into the Spanish Tongue; and by His generous miene enthralled the Infanta, for
whom He had exposed His Liberty.

Yet having an insight into the practices of that Court, that they would not
put the Restitution of the Palatinate into the consideration of the Portion,
but reserve it as a Super-foetation of the Spanish Love, and as an opportunity
for the Infanta to reconcile the English Spirits, who were heated by the late
Wars into an hatred of the Spaniards; and that this was but to lengthen out the
Treaty till they had wholly brought the Palatinate under their power; He
conformed His mind to the resolves of His Father, who said, " He would never
marry his Son with a Portion of His only Sister's Tears, and therefore inclined
to a rupture. But concealing His Purpose, and dissembling His Knowledge of
their Designs, He consulted His own Safety and Return, which His Fathers
Letters commanded: which He so prudently acquired, that the King of Spain
parted from Him with all those endearments with which departing Friends
ceremoniate their Farewels; having satisfied Him by a Proxy left with the Earl
of Bristol, to be delivered when the Dispensation was come. Which as soon as He
was safe on Shipboard, by a private Express, He commanded him to keep in his
hands till further Order.

[ An. 1623.] His Return to England, which was in October 1623, was entertained
with so much Joy and Thanksgiving, as if He had been the happy Genius of the
whole Nation; and His entrance into London was as a Triumph for His Wisdom,
their Bonefires lengthened out the day, and their Bells by uncessant ringing
forbad sleep to those eyes which were refreshed with His sight. Nor could the
People by age or sickness be confined at home, but despising the prescriptions
of their Physicians, went to meet Him as restored Health.

When He had given the King an account of His Voyage, and the Spanish Counsels
not to restore the Palatinate, a Parliament was Summoned, which was so zealous
of the Honor of the Prince, that both Houses Voted an Address to His Majesty,
that he would no longer Treat, but begin a War with Spain; and desiring the
Prince's Mediation (who was always ready to gratify the Nation) therein to
His Father, they assured Him they would stand by Him with their Lives and
Fortunes: but yet when the War, with the Crown, descended unto Him, they
shamefully deserted Him in the beginning of His Reign.

When neither a Wife nor Peace was any longer to be expected from Spain, both
were sought for from France, by a Marriage with Henrietta Maria, the youngest
Daughter of Henry the IV. The Love of whom the Prince had received by the Eye,
and She of Him by the Ear. For having formerly received impressions from the
Relations of His Gallantry; when She was told of His passing through Paris, She
answered (as it is reported) That if He went to Spain for a Wife, He might have
had one nearer hand, and saved Himself a great part of the labor.

[ Anno 1625.] In the midst of these Preparations for War and Love, King James
died at Theobalds, Sunday March 27. Anno 1625. and Prince CHARLES was
immediately proclaimed at the Court-Gate King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, and so throughout all the Three Kingdoms, with insinite Rejoycings.
The people expecting all the benefits of the happiest Government under Him,
whose private and vouthful part of Life had been so spent, that it had nothing
in it to be ^^^used, and where the eager inquisitors for matter of Reproach met
with no satisfaction. An Argument of a solid Virtue, that could hold out
against all the Vices of Youth, that are rendered more impetuous by Flatteries
and Plenty, which are cont^nu^lly resident in great Courts. For had any
debauchery polluted His earlier days, it had been onblished by those who in
scarcity of just Accusations did invent unimaginable Calumnies. Nor could it
have been hid, for in a great Fortune not^ing is concealed, but Curiosity opens
the Close^^ and Bed chambers, especially of Princes, and discovers their
closest retirements, exposing all their Actions to Fame and Censure. Nor did
the King deceive their hopes, they being the happiest people under the Sun
while He was undistuibed in the administration of Justice.

His first public Act was the Celebrating His Fathers Funeral, whereat He
Himself was Chief Mourner, (contrary to the Practice of His Royal Predecessors,
and not conformable to the Ceremonies of State;) Either preferring Piety to an
unnatural Grandeur; or urged by some secret Decree of Providence, that in all
the ruins of His Family He should drink the greatest draught of Tears; or His
Spirit presaging the Troubles of the Throne, He would hallow the Ascent to it
by a pious act of Grief.

When He had paid that debt to His deceased Father, He next provided for
Posterity, and therefore hastened the coming over of His dearest Consort, Whom
the Duke of Chevereux had in His Name espoused at the Church of Nostre-Dame in
Paris; and He receiving Her at Dover the next day after Trinity-Sunday; at
Canterbury began His Conjugal Embraces. A Lady of most excellent Endowments,
who assumed to Her self nothing in His Good Fortune but the Joy; and in His
Evil bore an equal share, for She reverenced Him, not his Greatness.

Thus having dispatched the affairs of His Family, He applies Himself to those
of His Kingdoms, which too much Felicity had made unmanageable by a moderate
Government. And He seemed not so much to ascend a Throne, as enter upon a
Theater, to wrestle with all the difficulties of a corrupted State; whose long
Peace had softened almost all the Nobless into Court-pleasures, and made the
Commons insolent by a great Plenty. The Rites and Discipline of Religion had
been blotted out by a long and uninterrupted Prosperity, and Factions crept
from the Church into the Senate, which were made use of by those that
endeavored the alteration of Government; and the Resolves of that Council were
the dictates of some heady Demagogues, who fed the Vulgar with hopes of Novelty
under the name of Liberty, so that the King could not endure their Vices, nor
they His Virtues: whence came all the Obstructions to His Designs for Glory and
the Public good. The Treasury had been exhausted to satiate the unquiet and
greedy Scots: and the people were taught not to supply it, unless they were
bribed with the blood of some Minister of State, or some more advantages for
Licentiousness. Each of these single would have ennobled the Care of an
Ordinary Prudence to have weathered out: but when all these conspired with the
traitorous Projects of men of unbounded and unlawful hopes, they took from Him
His Peace, and that which the World calls Happiness; but yet they made Him
Great, and affording Exercises for His most excellent Abilities rendered Him
Glorious.

The different states of these Difficulties, when like Clouds they were
gathering together, and when they descended in showers of Blood, divide the
King's Reign into two parts. The first could not be esteemed days of Peace,
but an Immunity from Civil War. The other was when He was concluded by that
Fatal Necessity, either to part with his Dignity, and expose His Subjects to
the injuries of numerous Tyrants; or else to exceed the calmer temper of His
peaceful Soul, and make use of those necessary Arms, whereby He might hope to
divert, if possible, the Ruin of Church and State which He saw in projection.

In the first Part He had no Wars at home but what was in the Houses of
Parliament; which though their first Institution designed for the production of
just Counsels, and assistances of Government, yet, through the just Indignation
of Heaven, and the practices of some unquiet and seditious persons, became the
wombs wherein were first conceived and formed those monstrous Confusions which
destroyed their own Liberty, caused our Miseries, and the King's Afflictions.

His First Parliament began June 18. At the opening of which the King
acquainted them with the necessity of Supplies for the War with Spain, which
they importunately had through His Mediation engaged His Father in, and made it
as hereditary to Him as the Crown. His Eloquence gave powerful Reasons for
speedy and large sums of Money; did also audit to them the several
disbursements relating both to the Army and Navy, that He might remove all
Jealousies of mis-imployment, and give them notice how well He understood the
Office He had newly entered upon, and how to be a faithful Steward of the
Public Treasure. But the Projectors of the alteration of Government brought
into debate two Petitions, one for Religion, the other for Grievances, formed
in King James's time, which delayed the Succors, and increased the
Necessities, which at last they answered but with two Subsidies, too poor a
stock to furnish an Army with; yet was kindly accepted, in expectation of more
at the next Session. For the Infection seizing upon London, the Parliament was
adjourned till August, when they were to meet at Oxford: and at that time He
passed such Acts as were presented to Him.

At the next Session He gave a complying and satisfactory answer to all their
Petitions, and expected a Retribution in larger Subsidies toward the Spanish
War. But in stead of these, there were high and furious debates of Grievances,
consultations to form and publish Remonstrances, Accusations of the Duke of
Buckingham: Which the King esteeming as reproaches of His Government, and
assaults upon Monarchy, dissolves that Aslembly, hoping to find one of a less
choleric complexion after His Coronation.

This inauspicious Meeting drew aster it another Mischief, the Miscarriage of
the Designs upon Spain. For the supplies of Money being scanty and slow, the
Fleet could not go forth till October 8. an unseasonable time in the British
Seas; and their first contest was with Winds and Tempests, which destroying
some, seattered all the Ships. When they met, a more dangerous storm fell among
the Soldiers and Seamen, where small Pay caused less Discipline, and a contempt
of their General, the Lord Wimbleton, rendered the attempt upon Cades vain and
fruitless. This was followed by a Contagion (to which some conceive
discontented minds make the bodies of men more obnoxious) in the Navy, which
forced it home, more empty of Men, and less of Reputation.

The Infection decreasing at London, the King performed the Solemnities of His
Coronation February 2. with some alterations from those of His Predecessors:
for in the Civil He omitted the usual Parade of Riding from the Tower through
the City to White Hall, to save the Expenses that Pomp required, for more noble
undertakings. In the Spiritual there was restored a Clause in the Prayers which
had been pretermitted since Henry VI. and was this; Let Him obtain favor for
this People, like Aaron in the Tabernacle, Elisha in the waters, Zacharias in
the Temple; give Him Peter 's Key of Discipline, Paul 's Doctrine. Which though
more agreeing to the Principles of Protestantism, which acknowledges the Power
of Princes in their Churches, and was therefore omitted in the times of Popery;
yet was quarrelled at by the Factious party, (who take advantages of Calumny
and Sedition from good as well as bad circumstances) and condemned as a new
invention of Bishop Laud, and made use of to defame both the King and him.

After this He began a Second Parliament February 2. wherein the Commons voted
Him Four Subsidies, but the Demagogues intended them as the price of the Duke
of Buckingham's blood; whom Mr. Cook and Dr. Turner with so much bitterness
inveighed against, as passing the modesty of their former dissimulation they
taxed the King's Government. Sir Dudley Digges, Sir John Elliot and others
carried up Articles against him to the Lord's House, in which, to make the
Faction more sport, the Duke and the Earl of Bristol did mutually impeach each
other. By these contrasts the Parliament were so highly heated, that the
Faction thought it fit time to put a Remonstrance in the forge, which according
to their manner was to be a public Invective against the Government. But the
King having notice of it, dissolves the Parliament June 18. [ Anno 1626.] and
the Bill for the Subsidies never passed.

This misunderstanding at home produced another War abroad. For the King of
France taking advantage of these our Domestic embroilments begins a War upon
us, and seiseth upon the English Merchant Ships in the River of Bourdeaux. His
pretense was, because the King had sent back all the French Servants of the
Queen, whose insolences had been intolerable. But the world saw the vanity of
this pretext in the Example of Lewis himself, who had in the like manner
dimitted the Spanish attendants of his own Queen: and that truly the unhappy
Counsels in Parliament had exposed this Just Prince to foreign injuries. Which
He magnanimously endeavored to revenge, and to recover the goods of His abused
Subjects; and therefore sent the Fleet designed for Justice upon Spain to seek
it first in France. But the want of Money made the Preparations slow; and
therefore the Navy putting out late in the year was by Storms forced to desist
the enterprise. So that what was the effect only of the malice of His Enemies,
was imputed by some to a secret Decree of Heaven, which obstructed His just
undertakings for Glory.

[ Anno 1627.] The next year the King, quickened by the Petitions of the
Rochellers, who now sued for His Protection, as well as by the Justice of His
own Cause, more early prosecuted His Counsels, and sent the Duke of Buckingham
to attach the Isle of Rhee; which though alarmed to a greater strength by the
last year's vain attempt, yet had now submitted to the English Valor, had not
the Duke managed that War more with the Gayeties of a Courtier than the Arts of
a Soldier. And when it was wisdom to forsake those attempts which former
neglects had made impossible, being too greedy of Honor, and to avoid the
imputation on of fear in a safe retreat, he loaded his overthrow with a new
Ignominy, and an heavier loss of men, (the common fate of those Who seek for
glory in the parcels, lose it in the gross.) Which was contrary to the temper
of his Master, who was so tender of humane blood, that therefore He raised no
Wars, but found them; and thought it an opprobrious bargain to purchase the
fruitless Laurels, or the empty name of Honor, with the lives of men, but
where the Public Safety required the hazard and loss of some particulars.

This Expedition being so unhappy, and the Miseries of Rochel making them
importunate for the King's Assistance, His Compassionate Soul was desirous to
remove their Dangers, but was restrained by that necessitous condition the
Faction had concluded Him under. To free Himself from which, that He might
deliver the oppressed, He does pawn His own Lands for 120000 pounds to the
City, and borrows 30000 pounds more of the East India Company: but this was yet
too narrow a Foundation to support the charges of the Fleet, and no way so
natural to get adequate supplies as by a Parliament; which He therefore summons
to meet March 17, intending to use all Methods of Complacency to unite the
Subjects Affections, to Himself.

Which in the beginning proved successful, for the modesty of the Subjects
strove with the Piety of the King, and both Interests contended to oblige, that
they might be obliged. The Parliament granted the King [ Anno 1628.] five
Subsidies, and He freely granted their Petition of Right, the greatest
Condescension that ever any King made, wherein He seemed to submit the Royal
Scepter to the Popular Fasces, and to have given Satisfaction even to
Supererogation.

These auspicious beginnings, though full of Joy both to Prince and People,
were matter of envy to the Faction; and therefore to form new Discontents and
Jealousies, the Demagogues persuaded the Houses that the King's Grant of their
Petition extended, (beyond their own Hopes and the Limits themselves had set,
and what He had expressly mentioned and cautioned) even to the taking away His
Right to Tonnage and Poundage. Besides this, they were again hammering a
Remonstrance to reproach Him and His Ministers of maladministration. Which
Ingratitude He being not able to endure, on June 26. adjourns the Parliament
till October. 20. and afterward by Proclamation till Jan. 20. following.

In the interim, the King hastens to send succors to Rochel: and though the
General, the Duke of Buckingham, was at Portsmouth Assassinated by Felton,
armed (as he professed) with the public hatred; yet the Preparations were not
slackned, the King by His personal industry doing more to the necessary
furnishing of the Fleet in ten or twelve days than the Duke had done in so
many months before. But in the mean while Rochel was barricadoed to an
impossibility of Relief. Therefore the Earl of Lindsey, who commanded the
Forces, after some gallant, yet fruitless attempts returned to England, and the
Rochellers to the Obedience of the French King.

As Providence had removed the great Object of the Popular hate, and (as was
pretended) the chief obstruction of the Subjects Love to their King, the Duke
of Buckingham; so the King himself labors to remove all other occasions of
quarrel before the next Session. He restores Archbishop Abbot, who for his
remisness in the Discipline of the Church had been suspended from his Office,
and was therefore the Darling of the Commons because in disgrace with the King,
(so contrary are the affections of a corrupted State to those of their
Governors) to the administration of it again. Dr. Potter, the great Calvinist,
was made Bishop of Carlisle. Mr. Mountague's Book of Appello Caesarem was
called in. Proclamations were issued out against Papists. Sir Thomas Wentworth,
an active Leader of the Commons, was toward the beginning of this Session, as
Sir John Savil had been at the end of the last, called up into the Lord's
House, being made Viscount Wentworth, and Lord President of the North.

But the Honors of these Persons (whose parts the King, who well understood
men, thought worthy of his Favor and Employment) seeming the rewards of
Sedition, and the spoils of destructive Counsels, the Demagogues were more
eager in the pursuit of that which these had attained unto, by the like Arts.
And therefore despising all the King's obliging practices, in the next Sessions
they assumed a power of reforming Church and State, called the Customers into
question for Levying Tonnage and Poundage, made now their Invectives, as they
formerly did against the Duke, against the Lord Treasurer Weston; so that it
appeared that not the persons of men, but the King's trust of them, was the
object of their Envy, and His Favor, though never so Virtuous, marked them out
for Ruin. And upon these points they raised the heat to such a degree, that
fearing they should be dissolved ere they had time to vent their passions, they
began a Violence upon their own Body (an example which lasted longer than their
Cause, and at last produced the overthrow of all their Privileges.) They locked
the Doors of the House, kept the Key thereof in one of their own Pockets, held
the Speaker by strong hand in the Chair, till they had thundered out their
Votes, like dreadful Anathemaes, against those that should Levy, and, which
was more ranting, against such as should willingly pay the Tonnage and
Poundage. This Force the King went with His Guard of Pensioners to remove;
which they hearing, adjourned the House; and the King in the House of Lords
declaring the Injustice of those Vipers who destroyed their own Liberties,
dissolved the Parliament.

While the winds of Sedition raged thus furiously at home, more gentle gales
came from abroad. The French King's designs upon other places required Peace
from us, and therefore the Signiorie of Venice by her Ambassadors was moved to
procure an Accord betwixt Charles and Lewis; which the King accepted. And not
long after [ Anno 1629.] the Spaniard pressed with equal necessities desired
Amity; which was also granted. The King being thus freed from His domestic
Embroilments and foreign Enmities, soon made the World see His Skill in the
Arts of Empire, and rendered Himself abroad more considerable than any of His
Predecessors. And He was more glorious in the eyes of the good, and more
satisfied in His own breast, by confirming Peace with Prudence, than if He had
finished Wars with destroying Arms. So that His Scepter was the Caduceus to
arbitrate the differences of the Potentates of Europe. His Subjects likewise
tasted the sweetness of a Reign which Heaven did indulge with all its favors,
but only that of valuing their Happiness. While other Nations weltred in blood,
His people enjoyed a profound Peace, and that Plenty which the freedom of
Commerce brings along with it. The Dutch and Easterlings used London as the
surest Bank to preserve and increase their Trading. The Spanish Bullion was
here Coined, which advantaged the King's Mint, and increased the Wealth of the
Merchants, who returned most of that Money in our native Commodities.

While He dispensed these Blessings to the People, Heaven was liberal to Him in
giving Him a Son to inherit His Dominions, May 29. [ Anno 1630.] which was so
great matter of rejoicing to the People of uncorrupted minds, that Heaven
seemed also concerned in the Exultation, kindling another Fire more than
Ordinary, making a Star to be seen the same day at noon. (From which most men
presaged that that Prince should be of high Undertakings, and of no common
glory among Kings: which has since been confirmed by the miraculous
preservation of Him, and Heaven seemed to conduct Him to the Throne.) For this
great blessing the King gave public Thanks to the Author of it, Almighty God,
at St. Paul's Church; and God was pleased in a return to those thanks with a
numerous Issue afterward to increase this Happiness. For neither Armies nor
Navies are such sure props of Empire as Children are. Time, Fortune, private
Lusts, or Errors may take off, or change Friends: but those that Nature has
united must have the same Interest, especially in Royal Families, in whose
Prosperities strangers may have a part, but their Adversities will be sure to
crush their nearest Allies.

Prospering thus in Peace at home, a small time assisted His frugality to get
such a Treasure, and gave Him leisure to form such Counsels as might curb the
Insolence of His Enemies abroad. He confederated with other Princes to give a
check to the Austrian Greatness, assisting by His Treasure, Arms and Counsel,
the King of Sweden, to deliver the oppressed German States from the Imperial
Oppressions. And when Gustavus's fortune made him insolent, and he would impose
unequal Conditions upon the Paltsgrave, the King's Brother in Law, He
necessitated him notwithstanding his Victories to more easy Articles.

The next year was notorious for two Trials: one of the Lord Audley Earl of
Castlehaven, who being accused by all the abused parts of his Family of a
prodigious wickedness and unnatural uncleanness, was by the King submitted to a
trial by his Peers, and by them being found Guilty, was Condemned, and his
Nobility could be no patronage for his Crimes; (but in the King's eyes they
appeared more horrid, because they polluted that Order) and was afterward
executed.

The other was of a trial of Combat at a Marshal's Court, betwixt Donnold Lord
Rey, a Scottish High-lander, and David Ramsey, a Scottish Courtier. The first
accused the last to have solicited him to a Confederacy with the Marquess
Hamilton, who was then Commander of some Forces in assistance of the King of
Sweden: in which Ramsey said all Scotland was engaged but three; and that their
friends had gotten provision of Arms and Powder out of England; that the Court
was extremely corrupted; and that the matters of Church and State were so out
of frame as must tend to a Change.

There were no Witnesses, and the Defendant denying what the Appellant
affirmed, the Trial was thought must be by Duel. In order to which the King
grants a Commission for a Court-Marshal: where though the presumptions of
Ramsey's guilt were more heightened, yet the King hinders any further process by
Combat, which is doubted whether it be lawful; either thinking none so foolish
as to strive for Empire which He found so full of Trouble; or knowing that
Magistracy being the sole Gift of Heaven, it was vain to commit a crime in hope
of enjoying it, or in fear of losing it: (which was the Principle upon which
Excellent Princes have neglected the diligent Inquisition of Conspiracies) and
fatally continues Hamilton in that favor as did enable him afterward more
falsely to act that Treason of which he was then accused.

[ Anno 1632.] Some Tumults in Ireland showed a defect in that Government,
which made the King send over as Deputy thither the Lord Wentworth, a most
accomplished Person in affairs of Rule, of great Abilities equal to a Minister
of State. The King's choice of him he soon justified, by reducing that
tumultuary people to such a condition of Peace and security as it had never
been since its first annexion to this Crown, and made it pay for the Charges of
its own Government, which before was deducted out of the English Treasury:
their Peace and Laws now opening accesses for Plenty.

This enjoyment of Peace and Plenty through all the King's Dominions made Him
mindful of employing some fruits of it to the Honor of that God that caused
it; and not to let so great a Prosperity wholly corrupt the minds of men to a
neglect of Religion, (which is usual) He showed His own Zeal for the Ornaments
of it, and spent part of His Treasure toward the repair of St. Paul's Church,
and by His Example, Admonitions and Commands drew many of His Subjects to a
Contribution for it; and had restored it to its primitive luster and firmness,
adorned it to a magnificence equal with the Structure, which is supposed the
goodliest in the Christian World, had not the Malice of His Enemies forced Him
to Arms, mingled His Mortar with the blood of innocent people, and
sacrilegiously diverted all the Treasure and Materials gathered for this pious
design, to maintain an impious and unjust War: and afterward to dishonor His
Cares for Religion, they barbarously made it a Stable for their Horse, and
Quarters for their unhallowed Foot.

[ Anno 1633.] Some Reasons of State drew the King from London, May 13. to
receive the Imperial Crown of Scotland. Himself professed that He had no great
Stomach to the Journey, nor delight in the Nation, being a Race of men, that
under the Scheme of an honest animosity and specious plain-dealing were most
perfidious. A full Character of their great Movers. Yet as He had been nobly
treated all along His Journey by the English Nobility, so was He there
magnificently received and crowned at Edinburgh, June 10. But the King soon
found all those Caresses false. For the Nobility and Laick Patrons could not
concoct His Revocation (though legal and innocent) of such things as had been
stolen from the Crown during His Father's Minority, with a Commission for
Surrendry of Superiorities and Tithes to be retaken from the King by the
present Occupants (who could as then pretend no other Title than the unjust
usurpation of their Ancestors) on such conditions as might bring some Profit to
the Crown, (to which they justly belonged) some Augmentation to the Clergy, and
far more ease and benefit to the Common People, whom by advantage of those
illegal Tenures they oppressed with a most bitter Vassalage. This Act of His
Majesty being so full of equity and public good, those whose greatness was
builded upon Injustice did not bare-facedly oppose it, but endeavored to
hinder that and all the other designs of Peace and Order, by opposing in the
Parliament next after the Coronation the Act of Ratification of all those Laws
which King James had made in that Nation for the better regulating the affairs
of that Church, both as to the Government and Worship of it.

This was highly opposed by such as were sensible of their diminution by a
legal restitution of their unrighteous Possessions. And although the King
carried it by the major part of Voices; yet to prevent their own fires with the
public Ruin, they did most assiduously slander it among the People as the
abetting of Popery, and the betraying their Spiritual Liberty to the Romish
yoke. These Calumnies received more credit by the King's Order for a more
decent and Reverend Worship of God at His Royal Chapel at Edinburgh,
conformably to the English Usage.

Their noise grew louder by the Concent of their party of Malcontents in
England, who also took advantage to diffuse their poison from the King's Book
of Sports, which King JAMES had in his time published in Lancashire, and was
now ratified by King CHARLES for a more universal Observance. The Occasion of
which was the Apostasy of many to Popery, (whose Doctrines and Practices are
more indulgent to the licentious) through the rigid opinion of some Preachers,
who equaled all Recreations on the Sabbath (as they called it) to the most
prodigious transgressions. On the contrary, some of the ignorant Teachers had
perverted many to downright Judaism, by the consequence of so strict an
Observance of the Sabbath. And some over-busie Justices of Peace had suppressed
all the Ancient Feasts of the Dedications of Churches. The King therefore
intended by this edict to obstruct the success of the Enemies on both sides,
and to free His People from the yoke of this Superstition. But ( such is the
weakness of Humane Prudence, that the Remedies it applies to one Inconvenience
are pregnant of another; and whereas the Generality of men seldom do good but
as necessitated by Law, when Liberty is indulged, all things are soon filled
with Disorder and Confusion. And so) it happened in this, that the Vulgar
abusing the King's Liberty, (which was no more than is granted in other
Protestant Churches) and committing many undecencies, made many welltemper'd
Spirits too capable and credulous of those importunate Calumnies of the
Faction, that His Majesty was not well-affected to Religion.

[ Anno 1634.] The boldness of the Pickeroons, Turks, and Dunkirk-Pirates
infesting our Coasts, damaging our Traffic, the usurpation of the Holland
Fishers on the King's Dominion in the Narrow Seas, and His Right disputed in a
Tract by the Learned Grotius, call the King's next Cares for His own Honor,
and the People's Safety. But the Remedy appeared exceeding difficult; the
furnishing of a Navy for so honorable an undertaking being too heavy a burden
for His Exchequer; which (although not emptied by any luxuriant Feasts, nor
profusely wasted on some prodigal and unthrifty Favorite, nor lavished on
ambitious designs, from all which destructions of Treasure no King was more
free) was but just sufficient for ordinary and necessary Expenses of State and
Majesty. And though it was most just for Him to expect the Peoples Contribution
to their own Safety, who were never richer than now, nor had they ever more
Security for their riches than they now had by His Concessions of Liberty: yet
knowing how powerful the Faction always was to disturb the Counsels of
Parliament, He feared that from their Proceedings the Common Enemies would be
encouraged (as formerly) to higher Insolences, and the envious Demagogues
would contemn their own safety to ruin His Honor. He also accounted it a
great unhappiness to be necessitated to maintain His State by extraordinary
ways, and therefore refused to renew Privy Seals and Loans, the use of which
He debarred Himself of in granting the Petition of Right. Therefore consults
His Atturney-General Noy, whether the Prerogative had yet any thing left to
save an unwilling people. Noy acquaints Him with Ancient Precedents of raising
a Tax upon the Nation for setting forth a Navy in case of danger, and assures
Him of the Legality of the way in proceeding by Writs to that effect. Which
Counsel being embraced, there were Writs directed to the several Counties for
such a Contribution, that in the whole might build, furnish and maintain 47
Ships for the safety of the Kingdom. And by these the King soon secured and
calmed the Seas; but the Faction endeavored to raise a Tempest at Land.

[ Anno 1635.] They complained of Invasions on their Spiritual Liberties,
because the Bishops endeavored in these years to reduce the Ceremonies of the
Church to their primitive Observance, of which a long Prosperity had made men
negligent: and time had done that to the Spiritual Body which it does to the
Natural, daily amassed those Corruptions which at length will stand in need of
cure. Therefore when they took this proper Method of reforming a corrupted
State in bringing things back to their Original Institution, both His Majesty
and they were defamed with designs of Popery.

This Tax of Ship Money was pretended a breach to their Civil Liberties, and
contrary to Law, because not laid by a Parliament. Therefore those who sought
the People's favor to alter the present Government, by seeming the singular
Patrons of their Rights, refused to pay the Tax, [ Anno 1636.] and stood it out
to a Trial at Law. The Just Prince declined not the Trial, and permitted
Monarchy and Liberty to plead at the same Bar. All the Judges of the Land did
justify by their Subscriptions, that it was legal for the King to levy such a
Tax; and their Subscriptions were enrolled in all the Courts of
Westminster Hall. And when it came to be argued in the Exchequer-Chamber, ten
of them absolutely declared for it; only two, Crook and Hutton, openly
dissented from that opinion to which they had formerly subscribed, not without
the ignominy of Levity unbeseeming their places. And as the King was thus
victorious in the Law, so was He at Sea; and having curbed the Pirates, He also
reduced the Hollanders to a precarious use of His Seas.

Amidst all these Difficulties and Calumnies the King hitherto had so governed,
that sober men could not pray for, nor Heaven grant in Mercy to a People any
greater Happiness than what His Reign did afford. The British Empire never more
flourished with Magnificent Edifices; the Trade of the Nation had brought the
wealth of the Indies home to our doors; Learning and all good Sciences were so
cherished, that they grew to Admiration, and many Arts of the Ancients, buried
and forgotten by time, were revived again. No Subjects under the Sun richer,
and (which was the effect of that) none prouder. Security increased the
Husband-mans stock, and Justice preserved his Life; none being condemned as to
Life, but by the lawful Verdict of those of an equal Condition, the Jury of
his Peers. The poor might Reverence, but needed not Fear the Great: and the
Great though he might despise, yet could not injure his more obscure Neighbor.
And all things were so administered, that they seemed to conspire to the Public
good; except that they made our Happiness too much the cause of all Civil
Commotions, and brought our Felicity to that height, that by the necessity of
humane nature, which has placed all things in motion, it must necessarily
decline. And God provoked by our sins did no longer restrain and obstruct the
arts and fury of some wicked men, who contemning their present certain
enjoyments, hoped for more wicked acquisitions in public Troubles; to
overwhelm every part of the King's Dominions with a deluge of Blood and Misery,
and to commence that War, which as it was horrid with much slaughter, so it was
memorable with the Experiences of His Majesty's Virtues; Confusions, like
Winds, from every Coast at once assaulting and trying His Righteous Soul.

The first Storm arose from the North, and the flame first broke out in
Scotland, where those Lords who feared they should lose their spoils of
Religion and Majesty, took all occasions to hasten the public Misery (which at
last most heavily lay upon their Country, the hands they had strengthened and
instructed to fight against their Prince, laying a more unsupportable slavery
upon them than their most impious Slanders could form in the imaginations of
the credulous that they might fear from the King) by calumniating the King's
Government, raising fears of Tyranny and Idolatry, forming and spreading
seditious Libels. The Author, or at least the Abettor, of one of which was
found to be the Lord Balmerino, a Traitor by nature, being the Son of one who
had before merited death for his Treasons to King James, yet found that mercy
from him as the Son now did from King Charles, to have his Life and Estate
continued after condemnation. Yet this perfidious man interpreted the King's
Clemency for his own Virtue; and he that had dared such a Crime, could not be
changed by the Pardon of it; and as if he had rather received an Injury than
Life, he was the most active in the approaching Rebellion.

[ Anno 1637.] For the Rabble, that delights in Tumults, were fitted by this
and other Boutefeus for any occasion of contemning the King's Authority (though
His designs, that were thus displeasing to the Nobless, were evidently for the
benefit of the Populacy) and at last took fire from the Liturgy, something
differing from ours, (lest a full consent might argue a dependency upon the
Church of England) which some Scottish Bishops had composed and presented to the
King for the use of their Church; which the King, who was desirous that those
who were united under His Command might not be divided in Worship, confirmed,
and appointed to be first read July 13. at Edinburgh, a City always pregnant
with suspicions and false rumors. But it was entertained with all the
instruments of Fury that were present to a debauched multitude: for they flung
cudgels and sticks at the Dean of Edinburgh while he was performing his Office;
and after that was done, re-inforc'd their assault upon the Bishops, whom the
Earls of Roxbrough and Traquaire pretended to protect, who endured some
affronts, that their Patience might provoke a greater rage in the Multitude,
which a vigorous punishment had easily extinguished. For they that are fierce
in a crowd, being singled, through their particular fears become obedient. And
that rabble that talks high against the determinations of their Prince, when
danger from the Laws is within their ken, distrust their companions, and return
to subjection.

But it soon appeared that this was not the bare effort of a mutinous
Multitude, but a longformed Conspiracy; and to this Multitude, whose present
terror was great, yet would have been contemptible in a short space, there
appeared Parties to head them of several Orders. Who presently digested their
Partisans into several Tables, and concocted this Mutiny into a formal
Rebellion. To prosecute which they mutually obliged themselves and the whole
Nation in a Covenant to extirpate Episcopacy, and whatsoever they pleased to
brand with the odious names of Heresy and Superstition, and to defend each
other against all Persons, not excepting the King.

To reduce this people to more peaceful Practices, the King sends Marquess
Hamilton (one who being caressed by His Majesty's Favor had risen to such a
degree of wealth and greatness, that now he dreamed of nothing less than Empire
to bring his power to perfection, at least to be Monarch of Scotland, to which
he had some pretensions by his birth) as His Commissioner. Who with a species
of Loyalty dissembled that pleasure which he took in the opposition of the
Covenanters, whose first motions were secretly directed by his counsels, and
those of his dependents, Traquaire and Roxbrough, for all his Allies were of
that party (contrary to the custom of that Country, where all the Members of a
Family espouse the part of their Head though in the utmost danger:) and his
Mother rid armed with Pistols at her Saddle-bow for defense of the Covenant. By
his actings there new seeds of Discontents and War were daily sown, and his
oppositions so faint, that he rather increased than allayed their fury: By
several returns to His Majesty for new Instructions he gave time to the Rebels
to consolidate their Conspiracy, to call home their Exiles of Poverty that were
in foreign Armies, and provide Arms for open Force: By his false
representations of the state of things, he induced the King to temporize with
the too-potent Corruption of that Nation (an artifice King JAMES had sometimes
practiced) and by granting their desires, to make them sensible of the evils
which would flow from their own counsels. Therefore the King gave Order for
revoking the Liturgy, the High Commission, the Book of Canons, and the Five
Articles of Perth.

But the Covenanters were more insolent by these Concessions, because they had
gotten that by unlawful courses and unjust force which Modesty and Submission
had never obtained; and imputing these Grants to the King's Weakness, not his
Goodness, they proceeded to bolder Attempts: Indicted an Assembly without Him,
in which they abolished Episcopacy; excommunicated the Bishops and all that
adhered to them. Afterward they seized upon the King's Revenue, surprised His
Forts and Castles, and at last put themselves into Arms.

Provoked with these Injuries the King amasses a gallant Army, in which was a
very great appearance of Lords and Gentlemen, and with these marches, and
incamps within two miles of Berwick, within sight of the Enemy. But their
present Condition being such as could endure neither War nor Peace, they
endeavored to dissipate that Army, which they could not overthrow, by a
pretense to a Pacification. For which they petitioned the King, who yielded
unto it out of His innate tenderness of His Subjects Blood. So an Accord was
made June 17. [ Anno 1639.] and the King disbands His Army, expecting the Scots
should do the like, according to the Articles of Agreement.

But they being delivered from Fear, would not be restrained by Shame from
breaking their Faith. For no sooner had the King disbanded, but they protested
against the Pacification, printed many false Copies of it, that might represent
it dishonorable to the King, retained their Officers in pay, changed the old
Form of holding Parliaments, invaded the Prerogatives of the Crown, and
solicited the French King for an aid of men and money.

This perfidious abuse of His Majesty's Clemency made those that judge of
Counsels by the Issue to censure the King's Facility. Some wondered how He could
imagine there would be any Moderation in so corrupt a Generation of men, and
that they who had broken the Peace out of a desire of War, should now lay aside
their Arms out of a love to Quiet. That there would be always the same causes
to the Scots of disturbing England, and opposing Government, their unquiet
nature and Covetousness: therefore unless some strong impression made them
either unable or unwilling to distract our quiet, the King was to look for a
speedy return of their Injuries. Others attributed the Accord to the King's
sense that some eminent Officers in His own Camp were polluted with Counsels
not different from the Covenanters: and that Hamilton His Admiral had betrayed
the seasons of fighting by riding quietly in the Forth of Edinburgh; and had
secret Conference with His Mother, the great Nurse of the Covenant, on
Shipboard. But most referred it to the King's innate tenderness of His Subjects
Blood, and to His Prudence not to defile His Glory with the overthrow (which
seemed probable) of a contemptible Enemy, where the gains of the Victory could
not balance the hazards of attempting it.

[ Anno 1640.] While men thus discourse of the Scots Perfidiousness, the King
prepares for another Army, and in order thereto calls a Parliament in Ireland,
and another in England, for assistances against the Rebels in Scotland. The
Irish granted Money to raise and pay 8000 men in Arms, and furnish them with
Ammunition. Yet this Example, with the King's account of the Injuries done to
Him and this Nation by the Scots, and his promise of for ever acquitting them
of Ship Money if now they would freely assist Him, prevailed nothing upon the
English Parliament, whom the Faction drew aside to other Counsels. And when the
King sent Sir Henry Vane to re-mind them of His desires, and to demand Twelve
Subsidies, yet to accept of Six, he industriously (as was collected from His
own and His Sons following practices) insisted upon the Twelve, without
insinuation of the lesser quantity His Majesty would be contented with; which
gave such an opportunity and matter for seditious Harangues, that the House was
so exasperated, as that they were about to Remonstrate against the War with
Scotland. To prevent this ominous effect of the falseness of His Servant, the
King was forced to dissolve the Parliament May 5. yet continued the
Convocation, which granted Him 4 s. in the pound for all their Ecclesiastical
Promotions. But the Laiety that in the House had not time to declame against
His Majesty's Proceedings, did it without doors; for being dispersed to their
homes, they filled all places with suspicious Rumors and high Discontents: and
in Southwark there was an open Mutiny began, which was not pacified without
much danger, and the Execution of the principal Leaders.

The King thus betrayed, defamed and deserted by those who should have
considered that in His Honor their Safety was embarked, though He had no less
cause to fear secret Conspiracies at Home, which were more dangerous because
obscure, than the Scots public Hostility; yet vigorously prosecuted His
undertaking, and raised a sufficient Army: but could not do it with equal speed
to His Enemies, who had soon reunited their dispersed Forces; and encouraged
by the Faction, with whom they held Intelligence, in England, contented not
themselves to stand upon the defense, but invaded us, and advanced so far
before all the King's Army could be gathered together, that they gave a defeat
to a Party of it ere the Rear could be brought up by the Earl of Strafford, who
was appointed General, or the King could come to encourage them with His
Presence.

He was no sooner arrived at His Army, but there followed Him from some English
Lords a Petition, conformable to the Scotch Remonstrance, which they called the
Intentions of the Army. So that His Majesty might justly fear some attempts in
the South, while He was thus defending Himself from the Northern injuries. The
King answered the Petitioners, That before their Petition came He had resolved
to summon all the Peers to consult what would be most for the Safety of the
Nation and His own Honor. Who accordingly met, Sept. 24. Where it was
determined that a Parliament should be called to meet, Nov. 3. and in the mean
time a Cessation should be made with the Scots, with whom some Commissioners
from the Parliament should Treat.

November. 3. began that Fatal Parliament, which was so transported by the Arts
of some unquiet persons, that they dishonored the name and hopes of a
Parliament, ingulfed the Nation in a Sea of Blood, ruined the King, and
betrayed all their own Privileges and the People's Liberty into the power of a
Phanatick and perfidious Army. And although His Majesty could not hope to find
them moderate, yet He endeavored to make them so; telling them at their
meeting, that He was resolved to put Himself freely upon the Affections of His
English Subjects; that He would satisfy all their just Grievances, and not
leave to malice it self a shadow to doubt of His desire to make this a glorious
and flourishing Kingdom. He commended to their care the chasing out of the
Rebels, the Provisions of His own Army, and the Relief of the oppressed
Northern Counties.

But the Malignity of some few, and the Iguorance of more, employed that
Assembly in other matters: First, In purging their House of all such as they
conceived would not comply with their destructive enterprises; and for such men
they either found some fault with their Elections, or made them Criminals in
some public Grievance; though others of a deeper guilt they kept among them,
that their Offenses might make them obnoxious to their power, and obsequious to
their commands. Then with composed Harangues they declaimed upon the public
Grievances, and reckoned up casual Misfortunes amongst designed Abuses of
Government, every way raising up Contumelies against the present Power: and
that which was fullest of Detraction and Envy was applauded as most pregnant
with Liberty. Thus pretending several Injuries had been done to the People,
they raised the Multitude to hopes of an unimaginable Liberty, and a discontent
with the present Government. After this they set free all the Martyrs of
Sedition, that for their malignant Libels had been imprisoned, and three of
them were conducted through London with such a company of people adorned with
Rosemary and Bays, as it seemed a Triumph over Justice and those Tribunals that
sentenced them. Then they fell upon all the chief Ministers of State: they
impeached the Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; after him the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Finch, Keeper of the Great Seal, the Judges
that according to their Oath had determined Ship Money legal, and others; some
of which fled, those that were found were clapped in Prison: so that the King was
soon despoiled of those that were able or faithful to give Him Counsel, and
others terrified in their Ministry to Him.

While the Factious thus led the House, their Partisans without by their
Instructions formed Petitions against the Government in Church and State; to
which they seduced the ignorant Rabble in the City and several Counties to
subscribe, and in a tumultuous manner to present them to their Patriots. Who
being animated by the success of their Arts, fell to draw up a Bill for
Triennial Parliaments, wherein the Power of calling that great Council of the
Nation was, upon refusal of the King, and the neglect of others, devolved upon
Constables. Which profanation of Majesty though the King dissuaded them from,
yet they persisted in; and He passed it.

[ Anno 1641.] After five Months time (for so long a space they took to rake up
Matter and Witnesses to justify their accusation, and to give leisure to the
Court for Overtures of gainful Offices to the great Sticklers against him;
which not appearing) the Earl of Strafford is brought to his Trial in
Westminster Hall before the Lords as his Judges: (the King, Queen and Prince
sitting behind a Curtain in an adjoining Gallery) and round about the Court
stood the Commons. His Accusers and Witnesses were English, Scotch and Irish,
(and indeed so brave a Person could not be ruined but by the pretended hatred
of the whole Empire) The English were such as envied his Virtues, and greatness
in the King's Favor. The Scotch, because they knew his Prudence able to
counter-work their Frauds, discover their impudent Cheats, and his wise
management to overthrow their Force. The Irish hatred arose from his just and
necessary Severity in his Government, whereby he had reduced them from so great
a Barbarousness that was impatient of Peace, to a Civility that was fertile of
Plenty; and by Artifices, Husbandry and Commerce had rendered that tumultuary
Nation so rich, that they were now able to repay to the English Treasury those
great Debts which their former Troubles and Commotions had contracted. Although
those of this Nation were Papists, and sworn Enemies both of the English name
and State, and were even then practicing and meditating their Rebellion, (which
they hoped more easy when so wise a Governor was removed) and so prone enough
of themselves to the Crime; yet were they much caressed by the Faction, that
these in the name of the whole Kingdom should press the Earl with envy to the
Grave.

His Charge consisted of Twenty eight Articles (that their number might cover
their want of Evidence.) To all which the Lieutenant (whose Patience was not
overcome, nor his nature changed by the Reproaches of his Accusers) answers
with so brave a Presence of Spirit, such firm Reasons, and so clear an
Eloquence, that he whom the mercenary Tongues of their Lawyers had rendered as a
Monster of men, could not be found guilty of Treason, either in the particulars
or the whole. So that his Enemies were filled with madness that their Charge of
Crimes appeared no other than a Libel of Slanders; and the dis-interessed
Hearers were (besides the pleasure they received to find so great Endowments
polluted with no heinous Crimes) sensible of the unhappiness of those who are
Ministers of State among a Factious people, where their prosperous Counsels are
not rewarded, and unsuccessful, though prudent, are severely accused: when they
err, every one condemns them, and their wise Advices few praise; for those that
are benefited envy, and such as are disappointed hate those that gave them. And
such seemed the Fate of this Excellent Counselor, whom nothing else but his
great Parts, his Master's Love and Trust had exposed to this Danger.

The Faction being obstructed this way, by the Earl's Innocence and Abilities,
from taking away his Life, move the House to proceed by a Bill of Attainder, to
the making a Law after the Fact, whereby they Vote him guilty of High Treason:
yet add a Caution, that it should not be drawn into a Precedent, seeking to
secure themselves from a return of that Injustice upon themselves which they
acted on him, intending to prosecute what they falsely charged him with, the
Alteration of Government. Which yet passed not without a long debate and
contention: for many that had none but honest hopes, disdained to administer to
the Interest of the Faction in the blood of so much Innocent Gallantry; and
those that were prudent saw how such an Example opened the avenues to ruin of
the best Persons, when once exposed to public hatred. Therefore they earnestly
dissuaded such a proceed. And fifty nine of the most eminent openly dissented
when it came to the Vote; whose Names were afterward posted, and marked for
the fury of the Rabble, that for the future they might not oppose the designs
of the Factious, unless they desired to be torn in pieces.

In two days the Lower House past the Bill, so swift were the Demagogues to
shed blood: but the Lords House was a little more deliberative (the King having
amongst them declared His sense of the Earl's Innocence:) of whose slow
Resolves the Faction being impatient, there came a seditious rabble of about 5
or 6000 of the dregs of the people, armed with Staves and Cudgels, and other
Instruments of Outrage, (instigated by the more unquiet Members both of the
House of Commons and the City) to the Parliament doors, clamouring Justice,
Justice: and the next day, to raise their Fury, there was a report spread among
them of some endeavors to prepare an Escape for the Lieutenant of Ireland;
therefore with more fierceness they raised their clamours, some objecting
Treason to him, others their Decay of Trade, and each one either as he was
instructed (for some of the House of Commons would be among them, to direct
their Fury, and to give some order to their Tumult, that it might appear more
terrible,) or the sense of his own necessities and lusts led him, urged his
different motives for Justice: and at last, heated by their own motion and
noise, they guard the doors of the House of Peers, offer insolences to the
Lords, especially the Bishops, as they went in, and threaten them if their
Votes disagree from their clamours. And when they had thus made an assault on
the Liberty of the Parliament (which yet was pretended to be so Sacred) they
afterward set upon the neighboring Abby-Church, where forcing open the doors
they brake down the Organs, spoiled all the Vestments and Ornaments of the
Worship: from thence they fly to Court, and disturb the Peace of it with their
undecent and barbarous clamours: and at last were raised to that impudency, as
to upbraid the King, (who from a Scaffold persuaded them as they passed by to a
modest care of their own private affairs) with an unfitness to reign.

When some Justices of the Peace, according to the Law, endeavored to suppress
those Tumults by imprisoning the most forward and bold Leaders, they themselves
were imprisoned by the Command of the Commons, upon pretext of an injury
offered to the Liberties of the Subject; of which one was (as they then
dictated) That every one might safely petition the Parliament: yet when the
Kentish men came to Petition for something contrary to the Gust of the Faction,
they caused the City Gates to be shut upon them; and when other Counties were
meditating Addresses for Peace, by threatenings they deterred them from such
honest undertakings. And when some prudent Persons minded the Demagogues how
dishonorable it was for the Parliament not to suppress such Mutinies, they
replied, that their friends ought rather to be thanked and caressed.

By these and other Arts having wholly overthrown the freedom of that Council,
and many withdrawing themselves from such Outrages, when scarce the third part
of the Peers were present, the Faction of that House likewise passed the Bill,
the Dissenters being out-voted only by seven Voices. Yet all this could not
prevail upon the King, though the Tumults were still high without, and within
He was daily solicited by the Lords of His Palace (who now looked upon the Earl
as the Herd does on an hurt Deer, and they hoped his Blood would be the
Lustration of the Court) to leave the Earl as a Sacrifice to the Vulgar Rage.
Nor did the King any ways yield, till the Judges (who were now obsequious to
the pleasures of the Parliament) declared He might do it by Law, and the Earl
by his own Letters devoted himself as a Victim for the public Peace and His
Majesty's Safety: and then overcome with Importunities on all hands, and being
abused by bad dealing of the Judges (as Himself complained to the Bishops whom
He consulted in that Case, and the Bishop of London, who was one of them,
answered, That if the King in Conscience found him not guilty, He ought not to
pass the Bill; but for matter of Law, what was Treason, he referred Him to the
Judges, who, according to their Oath, ought to carry themselves indifferently
betwixt Him and His Subjects:) The other four Bishops that were then consulted,
Durham, Lincoln, Carlisle, and the Archbishop of Armagh, were not so free as
the Bishop of London was, and therefore the King observed a special blessing of
God upon him. He at last with much reluctance signed a Commission to some Lords
to pass that Bill of Attainder, and another for Continuation of the Parliament
during the pleasure of the Two Houses.

The passing of these two Bills, as some thought, wounded the King's Greatness
more than any thing He ever did. The first, because it cut off a most exquisite
Instrument of Empire, and a most faithful Servant: and none did more make use
of this to pollute His Honor, than those who had even forced Him to it; like
those malignant and damned Spirits who upbraid unhappy Souls with those Crimes
and ruins to which they themselves have tempted and betrayed them. But the
heaviest Censor was Himself, for He never left bewailing His Compliance, or
rather Connivence, with this Murder, till the issue of His Blood dried up those
of His Tears.

By the other Bill He had, as some censured, renounced His Crown, and granted
it to those men who at present exercised so Arbitrary a Power, that they wanted
nothing but length of time to be reputed Kings, and this they now had gotten.
But the more Speculative concluded it an act of especial Prudence, for the King
made that an evidence of His sincere intention to oblige His people, and
overcome the Malice of His Enemies with Benefits: which the Faction would have
usurped, and by the boldness of the attempt engaged the People to them as the
only Patrons of their Liberty. And they were furnished with an Example for it
by their Confederates in Scotland, who indicted an Assembly without the King's
leave, and continued it against His pleasure; and (as all imitations of Crimes
exceed their first pattern) it was conceived these men whose furies were more
unjust, and so would be more fierce, intended to improve that Precedent to the
extremest guilt.

The Bill was no sooner signed, but they hastened the Execution; and so much
the more eagerly, because the King desired, in a most passionate Letter
delivered by the Prince to the Lords, that that Excellent Soul which found so
much Injustice on Earth, might have the more time to fit it self for the Mercy
of Heaven. But this favor which became Christians to grant, agreed not with
the Religion of his Adversaries, and therefore the second day after he was
brought to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, (in his Passage thither he had a sight
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, whose Prayers and Blessing he with a low
Obeisance begged, and the most pious Prelate bestowed them with Tears,) where
with a greater presence of mind than he had looked his Enemies in the face did
he encounter Death, and submitted his neck to the stroke of the Executioner. He
was a person of a generous Spirit, fitted for the noblest enterprises, and the
most difficult parts of Empire. His Counsels were bold, yet just, and he had a
Vigor proper for the Execution of them. Of an Eloquence, next to that of His
Master's, masculine, and most excellent. He was no less affectionate to the
Church than to the State, and not contented while living to defend the
Government and Patrimony of it, he commended it also to his Son when he was
about to die, and charged his abhorrency of Sacrilege. His Enemies called the
Majesty of his Miene in his Lieutenancy, Pride, and the undaunted execution of
his Office on the contumacious, the Insolency of his fortune. He was censured
for committing that fatal Error of following the King to London and to the
Parliament after the Pacification with the Scots at York; and it was thought,
that if he had gone over to his charge in Ireland, he might have secured both
himself and that Kingdom for His Majesty's Service. But some attributed this
Counsel to a necessity of Fate, whose first stroke is at the brain of those
whom it designs to ruin, and brought him to feel the effects of Popular Rage,
which himself in former Parliaments had used against Government, and to find
the Experience of his own advices against the Duke of Buckingham. Providence
teaching us to abhor over-fine Counsels by the mischiefs they bring upon their
Authors.

The Fall of this Great Man so terrified the other Officers of State, that the
Lord High Treasurer resigned his Staff to the Hands from whence he received it;
the Lord Cottington forsook the Mastership of the Court of Wards; and the
Guardian of the Prince returned Him to the King: These Lords parting with their
Offices, like those that scatter their Treasure and Jewels in the way, that
they might delude the violence of their greedy pursuers. But the King was left
^aked of their faithful Ministry, and exposed to the Infusions and
Informations of those who were either Accomplices or Mercenaries to the Faction,
to whom they discovered his most private Counsels.

When the Earl of Strafford was dead, then did the Parliament begin to think of
sending away the Scots, who hitherto had much impoverished the Northern
Counties, and increased the charges of the Nation: but now they were Voted to
receive 300000 pound, under the notion of a Brotherly Assistance, but in truth,
designed by the Faction, as a reward for their Clamours for the Earls Blood;
yet were they kept so long till the King had passed away more of His
Prerogative, in signing the Bills to take away the High Commission and the
Star Chamber. After which spoils of Majesty they disband the English and the
Scotch Armies, August 6. and on the 10. of that Month the King follows them
into Scotland, to settle, if it were possible, that Kingdom. But the King still
found them as before: when He satisfied their greedy appetites, then would they
offer Him their Lives and Fortunes; but when gain or advantage appeared from
His Enemies, they appeared in their proper nature ungrateful, changeable and
perfidious, whom no favors could oblige, nor any thing but Ruin was to be
expected by building upon their Love.

While the King was in Scotland laboring to settle that Nation by granting all
that the Covetousness and Ambition of their Leaders pretended was for the
Public good, and so aimed at no less than a Miracle, by His Benefits to reduce
Faith (which, like Life, when it is once departed does never naturally return)
into those perfidious breasts; the Parliament adjourns, and leaves a standing
Committee of such as were the Leaders or the Servants of the Faction. These
prepared new Toils for His Majesty's Return, and by them was the Grand
Remonstrance formed: in it were reckoned for Grievances all the Complaints of
men that were impatient of Laws and Government; the Offenses of Courtiers, the
unpleasing Resolves of Judges, the Neglects or Rigours of the Ministers of
Justice, the undigested Sermons of some Preachers, yea, the Positions of some
Divines in the Schools, were all exaggerated to defame the present Government
both in Church and State, and to magnify the skill of these State-Physicians
that offered Prescripts for all these Distempers. Besides, more easily to abuse
the Vulgar, who reckon Misfortunes as Crimes, unpleasing accidents were
represented as designs of Tyranny; and those things which had been reformed,
were yet mentioned as continued burdens. From which the people were assured
there could be no deliverance but by the wisdom and magnanimity of the
Remonstrants.

To prepare the way for this, the most opprobrious parts of it were first
whispered among the Populacy, that by this seeming suppression men impatient of
Secrets might more eagerly divulge them, and the danger appear greater by an
affected silence. Then prodigious Calumnies (which none but souls prone to any
wickedness could believe of so Great a man) were formed of the King, and such
suspicions raised of Him and His Friends, as might force them to some Injuries
which hitherto they forbore, and by securing themselves increase the Public
fears. For Slanders do rather provoke most men than amend them; and the
provoked think more of their safety, than to adjust their actions against their
malicious Slanderers. And when the minds of men were made thus solicitous
concerning Dangers from the King, to make them more pliable and ductile, there
was represented to them an inevitable anger of Heaven against the present state
of things both in Church and State, testified by many Prodigies that were
related, and portentuous Presages of Ruin. Certain Prophecies (for a credulity
to which the English Vulgar are infamous) from unknown Oracles are divulged,
which enigmatically describe the King as a Monster, and from such a Prince must
proceed a change of Government. Some vain persons also, that gave themselves up
to the Imposture of Astrology, were hired to terrify the people with the
unsignificant Conjunctions of Stars, and from them to foretell ruins to the
better part of the World, and an imminent destruction on men of the Long Robe,
and Alterations of States.

These were done to temper the minds of men by a superstition for a guidance of
their Ministers, who being conceived to be the Ambassadors of Heaven, were
supposed to have it in their Commission, to declare the Conditions of War and
Peace: and these, either through the same weakness capable of the like terrors
with the Vulgar, or (which is more to be abhorred) corrupted, as some were, by
the Caresses and gainful hopes that the Faction baited them with, did justify
their fears, and increase them by applying some obscure Prophecies in Scripture
to the present Times and People; compared the pretended Corruptions of our
Church with the Idolatries of Israel, and whatsoever was condemned in the Holy
Records, was paralleled with the things they disliked here, and all the Curses
that God poured upon His irreconcilable and obdurate enemies, were denounced
against such as differed from them, or would not join with the Faction.

To make these Harangues more efficacious, the Authors of them received the
Reverence of the Demagogues, who (despising, questioning and exposing to
Affronts such sober Divines as would have cured the madness of the People,)
appropriated to such Teachers the Titles of Saints, Faithful Ministers,
Precious men; and they on the other side made a return of Epithets to their
Masters, of the Servants of the Most High, such as were to do the Work of the
Lord; That by their Counsels men were to expect new Heavens and a new Earth;
that they were men that should prepare the Kingdom for Jesus Christ, and lay
the Foundations of the Empire of the Saints which was to last a Thousand years.
To make the Cry yet louder, they permitted all Sects and Heresies a License of
public profession, (which hitherto Discipline, the Care of the Common Peace
and Religion had confined to secret corners) and permitted the Office of
Teaching to every bold and ignorant undertaker; so that at last the dregs of
the People usurped that Dignity, and Women, who had parted with the natural
modesty of their Sex, would not only speak, but also rule in the Church. All
these, in gratitude for their Licentiousness, still persuaded to their hearers
the admiration of the Authors of it, and bitterly inveighed against those whom
the Care both of the Souls and Fortunes of men would excite to repress them, in
many of their Raptures denouncing Woe and Judgment to the lawful Governors in
Church and State.

While all these Methods of Ruin were preparing here, the same anger of God,
the same madness of men raised up another Tempest in Ireland. For the Popish
Lords and Priests of Ireland (who were the prime composers of the Tragedies
there,) were encouraged by the Success of the Scots, who by a prosperous
Rebellion (as the Historian of those Troubles writes) had procured for
themselves such large Privileges, to an imitation, which the present Jealousies
in England (where mutual Contrasts would employ all their force upon one
another,) promised to be secure. And they had an happy opportunity by the
Vacancy in Government through the slaughter of the Earl of Strafford, with whom
the Irish Lords (while they prosecuted him in England) had removed all those
other inferior Magistrates that were most skillful in the affairs of that
Kingdom, by accusing to the Faction some of them of Treason, and others of an
inclination to the Earl, and had got preferred to their charges such as were
either altogether unacquainted with the Genius of that People, or favorers of
the Conspiracy. A strength they had also ready; for those 8000 which had been
listed for the Scottish Expedition were unseasonably disbanded, and the King in
foresight they might cause some mischief in their own Country, had therefore
promised 4000 of them to the King of Spain: yet would not the Parliament
consent to their departure, because (as the Irish Lords suggested) it would
displease the King of France; and when the King promised to send as many to the
French Camp, that likewise was not relished. The Common Soldiers of that Army
being thus made useless, and therefore like men of their employment most fierce
when they were to be dismissed from the dangers of War, were easily drawn into
the Rebellion, although very few of their Officers were polluted with the Crime.

The Irish Lords and Priests being allured by these our Vices and these several
opportunities, began their Rebellion October. 23. The Irish throughout that whole
Kingdom on a sudden invading the unprovided English that were scattered among
them, despoiling them of their Estates, Goods, and many thousands of their
Lives, without any respect of Sex, Age, Kindred, or Friendship, and made them
as so many Sacrifices to their bloody Superstition. They missed but a little to
have surprised Dublin. But their Conspiracy being detected there and in some
few other places, the English name and interest was preserved in that Kingdom,
till they could receive Succors from hence.

The King had the first intelligence of it, in its very beginnings, in
Scotland, and thereupon sent Sir James Stuart to the Lords of the Privy Council
in Ireland, to acquaint them with His Knowledge, and Instructions, and to carry
all that Money that His present Stores could supply. Besides, He moves the
Parliament of Scotland, as being nearest, to a speedy help; who decline their
Aids, because Ireland was dependent upon the Crown of England. At the same time
also He sends post to the Parliament of England; who less regard it, the
Faction applauding their fortune, that new Troubles were arisen to molest the
King, and that the Royal Power being thus assaulted in all three Nations, there
must shortly arise so many new Commonwealths. Besides that it yielded fresh
matter of reproach to His Majesty, to whose Counsels at first secretly they
whispered, and at last publicly imputed that horrid Massacre. Which Slanders
were colored by the Arts of the Irish Rebels, who, to dishearten the English
from any resistance, bragged that the Queen was with their Army; That the King
would come amongst them with Auxiliary Forces; That they did but maintain His
Cause against the Puritans; That they had the Kings Commission for what they
did, showing indeed a Patent that themselves had drawn, but thereto was affixed
an Old broad Seal that had been taken from an obsolete Patent out of Farnham
Abbey, by one Plunckett, in the presence of many of their Lords and Priests, as
was afterward attested by the Confession of many. That the Scots were in
confederacy with them, to beget a faith of which, they abstained from the lives
and fortunes of those of that Nation among them.

On the other side, to encourage the Natives of their own party, they produce
fictitious Letters, wherein they were informed from England that the Parliament
had passed an Act, that all the Irish should be compelled to the Protestant
Worship; that for the first offense they should forfeit all their Goods, for
the second their Estates, and for the third their Lives. Besides, they present
them with the hopes of Liberty: That the English Yoke should be shaken off;
that they would have a King of their own Nation; and that the Goods and Estates
of the English should be divided among the Natives. And with these hopes of
Spoil and Liberty the Irish were driven to such a Fury, that they committed so
many horrid and barbarous acts as scarce ever any Age or People were guilty of.

In the mean while nothing was done for the relief of the poor English there,
but only some Votes passed against the Rebels, till the King returned to
London, which was about the end of November: where He with the Queen and the
Prince were magnificently feasted by the Citizens, and the Chief of them
afterward by Him at Hampton Court. For he never neglected any honest Arts to
gain His Peoples love; to which they were naturally prone enough, had not His
Enemies methods and impulses depraved their Genius. But this much troubled the
Faction, who envied that Reverence to Majesty in others which was not in
themselves, and they endeavored to make these loves short and unhappy; for
they discountenanced the prime advancers of this Honor to the King, and were
more eager to render Him odious. For having gotten a Guard about them, they
likewise insinuated into the people dangerous apprehensions as the cause of
that Guard, and every day grew more nice, and jealous of their Privileges, and
Power. The King's advices to more tenderness of His Prerogative, or His
Advertisements of the scandalous Speeches that were uttered in their House,
they interpret as encroachments upon their Grandeur, and upbraided the King for
them in their Petitions to Him.

But their greatest effort upon Majesty was the Remonstrance; after which they
took all occasions to magnify the apprehensions of those Fears which they had
falsely pretended to in it. This the Faction had before formed, and now brought
into the House of Commons; where it found a strong opposition by those wise men
that were tender of the public Peace and Common Good: though those who
preferred their Private to the General Interest, and every one that was
short-sighted and improvident for the future, were so fierce for it, that the
Debates were continued all night till ten a clock the next morning, so that
many of the more aged, and persons of best fortunes (not accustomed to such
watchings) were wearied out, and many others, not daring to provoke the Faction
in this their grand Design, left the House; so that at last they carried it,
yet but by eleven Votes. Which they presented with a Petition to take away the
Votes of Bishops in the House of Lords, and the Ceremonies in the Church, and
to remove those Persons from His Trust which they could not confide in; yet
named none, but only accused all under the name of a Malignant Popish Party.
Which they had no sooner delivered than they caused it to be published in Print.

To which the King answers in another public Declaration, but so much to the
discontent of the Demagogues, to find their Methods of Ruin so fully
discovered as they were in His Majesty's Answer, that they had recourse to
their former sovereign Remedy, which sober men accounted a crime, and an
indignity to Government, the Tumults of the Rabble. Who in great numbers and
much confusion came up to Westminster, some crying out against Bishops, others
belching their fury against the Liturgy, and a third party roaring that the
Power of the Militia should be taken out of the King's hands. To their Clamours
they added rude Affronts to those Lords whom their Leaders had taught them to
hate, and especially to the Bishops, at their going in or coming out of the
House: and afterward drawing up to White Hall, they appeared so insolent, as
it was evident they wanted only some to begin, for there were enough to
prosecute an Assault upon the King in His own Palace.

The Bishops thus rudely excluded from their Right and Liberty of coming to the
Parliament, Twelve of them afterward protest against the Proceedings of it,
during their so violent Exclusion. Which Protestation the Commons presently
accused of High Treason, and caused their Commitment to the Tower; where they
continued them till the Bill against their Votes in the Lords House was past,
that they might not produce their Reasons for their Rights, and against the
Injustice offered unto them, and then afterward released them.

The King also saw it necessary to take a Guard of such Gentlemen as offered
their Service for His Safety, and to prevent the profaning of Majesty by the
rude fury of the People, who used to make their Addresses acceptable at
Westminster, by offering in their passage some base Affronts at White Hall. But
when the terror of this Guard had reduced them to some less degree of
Impudency, they then, instructed by their Heads, labored to make it more
unsafe to the King, by seeking to raise the Rage and Jealousy of the whole
City against Him. For at midnight there were cries out in the Street, that all
People should arise to their defense; for the King with His Papists were coming
to fire the City, and cut their throats in their beds. Than which though
nothing was more false, yet it found the effects of truth; and the People by
such Alarms being terrified from sleep, the impressions of those nightly fears
lay long upon their Spirits in the day, and filled them almost with Madness.

The King therefore, not always to encourage these Violences with Patience,
but at last by a course of Justice to take off those whom He had found to be
the Authors of these destructive Counsels, the grand Movers of these Seditious
practices, and, which was more, the Inviters of a Foreign Force, the Scotch
Army, into this Nation; commands His Attorney General to accuse Five Members of
the House of Commous, and one of the Lords, upon Articles of High Treason, to
be tried according to the Laws of the Land: and He also sends some other
Officers to seal up their Trunks and Cabinets in their several Lodgings, and to
secure their Persons. This being related to the House of Commons (wherein the
Faction was now grown more powerful, and with whom did join many men of
Integrity in this Occurrence, being too careful of the Privileges of their
House, which yet secure none of the Members against Justice for Murder, Felony,
or Treason) they were so far from admitting the King's Charge against them,
that they accused the King of breach of Privilege, and Vote all those guilty
of Enmity to the Commonwealth that shall obey the King in any of His Commands
concerning them.

This Obstruction of Justice so far moved the King, together with the Advice of
some of His Council that were also of the House of Commons, as also an hope of
rooting up the Faction this way, that none through the hope of Concealment
should be encouraged to conspire the public Ruin, that He Himself, with about
an hundred Lords and Gentlemen and their followers, went to the House of
Commons: Where commanding His Attendants to move no further than the Stairs, to
offer no violence, nor return any uncivil language to any although provoked,
Himself with the Paltzgrave only enters the House, and demands that the
Incendiaries might be delivered into His hands, with whom He promises to deal
no otherwise than according to the Law. But they whom he sought, being before
informed (as it is reported) of the King's coming by the secret Intelligence of
Marquess Hamilton, and a Court Lady (who having lost the Confluence of Servants
with her Beauty, sought now to prevent a solitude by politic ministeries) had
forsook the place, and withdrawn themselves into the Sanctuary of the City.
Wherefore the King having renewed His Charge, without injury to any immediately
departs.

But the Faction would not let Him so rest, but prosecuted this attempt of His
with all the Clamours that they possibly could raise, spread the sparks of
Dissension far and wide, make the common people mad with Fears and
Distractions, stir up some in several Counties to bring Petitions for the
impeached Members and their Violated Privileges; and at last prepare an armed
Rabble disposed into Order to bring the accused Demagogues to the House from
their Coverts in London. This coming to the knowledge of the King, although
many Gallant and faithful Persons proffered their Service by mingling with the
Rout, or by being as Spectators, to curb any Insolences that should be
attempted on Him; yet was He resolved to withdraw Himself with the Queen and
their Children to Windsor, that He might permit their Fury to languish when it
had no opposition, and to give time for their jealousies and rumors to wax old
and perish. For the first Indignation of a mutinous Multitude is most fierce,
and a small delay breaks their consent: and Majesty would have a greater
Reverence, if any, at a distance.

The King's Wisdom was perceived by His Enemies, and therefore to counterwork
it, and not to let the people sleep without fear, lest they should come to be
sober, and return to the love of Obedience, strange reports were every day
brought of dangers from the King: That troops of Papists were gathered about
Kingston upon the Thames, where the County Magazine was lodged, under the
Command of the Lord George Digby, who was then famed to be a Papist, (though at
that time he was an elegant Assertor of the Protestant Faith,) and Col.
Lunsford, who was characterised to be of so monstrous an appetite that he would
eat Children. And parties were sent to take them both, which found no such
dreadful Preparations. At other times, when the People on the Lord's days were
at Divine Worship, they were distracted from it by Alarms, that the Papists
(who and from whence none could tell) were up in Arms, and were just then about
to fire their Houses, and mix their Blood with their Prayers: That there were
Forces kept in Grotts and Caves under ground, that should in the night break
out into the midst of the City, and cut all their throats: And what was more
prodigious, and though ridiculous, yet had not a few believers in London, That
there were designs by Gunpowder to blow up the Thames, and choke them with the
water in their beds. Thus were the people taught to hate their Prince, and by
bloody news from every Quarter they were instructed to that Cruelty which they
vainly feared, and to adore those by whose Counsels they were delivered from so
unexpected Dangers.

By all this the Faction gained the repute of Modesty inferior to their
supposed Trust, when they demanded nothing else but the Command of the Tower,
and the Militia of all the Counties in England, together with the Forts and
Castles of the same. For all which they moved the House of Commons of petition:
who desiring the Conjuncture of the Lords in the same, were wholly refused by
them. Therefore stemmed by the Faction they petition alone. Which unlimited
Power the King absolutely refused to grant unto them, who He foresaw would use
that, as they had all His other Concessions, to the ruin of the Author of
their Power. Yet was pleased to consent, after He had demonstrated the
prejudice they required to the English Nation, that they might send over an
Army of 10000 Scots into Ireland, and deliver unto them the strong Town and
Port of Carick fergus, one of the Chief Keys of that Kingdom: which was done to
oblige the Scots to them in their future designs. And also He was pleased to
wave the Prosecution of the Impeached Members, and was willing to grant a Free
and General Pardon for all His Subjects, as the Parliament should think
convenient.

But all this could not content them who had immoderate desires, and they were
more discontented that they could not usurp the King's Rights, than if they had
lost their own Privileges: therefore to bring the Lords to a concurrence with
them, the hitherto prosperous Art of Tumultuous Petitions was again practiced,
and great Numbers from several Counties were moved to come as Earthquakes, to
shake the Fundamental Constitutions of their House, and to require that neither
the Bishops nor the Popish Lords should continue in their Ancient Right to Vote
among the Peers. By this means they should weaken the King in the Voices of
that House, and whosoever they could not confide in, they could fright him from
Voting against them, by exposing him as Popish to the Popular Fury. For this
was the mothod of using the Petitions. The most common Answer was with Thanks,
and that the House of Commons were just now in consideration thereof. The
Petitioners were taught to reply, that They doubted not of the care of the
Commons House, but all their distrust was in the House of Lords, where the
Popish Lords and Bishops had the greatest Power, and there it stuck, whose
names they desired to know: and in this they were so earnest, that they would
not willingly withdraw whilst it was debated, and then they had leave to
depart with this Answer, That the House of Commons had already endeavored
Relief from the Lords in their Requests, and shall so continue till Redress be
obtained. Such Petitions as these were likewise from the several Classes of the
inferior Tradesmen about London, as Porters, Watermen, and the like: and that
nothing of testifying an universal Importunity might be left unattempted, Women
were persuaded to present Petitions to the same effect. While the Faction thus
boasted in the success of their Arts, Good men grieved to see these daily
Infamies of the supreme Council of the Nation, all whose Secrets were published
to the lowest and weakest part of the People: and they who clamoured it as a
breach of their Privilege, that the King took notice of their Debates, now
made them the Subjects of Discourse in every Shop, and all the corners of the
Street; where the good and bad were equally censured, and the Honor and Life
of every Senator exposed to the Verdict of the Rabble. No Magistrate did dare
to do his Office, and all things tended to a manifest Confusion: So that many
sober Persons did leave the Kingdom, as unsase, where Factions were more
powerful than the Laws. And Just Persons chose rather to hear than to see the
Miseries and Reproaches of their Country.

On the other side, to make the King more pliable, they tempt Him by danger in
His most beloved Part, the Queen, concerning whom they caused a Rumor, that
they did intend to impeach Her of High Treason. This Rumor made the deeper
Impression, because they had raised most prodigious Slanders (which are the
first Marks for destruction of Princes) on Her; and when they had removed all
other Counselors from the King, She was famed to be the Rock upon which all
hopes of Peace and Safety were split: That She commanded no less His Counsels
than Affections, and that His Weakness was so great, as not to consent to or
enterprise any thing which She did not first approve: That She had perverted
Him to Her Religion, and formed designs of overthrowing the Protestant
Profession. These and many other of a portentuous falsehood were scattered among
the Vulgar, who are always most prone to believe the Worst of Great Persons:
and the uncontrolled License of reporting such Calumnies is conceived the first
Dawning of Liberty. But the Parliament taking notice of the Report, sent some
of their House to purge themselves from it, as an unjust Scandal cast upon
them. To which the Queen mildly answers, That there was a general Report
thereof, but She never saw any Articles in writing, and having no certain
Author for either, She gave little credit thereto; nor will She believe they
would lay any Aspersion upon Her, who has been very unapt to misconstrue the
actions of any One person, and much more the Proceedings of Parliament, and
shall at all times wish an Happy Understanding between the King and His People.

But the King knowing how usual it was for the Faction by Tumults and other
Practices to transport the Parliament from their Just Intentions in other
things, and that they might do so in this, resolved to send Her into Holland,
under color of accompanying their Eldest Daughter, newly married to the Prince
of Orange; but in truth to secure Her, so that by the fears of Her danger (who
was so dear unto Him) He might not be forced to any thing contrary to His
Honor and Conscience, and that Her Affections and Relation to Him might not
betray Her Life to the Malice of His Enemies. With Her He also sent all the
Jewels of the Crown, that they might not be the spoils of the Faction, but the
means of the support of Her Dignity in foreign parts, if His Necessities
afterward should not permit Him to provide for Her otherwise. Which yet She
did not so employ, but reserved them for a supply of Ammunition and Arms, when
His Adversaries had forced Him to a necessary Defense. It was said that the
Faction knew of this conveyance, and might have prevented it, but that they
thought it for their greater advantage that this Treasure should be so managed,
that the King in confidence of that assistance might take up Arms, to which
they were resolved at last to drive Him. For they thought their Cause would be
better in War than Peace, because their present Deliberations were in the sense
of the Law actual Rebellions; and a longer time would discover those Impostures
by which they had deluded the People, who would soon leave them (as many now
did begin to repent of their Madness) to the Vengeance which was due to their
practices, unless they were more firmly united by a communion of guilt in an
open assaulting their Lawful Prince.

The King hastens the security of the Queen, and accompanies Her as far as
Dover, there to take his farewell of Her; a business almost as irksome as
death, to be separated from a Wife of so great Affections and eminent
Endowments: and that which made it the more bitter was, that the same cause
which forced Her Separation from Him set Her at a greater distance from His
Religion, (the only thing wherein their Souls were not united) even the
Barbarity of His Enemies who professed it, yet were so irreconcilable to
Virtue, that they hated Her for Her Example of Love and Loyalty to Him. While
He was committing Her to the mercy of the Winds and Waves, that She might
escape the Cruelty of more unquiet and faithless men, they prosecute Him with
their distasteful Addresses, and at Canterbury present Him with a Bill for
taking away Bishops Votes in Parliament. Which having been cast out of the
House of Peers several times before, ought not by the Course and Order of
Parliament to have been admitted again the same Session. But the Faction had
now used their accustomed Engine, a Tumult, and it was then passed by the
Lords, and brought hither together with some obscure Threats, that if it were
not signed, the Queen should not be suffered to depart. (By such impious
Violences did they make way for that which they called Reformation.) This His
Majesty signs, (though after it made a part of His penitential Confessions to
God) in hopes that that Bill being once consented to, the Fury of the Faction,
which with so great Violence pursued an absolute Destruction of the
Ecclesiastical Government, would be abated, as having advanced so far in their
design to weaken the King's Power in that House by the loss of so many Voices,
which would have been always on that side where Equity and Conscience did most
appear. But He soon found the Demagogues had not so much Ingenuity as to be
compounded with, and they made this but a step to the overthrow of that which
He designed to preserve.

When His Majesty was come back as far as Greenwich, He met with many
informations how averse the Faction was to Peace, and that their Proceedings
were raised to a level with their Principles, which some of them published,
That the Alteration they did intend, and which was necessary both in Church and
State, must be made by Blood. Therefore they endeavored by their Calumnies to
create an Hatred of Him, and to despoil Him of all the hopeful Effects of His
Condescensions. For when a Prince is once hated, his Benefits do him no less
hurt than Injuries. In order to this, Mr. Pym had publicly charged Him with a
Connivence at least, if not with the Contrivance of the Irish Rebellion:
because many Papists had His Majesty's immediate Warrant for their transport
thither. This the King requires satisfaction for, showing the Falsehood and
Malice of the Defamer, by giving an Account of the date of the several
Warrants. But the Faction so far prevailed as to make it a Public Sin, and the
House was persuaded to believe and acknowledge it to be their common sense.
Many others had uttered seditious Speeches in the House, especially Master
Marten, a man of all Uncleanness, a public contemner of Religion and
Honesty, that had wasted a large Patrimony (which he had likewise unjustly
morgaged to several and different Creditors) in the most infamous Lusts, and
sought a greater license and fresh supplies for them by the ruin of the State;
at which he was powerful, being of as impure and lascivious a Wit as he was of
Life, wherewith he used to profane God and His Vicegerents: yet serving the
ends of Confusion, had his name among the Catalogue of those that were to do
the Work of the Lord. Besides the attempts upon His Honor, they endeavor
another upon His Family, and to seize upon the Prince. Which the King hearing,
sends for Him and the Duke of York, and immediately removes to Theobalds in
order to His journey toward the North, where He inintended to settle His
abode, till He saw what Issue this Storm would have.

This removal of the King was variously censured. Some thought it unadvisedly
done, to withdraw so far from London, to leave His chief City wholly to the
practices, and expose His Friends there to the Impostures and Injuries of His
Enemies. Others, especially the Friends of the Faction, defamed it as a
preparing Himself for that War which followed. But others concluded it as an
act of Necessity, and where there was no choice for Prudence. For when He had
passed more obliging Acts, and parted with so much of His Prerogative and so
many undoubted Rights of His Crown, as could not be equalled by the Grants of
all His Predecessors, yet He found that He had effected nothing more by giving,
than to make the Faction more eagerly desire what they knew He must in Honor
and Conscience deny; and that the People were so bewitched as not to see, it is
safer to trust Him who was contented with a less degree of Power, than those
whose ambition and avarice knew no bounds: Who being thus deluded as so far to
administer to the Lusts of their Disturbers, would not fail their assistance to
seize upon His Person, unless in time He did provide for His Liberty. Nor could
it be imagined that He meditated a War, who to make His People happy (if they
had not despised their own Mercies) had deprived Himself of a power to manage
it. For besides those Acts formerly mentioned, He had signed many other as
prejudicial to such an undertaking. For He had passed Acts against His own
Power of Impressing Soldiers, His Right to Tonnage and Poundage, the Stannary
Courts, Clerk of the Market, the Presidial Courts in the North, and Marches of
Wales; whereby He had not only diminished His Greatness, and that Reverence
which was due to the Crown, but also so straightened His Revenue as it was not
able to maintain Discipline, without which no hopes of Victory, especially in a
Civil War. Besides, His Enemies in every County had injured His Fame, which is
of great moment in the deciding Controversies by the Sword; and the City of
London, which is the grand Treasury of the Wealth and Strength of the whole
Nation, was now enslaved by the Rabble to their commands. All which
considerations as they could not escape so Wise a Prince, so would they not
permit the Designs of War, especially in that Breast, to which it was equally
miserable to suffer the spilling of His Subjects blood, as to expose Himself to
Ruin. So that His departure from London was not of Design, but Necessity, nor
was there in it more of Fear than Shame; for He could no longer endure those
detestable Spectacula in which Tumults like Beasts were let loose to assault
the Majesty of Government.

While the King thus provides for His Liberty, the Faction proceed to usurp the
Militia, which His Majesty had denied, and the Lords were ashamed to ask:
therefore they privately encourage their Partisans in all the Cities and
Boroughs where they were most powerful, to appoint Musters, to arm and train
their Youth, and module them into Companies; which afterward (though contrary
to the Law) they move the Lower House to Vote Legal, and to make an Order in
the Name of the Parliament for the Constituting of Deputies to the same purpose
in every County: and at last, by the Tumults which they raised, the Threats
they used to divulge the names of the dissenting Lords, and secret promises to
some others (for Mr. Pym told the Earl of Dover, he must look for no Preferment
unless he joined with them) they prevailed upon the House of Peers, when many
of the most eminent were absent, to join in a Petition for the Militia, upon
pretense of great Dangers at home, and more prodigious terrors from abroad,
pretending that by Intelligence from Paris, Rome and Venice, they were assured
of great designs to overthrow the Parliament, together with the Protestant
Religion; (whose fate and Interest they would have it imagined, was so twisted
with theirs, that like those Twins they could not laugh nor grieve but in
Conjunction.) This Paper being presented to His Majesty, whose Soul was wholly
devoted to Peace, when it did not betray Religion and the Trust Heaven had
committed unto Him, He proposes to them Expedients whereby they might be
associated with Him in the Power of the Militia, which Honor and Conscience
forbad Him to divest Himself wholly of, and passionately adjures them to lay
aside their vain and empty Terrors, whereby they distracted and divided the
People, not suffering them to enjoy the Peace and Gracious Concessions wherein
He had exceeded the Goodness of all His Predecessors.

But they, who had projected to themselves the whole Power, would not be
contented with a Partner in it, and therefore despising His Indulgence, and
neglecting His Admonitions, the next day in furious Votes declared themselves
sole Masters of the Militia: and to make the People believe there was truth in
their false Fears, they command strict Watches to be kept in all suspected
places, Beacons to be new set up, the Sea-marks to be watched, and the Navy to
be new rigged and fitted for the Sea. New Plots were also discovered, and
Strange and unheard of Counsels to murder the most Eminent Patriots are brought
to light. A Tailor in a ditch hears some desperate Cavaliers contriving the
Death of Mr. Pym. A Plaster also taken from a Plague Sore was sent into the
House to the same person, that the Infection first seizing on a Member of the
quickest senses, might thence more impetuously diffuse it self upon all the
most Grave Senators. Such like Plots as these, and whatsoever could be devised,
were published to make the Vulgar think those demands of the Faction seem
modest, (their dangers being so great) which were very unjust.

And lest the King should at His coming into the North make use of that
Magazine at Hull (which at His own Charges He had provided for the Scotch
Expedition) for His own defense, the Faction, to secure that and the Town for
their future purposes, send down Sir John Hotham, without any Order or
Commission from either House of Parliament, to seize on them. This Man of a
fury and impudence equal to their Commands, when the King, petitioned by the
Gentlemen of Yorkshire to employ those Arms and that Ammunition for the Safety
and Peace of that County, (where some of the Factious Members of Parliament had
begun to form the like Seditions with those of London,) would have entered Hull,
[ Anno 1642.] April 23. insolently shut the Gates upon Him, and would not
permit Him, though with but twenty Attendants, for He offered to leave the
Guard of Noblemen and Gentlemen which followed Him without. The King thereupon
Proclaims him Traitor, and by Letters complains of the Indignity, and requires
Satisfaction. But the Faction rendered the Act so glorious, that the House of
Commons by their Votes approved what he had done without their Command, and
clamoured that the King had done them an injury, in proclaiming so innocent a
Member, Traitor: Ordered the Earl of Warwick, to whom they had committed the
Command of the Navy, to land some men out of the Ships at Hull, and to
transport the Magazine there from thence to London. An Order of Assistance was
also given to several of their Confidents, as a Committee of both Houses to
reside at Hull, and the Counties of York and Lincoln were commanded to execute
their commands. Besides, they sent a Commission to Hotham to prosecute the
Insolences he had begun, and kindle that War which took fire on the whole
Nation, and in a short space consumed him and his Son, who were executed by the
Instructors of his Villainy: For he fell under that same Fate which attends all
the Instruments of Great Crimes, to be Odious and suspected by those that made
use of them. Therefore they gave such a power to the Lord Fairfax in Yorkshire
as did conclude the diminution, and submission of Hotham to His Commands. This
caused him to reflect with grief and madness upon his first ministry to the
Faction, which appeared every day more monstrous to his Conscience, being now
spoiled of that Grandeur that he hoped would have been its reward, and awakened
by those Desolations in the whole Kingdom which followed it, and were but as
the Copies of his Original Treason. Therefore he thought to expiate his former
guilt by surrendering the Town to Him from whom he had detained it. But his
practices were discovered to the Faction by One whom they had sent thither in
pretense to preach the Gospel, but in truth secretly to search into the
intrigues of his Counsels: so that he perished in his design, being neither
stout nor wise enough in just enterprises, nor of a pertinacy sufficient for a
prosperous Perfidiousness. And although in his Ruin the King observed how
great a draught was offered to the highest thirst of Revenge, yet He did truly
bewail him: and indeed he was so much the more to be pitied, because his cruel
Masters deluded him to a silence of their black Secrets with a false hope of
Life till the Ax was upon his Neck. So betraying his Soul to a surprise by his
Spiritual enemies, as his pretended Spiritual Guides had done his Body to them.

The Insolency of Hotham, who acted according to his Instructions and late
Commission, beginning acts not usual in Peace, nor justifiable by Law, (for he
issued out Warrants for the Trained Bands to march into Hull with their Arms,
where he forced them to leave them, and nakedly return to their homes, that so
they might be obnoxious to his Violence) and the practices of the Committee
which were sent down into the North, to debauch the People in their Loyalty,
made the King intend His own Security by a Guard; which the Gentry and
Commonalty of Yorkshire, that were witnesses of the Injury offered to their
Prince, did willingly and readily make up. No sooner had the King expressed His
intention of such a Guard, but the Faction, who were watchful of all
opportunities of beginning a War, and engaging those that either through Fear
or Weakness had hitherto submitted to their Impostures, in a more obliging
guilt, (for now the greatest part of the Peers, who were of the most Ancient
Families and Noblest Fortunes, and a very great number of the House of Commons,
Persons of just hopes and fair Estates, who perceiving the designs of the
Disturbers, scorned any longer to be their Slaves, yet not thinking it safe to
provoke the fury of the Vulgar Tumults by a present opposition, had withdrawn
from the Parliament to follow the King and His Fortune, and every day some more
were still falling off) took this occasion to commence our Miseries, and open
those Sluices of Blood which polluted the whole Kingdom. For upon the first
Intelligence of it they filled the House of Commons and the City with Clamours,
That His Majesty had now taken Arms to the overthrow of them and the Protestant
Religion; and that they were not any longer to think the Happiness of the
Kingdom did depend upon the King, or any of the Regal Branches of that Stock;
that it would argue no want either of Duty or Modesty, if they should depose
Him. By these Harangues they so heated the Parliament, that was now more
penurious than before in persons of Honor and Conscience, to such a degree of
Fury, that unmindful how they themselves for eight months before upon
impossible Fears and improbable Jealousies had taken a Guard, they Resolved
upon the Question, that the King by taking to himself such a Guard did intend
to levy War against the Parliament. With an equal fury they Issue out
Commissions into all parts of the Kingdom, and appoint certain days for all the
Trained Bands to be put into a posture of War, sending down some of their
Members to see to the execution of these Commands, and to seize on the
Magazines in the several Counties.

To all these their violent and unjust attempts the King first opposes the Law,
in several Declarations manifests the Power of Arms to be the Ancient and
undoubted Right of the Crown, by many Proclamations, Charges all Men under the
Crime and Penalties of Treason to forbear the Execution of those Ordinances
which were published to License their Rebellion, and Answers with a wonderful
Diligence and Eloquence all the fictitious Pretensions of the Parliament to
that Power, in their several Remonstrances. But though the King had in the
judgment of all understanding and uninteressed persons the Juster Cause, and
the more powerful Pen, yet the Faction's Haste, which is most efficacious in
Civil Discords, the Slanders they had raised of Him, and impressed in the minds
of the People, the terrors of that Arbitrary Power which the House of Commons
had a long while exercised in the vexatious prosecution of all such as did
oppose their imperious Resolves, (for they would by their Messengers send for
the Great Earls and Prime Barons of the Kingdom as Rogues and Felons, and weary
them and others with a tedious and chargeable Attendance, oppress them with
heavy and unproportionable Censures, and restrain them by Illegal
Imprisonments) and the hopes of license and spoil in the ruin of Church and
State, had so preoccupated the Minds of the inferior Multitude, that neither
Law nor Religion could have the least consideration in their practices; and
those Persons whom His Majesty appointed as Commissioners of Array, in few
places found that Obedience which was due to the just Commands of a Gracious
Prince, who vainly expected that Reverence to Justice in others which Himself
gave.

After the experience of their Power in these their Successes at Land, and
having gotten the whole Navy at Sea, being made Masters of the most and
greatest Strengths of the Kingdom, they then thought it might be safe for them
to publish the aims and ends of their most destructive designs; which if sooner
manifested, when the King by His Message of 20. of January from Windsor Castle
advised them to prescribe the limits of their Privileges, give full Boundaries
to His own Power, and propose what was in their judgments proper to make the
People happy; and most religiously promised an equal tenderness of theirs and
the Peoples Rights as of His own, and what was for the Public Good should not
be obstructed for His Particular emolument; they had justly drawn upon
themselves all that popular hatred which they endeavored to fling upon the
King, and had been buried under those ruins which they projected for the Grave
of Majesty. But then the Faction confided not so much in their own force, nor
were the Vulgar then so blinded with fury as to choose their own Destruction:
and therefore to that Message of Peace nothing was returned but Complaints,
That by such Advisoes their Counsels were disturbed, that it was contrary to
their unbounded Privileges to be minded of what was necessary. But now they
were furnished with a Power equal to their Ambition, they thought it expedient
to confirm their newly-gotten Empire with some pretensions to Peace; but with a
great deal of Caution, that the affectation of it might not disappoint them of
their hopes, which were all built upon War and Confusion. Therefore they formed
the Conditions such as the King could not in Honor or Conscience grant them,
nor expect Peace by them. Or if He did, they should be instated in such a
Grandeur, that they might reap for themselves all the reproachful Honors and
unlawful gains of an Arbitrary Power, the thing they aimed at, and leave the
King overwhelmed with shame and contempt for their miscarriages in Government.
These Conditions were digested into Nineteen Propositions; which when presented
to the King, He saw by an assent to them He should be concluded to have deposed
Himself, and be but as an helpless and idle Spectator of the Miseries such
Tyrants would bring upon the People whom God had committed to His Trust.
Therefore He gave them that denial which they really desired and expected, and
adjusts His refusal in a Declaration, wherein He sets forth the Injustice of
each Proposition. His Answer He sent by the Marquess of Hertford and Earl of
Southampton, Persons of great Integrity and Prudence, with Instructions to
Treat in the House of Peers upon more equal Conditions.

But it behoved the Faction not to let the Kingdom see any way to Peace,
therefore denying any admittance to those Lords, before ever the King's Answer
could publicly discover who were the obstructours of the Peoples quiet, they
Ordered a Collection to be made of Money and Plate, to maintain Horse,
Horsemen and Arms for the ensuing War. The specious Pretenses for which were
the Safety of the King's Person, and the taking Him out of the hands of Evil
Counselors, the Defense of the Privileges of Parliament, the Preservation of
the Protestant Religion, and the maintenance of the Ancient Laws of the Land.
Such inviting causes as these inflamed the Minds of the Multitude, and filled
them with more airy hopes of Victory than the noise of Drums and Trumpets: But
that which was most powerful were the Sermons of such who, being displeased
with the present Ecclesiastical Covernment, were promised the richest
Benefices, and a partage of the Revenues which belonged to Bishops, Deans and
Chapiters. These from their Pulpits proclaimed War in the Name of Christ the
Prince of Peace, and whatsoever was contributed to the spilling of the blood of
the Wicked, was to build up the Throne of the meekest Lamb; and besides the
satisfaction they were to expect from the Public Faith, which the Parliament
promised, there was a larger Interest to be doubled upon them in the Kingdom of
Saints that was now approaching. Deluded by these Artifices and Impostures,
People of all Conditions and all Sexes, some carried by a secret Instinct,
others hurried by some furious Zeal, and a last sort led by Covetousness, cast
into this Holy Treasury the Banck for Blood, all the Ornaments of their Family,
all their Silver Vessels, even to their Spoons, with the Pledges of their first
Love, their Marriage-rings; and the younger Females spared not their Thimbles
and Bodkins, the obliging Gifts of their Inamorato's, from being a part of the
Price of Blood. But while these Preparations were made at London, the King at
York Declares against the Scandal, that He intended to Levy War against the
Parliament, calling God to witness how far His desires and thoughts were from
it; and also those many Lords who were witnesses of His Counsels and Actions,
do publish to the World by a Writing subscribed with all their Names, to the
number of Forty and odd, that they saw not any color of Preparations or
Counsels that might reasonably beget the belief of any such Design, and were
fully persuaded that He had no such intention.

But all was in vain, for the Faction chose that the People should be rather
guilty of committing Rebellion, than only of favoring the Contrivers of it,
and decreed to try whether by a prosperous Success they could change their
Crimes to Virtue. Therefore they hastened all they could to raise Horse and
Foot to form an Army equal to their Usurpation: which was not difficult for
them to do, for they being Masters of London, whose Multitudes desirous of
Novelty were easily amassed for any enterprise, especially when the entering
into this Warfare might make the Servant freer than his Master, (for such was
the License was indulged to those Youths that would serve the Cause) 20000 were
sooner gathered than the King could get 500. The City also could afford them
more Ordnance than the King could promise to Himself common Muskets: and to pay
their Soldiers, besides the vast sums that were gathered for Ireland (which
though they by their own Act had decreed should not be used for any other
enterprise, yet now dispense with their Faith, and employ it to make England as
miserable as that Island) and the Contributions of the deluded souls for this
War; they seized also upon the Revenues of the King, Queen, Prince, and
Bishops, and plunder the Houses of those Lords and Gentlemen whom they
suspected to be Favorers of the King's Cause. And in contemplation of these
advantages, they promised their credulous party an undoubted Victory, and to
lead Majesty Captive in Triumph through London within a Month, by the Conduct
of the Earl of Essex, whom they appointed General.

Thus did they drive that Just and Gracious Prince to seek His Safety by
necessary Arms, since nothing worse could befall Him after a stout, though
unhappy, Resistance, than He was to hope for in a tame Submission to their
Violence. Therefore though He perfectly abhorred those Sins which are the
Consequences of War, yet He wanted not Courage to attempt at Victory,
notwithstanding it seemed almost impossible against so well-appointed an Enemy.
Therefore with an incredible diligence moving from place to place, from York to
Nottingham, from thence to Shrewsbury, and the Confines of Wales, by
discovering those Abilities with which His Soul was richly fraught unto His
deluded Subjects, He appeared not only worthy of their Reverence, but of their
Lives and Fortunes for His Defense; and in all places encouraging the Good with
His Commendations, exciting the Fearful by His Example, dissembling the
Imperfections of His Friends, but always praising their Virtues, He so
prevailed upon those who were not men of many Times, nor by a former Guilt
debauched to Inhumanity, that He had quickly contracted an Army greater than
His Enemies expected, and which was every day increased by those Lords and
Gentlemen who refused to be polluted any longer with the practices of the
Faction by sitting among them, and being Persons of large Fortunes had raised
their Friends and Tenants to succor that Majesty that now labored under an
Eclipse. Most men being moved with Pity and Shame to see their Prince, whose
former Reign had made them wanton in Plenty, to be driven from His own Palaces,
and concluded under a want of Bread, to be necessitated to implore their aid,
for the preservation of His and their Rights. So that notwithstanding all the
Impostures of the Faction and the Corruptions of the Age, there were many great
Examples of Loyalty and Virtue. Many Noble Persons did almost impoverish
themselves to supply the King with Men and Money. Some Private men made their
way through numerous dangers to join with, and fight under His Colors. Many
great Ladies and Virtuous Matrons parted with the Ornaments of their Sex to
relieve His wants, and some bravely defended their Houses in His Cause when
their Lords were otherwhere seeking Honor in His Service. Both the
Universities freely devoted their Plate to succor their Prince, the Supreme
Patron and Incourager of all Learning; and the Queen pawned Her Jewels to
provide necessaries for the Safety of Her Husband. Which Duty of Hers, though
it deserved the Honor of all Ages, was branded by the Demagogues with the
imputation of Treason.

This sudden and unexpected growth of the Strength of the King after so many
years of Slanders, and such industrious Plots to make Him odious and
Contemptible, raised the admiration of all men, and the fears of that credulous
Party who had given up their Faith to the Faction, when they represented the
King guilty of so much Folly and Vice (and some corrupted Citizens had
represented Him as a Prodigy of both in a Scene at Guild Hall in London, an
Art used by Jesuits to impress more deeply a Calumny,) that they could not
imagine any person of Prudence or Conscience would appear in His Service, and
they expected every day when, deserted by all as a Monster, He should in Chains
deliver Himself up to the Commands of the Parliament. Some attributed this
strange increase in power to the natural Affection of the English to their
Lawful Sovereign, from whom though the Arts and Impulses of Seditious
Demagogues may a while estrange and divorce their minds, yet their Genius will
irresistibly at last force them to their first Love; and therefore they urged
the saying of that Observing Statesman, that if the Crown of England were
placed but on an Hedge-stake, he would be on that side where the Crown was.
Others referred it to the full evidence of the wickedness of His Adversaries,
for their Counsels were now discovered, and their Ends manifest, not to
maintain the Common Liberty, which was equally hateful to them as Tyranny when
it was not in their hands, but to acquire a Grandeur and Power that might
secure and administer to their Lusts: and it was now every where published what
Mr. Hambden Answered to one who inquired What they did expect from the King; he
replied, That He should commit Himself and all that is His to our Care. Others
ascribed it to the fears of ruin to those numerous Families and Myriads of
people which the change of Government designed by the Parliament must
necessarily effect. But this, though it argued that Cause exceeding bad by
which so great a part of a Community is utterly destroyed, without any absolute
necessity for preserving the whole; yet made but an inconsiderable Addition to
the King, whose greatest Power was built upon Persons of the Noblest Extract
and the fairest Estates in England, of which they could not easily suspect to
be divested without an absolute overthrow of all the Laws of Right and Wrong,
which nevertheless was to be feared by their invasions on the King's most
undoubted Rights. For when Majesty it self is assaulted, there can be no
security for private Fortunes; and those that decline upon design from the
paths of Equity, will never rest till they come to the Extremity of Injustice;
as these afterward did. Besides those that imputed the speedy amassing of
these Forces to the Equity of the King's Cause, His most Powerful Eloquence,
Indefatigable Industry, and most Obliging Converse; there were another sort
that, suspending their Judgments till all the Scenes of War were passed,
resolved all into the Providence of God: Who though He were pleased to single
Him out of all the Kings of the Earth as the sit Champion to wrestle with
Adversity, and to make Him glorious by Sufferings, which being well born truly
prove men Great; yet would He furnish Him (almost by a Miracle) likewise with
such Advantages, in the conduct of which His Prudence and Magnanimity might
evidence that He did deserve Prosperity, and by clearing up even this way His
eminent Virtues, warn the following Ages from a Credulity to unquiet Persons,
since the best of Princes was thus infamously slandered.

From all these concurring Causes, each one in their Way and Order, did the
King's strength so far increase, as that He won many Battles, and was not far
from Conquest in the Whole War; had not God seen fit to afflict this sinful
Nation with Numerous and most Impious Tyrants, and make us feel, that no
Oppressions are so unsupportable as those which are imposed by such as have
made the highest Pretensions to Liberty: of which we had bitter experience
after the War was sinished that was now begun. For there had been some slight
Conflicts e're this in the several Counties betwixt the Commissioners of Array
and the Militia, with various Successes; which require just Volumes and
complete Histories to relate, and cannot be comprehended in the short View of
the King's Life, where it is only intended to speak of those Battles in which
the King in Person gave sufficient evidence of His Wisdom and Valor. The first
of which was at Edgehill on October. 23. For the King had no sooner gotten a
considerable Force, though not equal to those of His Enemies, but He marched
toward London, and in His way thither met with Essex's Army that were come
from thence to take Him. The King having viewed their Army by a
Prospective-glass from the top of that Hill, and being asked afterward by His
Officers what He meant to do, To give them battle (said He with a present
Courage) it is the first time I ever saw the Rebels in a body: God, and good
men's Prayers to Him, assist the Justice of My Cause: and immediately prepared
for the Fight; which was acted with such a fury, that near 6000 (according to
the common Account, but some say a far less number) were slain upon the place.
Night concluded this Battle, which had comprehended the whole War, had not the
King's prevailing Horse preferred the Spoils to Victory, and left the Enemy
some advantage to dispute for her. But the King had all the fairest marks of
her favor. For though He had lost His General, yet He kept the Field,
possessed the dead Bodies, opened His way toward London, and in the sight of
some part of the Army of Essex, (who accounted it a Victory that He was not
totally routed and killed,) took Banbury, and entered Triumphantly into Oxford
(which He had designed for His Winter Quarters) with 150 Colors taken in
sight. And having assured that place, He advances toward London, whither Essex
had gotten before Him, and disposed his bassled Regiments within ten miles of
the City; yet the King fell upon two Regiments of them at Brainford, took 500
Prisoners, and sunk their Ordnance. From thence intending to draw nearer
London, He had intelligence, that the City had poured forth all their
Auxiliaries to reinforce Essex's Troops; to which being unwilling to oppose
His Soldiers wearied with their March, nor thinking it safe to force an Enemy
to fight upon Necessity, which inspires a more than Ordinary Fury, He retreats
to Oxford, having taught His Enemies, that He was not easily to be Overcome.

For in the management of this Battle, He did not only undeceive the abused
world of those Slanders which His Enemies had polluted Him with, but He
exceeded that Opinion His own Party had of His Abilities. And though He parted
from London altogether unexperienced in Martial affairs, yet at Edgehill He
appeared a most Excellent Commander. His Valor was also equal to His Prudence,
and He could as well endure Labors as despise Dangers. And by a communication
of toils, encouraged His Soldiers to keep the Field all the night, when they
saw He refused the refreshments of a Bed; for He sought no other Shelter from
the injuries of the Air than His own Coach. These Virtues and this Success made
such an impression on the Parliament, that though they took all courses to hide
the Infamy of their worsted Army, yet in more humble Expressions than formerly
they Petitioned the King for a Treaty of Peace, which His Majesty very
earnestly embraced. But the Faction, who were frighted with these Tendencies to
an Accommodation, cause some of the City to Petition against it, and to make
profer of their Lives and Fortunes for the prosecution of the War. Encouraged
by this they form their Propositions like the Commands of Conquerours, and so
streighten the Power and Time of their Commissioners, that the Treaty at Oxford
became fruitless, which there had taken up all the King's employment this
Winter, though abroad His Forces were busy in several Parts of the Nation, not
without honor.

[ Anno 1643.] At the Opening of the Spring the Queen comes back to England,
bringing with Her some considerable Supplies of Men, Money and Ammunition, and
Her coming was entertained with such a Series of Successes, that the King that
Summer was Master of the North and West, except some few Garrisons. Which so
dismayed the Parliament, that very many of them were preparing to quit the
Kingdom: and had the King followed His own Counsels, to march immediately
toward London, and not been fatally overborn at a Council of War, (which, it
is said, His Enemies at London did assure their Party would so be) first to
attempt Gloucester, He had, in the judgment of all discerning men, then
finished the War with Glory. But here He lay so long till Essex had gotten a
Recruit from London, and came time enough to relieve the Town; though in his
return the King necessitated him to fight, worsted him near Newbery, and so
bravely followed him the next day, that He forced the Parliaments Horse which
were left in the Rear to seek their safety by making their way over a great
part of their Foot; yet lost on His side much Noble Blood, as the Earls of
Carnarvan and Sunderland, and Viscount Falkland. This last was lamented by all,
being equally dexterous at the Pen and Sword, had won some Wreathes in those
Controversies that were to be managed by Reason, and was eminent in all the
Generous parts of Learning, above any of his Fortune and Dignity. After this
Encounter the King returns to Oxford, to Consult with those Members of both
Houses that had left the Impostures and Tumults at London, to join with Him for
the common benefit, who being as to the Peers the far greater, and as to the
Commons an equal Number with those at Westminster, they assumed the Name and
Authority of Parliament, and deliberated of the ways of Peace, and means to
prevent the Desolations which the Faction so furiously designed, who were now
resolving to increase our Miseries by Calling in the Scots to their assistance.

For though they pretended so highly to God's Cause, as if they had the
certainty of some Divine Revelation, yet they would not trust Him for their
Preservation, notwithstanding their pretenses to his Cause had furnished them
with so vast a Treasure and so mighty a Strength; but would invite others to
the Violation of most sacred Oaths, to sin against all Laws and every Rule of
Justice, that themselves might be secure in their Usurpations. And that
Perfidious Party that then ruled in Scotland, hoping for as great advantages as
their former Wickedness had yielded, contrary to all Obligations which the
King's Goodness had laid on them, and their free and Voluntary Execrations, (as
was that of Alexander Lesley, who lifting up his arms and hands to Heaven,
wished they might rot to his body before he died, if ever he should heave them
up hereafter, or draw his sword, against so good a King,) drew that People once
more into Rebellion against their Prince; and to make them more eager, and
think the Enterprise easy, they first raised a report that the King was
deserted by most of His Nobility.

The Parliament at Oxford having by a Letter moved the Earl of Essex to
endeavor Peace, did also declare against this Invasion of the Scots by another
Letter sent to them, in which also they acquaint them with the falsness of
their officious Lie, and show how inconsiderable a Number of Lords were with
those that invited them in. The King Himself writes also to put them in mind of
their several Engagements to be Quiet. But with an Insolency fit for most
perjured Souls, they Commanded the Letters to be burned by the hand of the
Hangman. A more secret falsehood He also found in the Marquess Hamilton, whose
Treasons now came to be more suspected. For His Majesty having written to him,
to use all his Power and Interest to keep his Countrymen at home, (which had
not been difficult for one of his Grandeur in that unquiet Nation) he by some
secret Arts does more inflame them; and to cover his Perfidiousness, flies from
Scotland to Oxford, as seeking a shelter for his Loyalty; but indeed to be a
Spy in the King's Counsels. But his Treasons had outstripp'd him and his
Brother, the Earl of Lanerick, who came with him, therefore they were both
forbidden the Court. Lanerick not willing to tarry till a further Discovery,
gets out of Oxford, flies to those at London, and by them was employed in the
Scotch Army; which made Hamilton's Treachery more evident, and he was sent
Prisoner to Pendennis Castle. But the dishonor of that Nation was in a great
measure repaired by the Gallantry and Faithfulness of the Marquess Montross,
who being commissioned by the King, with an incredible Industry by small
numbers of men won many Battles, and overthrew well-formed Armies: and had not
the Fate of his Master, which was to be betrayed by those He trusted, been
likewise common to him, he had forced that Nation to Justice and Quiet.

But e're Montross could get his Commission, the Scots were entered England:
whose coming that it might be less odious to the People, who now grew cold in
their zeal to the Cause, and saw themselves deluded into so continued dangers,
the Faction make use of such frauds as should make the People either think them
necessary assistances, or might divert their thoughts from apprehending the
Miseries they brought with them to this Nation; therefore they invent new
Slanders of the King and His Party. That His Majesty did intend to translate
Monarchy into a Tyranny: that He would seize upon all their Estates who had any
way opposed Him, and make their persons Slaves: that there was no hope of
Pardon from Him, who was so merciless: that He would take away all their
Liberties and Privileges as forfeited, destroy the Protestant Religion, and
introduce Popery, which at Oxford He did practice Himself, and that all men
must be forced to go to Mass. As for His Party they set them out to be such
Monsters, that the lower sort of People doubted whether the Cavaliers had the
shapes of men. For sad Relations were printed and published of their inhumanity
and barbarous murders: that they did feast upon the Flesh of Men, and that they
fed their Dogs and their Horses with the same Diet, to make them more fierce
for the blood of the Godly Party: that no man's house was so poor and mean that
a Cavalier would think beneath his rapine. Thus they wrought upon the
melancholy spirits of some by fear. For those of a morose and choleric temper
they had proper divertisements: they permitted to them a tumultuary
Reformation, to pull down the Pictures and Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary,
and the Saints; which with great Solemnity they committed to the flames, that
they might suffer as it were another Martyrdom. All Crosses, though set up for
Ornament and Use in the Streets of London, and other places, they pulled down:
they invade the Churches, and there deface what their Humor or Rapine would
call Superstition, pull down the Organs, tear the Surplices; and all this was
suffered to please the Rabble, who delight in violences and such ostentations
of their fury, and to make them in something or other guilty, that they might
despair of Pardon.

For others, who were to be wrought upon by Religion, they entertain them with
Fasts, public Thanksgivings for slight Victories, and solemn Spiritual
meetings (as they called them;) where whatsoever the Faction dictated was
commended by the Speakers to their unwary hearers as the Oracles of Heaven: and
being thus wrapped up in those true delights which accompany the Worship of
God, they were securely swallowed by them, as Poison when it is offered in a
Sacramental Chalice. To please their Ministers whom hitherto they had used as
their Properties and Instruments of their Arts, Presbytery is set up, that they
also might have an Imaginary Empire: but it was not intended they should
exercise it. For the pretensions of that to a Divine Right did so terrify them
who were resolved against all Government that was not subject unto or dependent
on theirs, that they presently raised all the other Sects, Independents,
Erastians, (who for the most part were Lawyers, that could not endure to hear
of any Thunderbolts of Excommunication, but what was heated in their own
forges) Anabaptists, Seekers, and Atheists (of which there were many sprung up,
who seeing how Religion was abused to carnal and unjust Ends, began first to
despise that, and afterward to deny God) to write and declaim against this new
Polity, as the most severe and absolute Tyranny under the Sun, and the tenth
Persecution. But this seeming modesty of admitting a Church Government served
their ends for the present, till they could acquire a greater strength, in
confidence of which they might slight the Terrors of the Law, and the
Anathema's of the Church. The Liturgy also was abolished, under pretense of a
Spiritual Liberty, for it was accused of putting a restraint upon the Spirit,
but in truth, because it had so frequent Offices for the King. To these were
added the Covenant, the Fetters of the Scottish Slavery: this was to bind the
whole Nation to the Interests of the Faction, and was used as the Water of
Jealousy, to discover those whom they did suspect. Therefore all the
Conspirators, of what Sect soever, whether Independents or Anabaptists, though
they refused to take it themselves, (because it did oblige to the Preservation
of the King's Person and Authority) yet were as eager Imposers of it as the
Presbyterians (who in simplicity urged it as the Fundamental Constitution of
their Empire) upon all who they thought would not prostitute their Souls to
their designs, or had any thing fit to be made their Spoils. And by this only
Engine many thousand Persons and Families were miserably ruined, especially of
the Clergy.

To oblige more fastly those that had no patience to expect nor hopes to
receive any reward for their Service against their Prince in the other life,
and so would not be satisfied with the shows of Religion, but sought more solid
encouragements in the spoils of it, the Lands of the Bishops were exposed to
sale, and that at such easy rates as might invite the hazards of the Purchase,
satiate their boundless Covetousness, and engage them in a pertinacious faith
to their Merchants. To cement all these distinct Humors in one common
pleasure, the Archbishop of Canterbury was prepared for a Sacrifice, and about
this time began his Trial, which continued a whole year, being when the Houses
were at leisure called by several months and weeks to answer to his Charge,
that by his frequent passages as a Prisoner he might give a pleasant Diversion
to the Rabble, who are delighted with the ruins and misfortunes of great
Persons, and by their injuries and reproaches he might be reduced to such a
weakness of Spirit as was not competent with the defense of his Cause. But his
Cause and his Conscience were impregnable, and he overthrew their Slanders,
though he could not their Power.

By these Arts and Ways was the Winter spent to prepare for the attempts of the
following Summer, wherein, [ Anno 1644.] though the Parliaments Forces
increased by the Scottish Succors had the Success over several bodies of the
Royalists, yet that small Number that followed the King's Person, and were
guided by His own Counsels and Example, obtained two great Victories. For His
Majesty having once more provided for the Safety of the Queen, (in sending Her
to Excester, there to lay down the burden of Her Love, and from thence to seek
for Shelter in France) taken (contrary to their hopes) His last farewell of
Her, and left Oxford strengthened against the Siege which the Earl of Essex and
Sir William Waller threatened that place with, He with a small party draws out,
intending to form His Counsels according to the future Occurrences. This made
the Enemy divide, and Essex was designed to reduce the West. But Waller, with
whom usually went Sir Arthur Hesilrigge (a Person fitter to raise Seditious
Tumults than manage Armies) was to hunt the King upon the Mountains of Wales,
toward which He seemed to direct His course. But hearing of the resolutions of
these two jealous Generals, He wheels about to Oxford, and from thence drew the
greatest strength of that Garrison, and with that falling upon Waller at
Cropredy-bridge, obtained a great Victory; which would have been more
prejudicial to the Enemy, had not the Tenderness of His Subjects Blood
restrained Him from prosecuting His Success to a greater slaughter. But
contenting Himself to have diverted Injuries from His own breast, He only used
this Victory for an advantage to Peace, which in a Letter from Evesham, July 4.
He moves the Parliament unto.

But the unquiet Criminals rendered it vain and fruitless, and represented to
the People their yet prevailing Forces in the North, and their Army in the
West, which had now taken in some considerable places to their Obedience.
Therefore to remove their Confidence in Essex's Power, the King follows him,
and so closely pursues him, that He drove him up into Cornwall, and there did
as it were besiege him. During which He sent a Letter to him, which was
seconded by another from the Lords and Gentlemen in His Army, to solicit His
endeavors for the Peace and Quiet of the bleeding and wasted Kingdom. But it
met not its desired effect: Because that Earl either valued not that solid
Glory of being the happy Author of a Nations Settlement; or feared that his
past Actions had wholly despoiled him of hopes of Security in a return to
Obedience, or knew that his Authority was not so great to put an Issue to those
Crimes which he had led others to commit. (For every inconsiderable person may
be powerful at Disturbances, but to form Peace requires much Wisdom and great
Virtues.) Which last was generally believed, for he had found and complained
that his Credit declined with the Faction, that they were distrustful lest
their own Arts might teach him to have no faith to them, because he often
solicited them to a composing of the Kingdoms Distractions. Therefore making no
return to those Letters, he provided for his own safety in a Cock-boat, and
ignominiously deserted his Army; of which the Horse, taking the advantage of a
dark night, made their escape, but the Commanders of the Foot did capitulate
for their Lives, and left their Arms, Cannon, Baggage and Ammunition, to the
Disposal of the King.

The speedy and prudent acquisition of these two Victories showed the King had
those Abilities that might have inserted Him in the Catalogue of the Bravest
Commanders; and had not want of Success in His following Enterprises clouded
the Glory of this Summer, He had been as eminent among the Masters of War as He
was among the Sons of Peace, the Honor of which last He most eagerly thirsted,
as rendering Him most like that Majesty He did represent. Therefore after this
Victory, by a Letter from Tavestock, Sept. 8. He re-inforces that from Evesham
for an Accord with the Parliament, being not transported from His Lenity by the
Violence with which Victory uses to hurry humane breasts to an insolence. But
He knew that Peace, though it is profitable to the Conquered, yet it is
glorious for the Conqueror. To busy His Army while He expected their Answer,
and formed an Association in the Western Counties, He sits down before
Plymmouth; but finding this Message had an equal reception with the former, and
that the Faction intended not to sacrifice their ill-acquired Power and Usurped
Interests to the public Tranquillity, He rises from thence, and marches
toward London, from whence were by this time in the way to meet Him Essex and
Waller recruited, and joined with the Earl of Manchester's Forces that were now
returned from their Northern Services. And at Newbery both sides join in an
eager Fight, which being varied with different successes, in the several
divisions, each party draw off by degrees, and neither found cause to boast of
a Victory.

The King being returned to Oxford, the Parliament wearied with the Complaints
of the oppressed Nation, who now grew impatient under the Distractions, take
into Consideration His Majesty's two Messages for Peace, and send Propositions
for it in the name of the two Parliaments of England and Scotland, united by
Solemn League and Covenant. Which though they seemed the desires of minds that
intended nothing less than the common Tranquillity, yet the King neglects them
not, but hoping that in a Treaty Commissioners might argue them into Reason,
offers it, which with much difficulty the Houses are drawn to accept; but yet
would have it at Vxbridge, a place but about fifteen miles distant from London,
and above twice that distance from Oxford. And accordingly Commissioners from
both Parties met on Jan. 30. While the King was providing for the Treaty, and
forming Instructions for His Ministers, the Faction found the Parliament other
work by new designs; and to habituate the People to an abhorrency of Peace, fed
them with blood. The two Hotham's first were to be the Sport of the Multitude:
and that the Father might have more than a single death, he was drawn back in
his journey to the Scaffold, December. 31. that his Son might be executed before
him, as he was Jan. 1. when after he had expressed his fury to those Masters
whom they had served to their ruins, his Head was chopped off. And on Jan. 2.
the Father is brought to the place that was defiled with his Son's blood, and
had his own added to it. These were not much lamented by any, for the memory
that they first kindled the Flame of the Nation kept every eye dry.

The People thus fed with courser blood, a cleaner Sacrifice was afterward
presented, William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England.
He had endured Imprisonment four years, and passed through a Trial of many
months, in which he had acquitted himself with such a confidence as became the
Innocence and Constancy of a Christian Bishop and Confessor, but yet must fall
to please the Scots, and those merciless men who imputed God's anger in the
difficulties of Success against their Prince, to the continuance of this
Prelate's Life: therefore he was Voted Guilty of High Treason by the House of
Commons, and was condemned in the House of Peers (though they have no power
over the life of the meanest Subject without the concurrence of the King) when
there were but Seven Lords present, Some Writers (who since have been convinced
of their misinformation) have named amongst those Seven Lords, the Lord Bruce
Earl of Elgin; but his Lordship upon the first notice of this report, did to
several Persons of Quality and Honor he conversed with, and since has
affirmed to me, that he was not then present, and that his heart could never
consent to the shedding of the blood of that Excellent Prelate.
and all those not consenting to the Murder, to be drawn, hanged and quartered.
And this was the first Example of murdering Men by Votes, of killing by an
Order of Parliament, when there is no Law. It was moved (they say) by some that
he might be shipped over to New England, to die by the Contempt and Malice of
those People. But this seemed too great an Honor, because it would make his
end as his life was, much like that of the Primitive Bishops, who for their
Piety were banished to Barbarous Coasts, or condemned to the Mines. Or else it
would be like an Athenian Ostracism, and confess him too great and good to live
among us. Therefore this motion was rejected; yet the Lords upon his Petition,
to the distaste of some Commons, changed the manner of that vile Execution to
that more generous of being beheaded. To the Scaffold he was brought Jan. 10.
after he had endured some affronts in his Antichamber in the Tower by some Sons
of Schism and Sedition, who unseasonably that morning he was preparing himself
to appear before the great Bishop of our Souls, would have him give some
satisfaction to the Godly (for so they called themselves) for his Persecutions,
(which he called Discipline.) To whom he Answered, That he was now shortly to
give account of all his Actions at an higher and more equal Tribunal, and
desired he might not be disturbed in his Preparations for it. When he came to
the Scene of his death, he appeared with that cheerfulness and serenity in his
face, as a good Conscience does beautify the owners with: and it was so
conspicuous, that his Enemies, who were ashamed to see his Innocence pourtraied
in his Countenance, did report he had drunk some Spirits, to force his nature
from a paleness. He preached his own Funeral Sermon on that Text, Hebr. 12.2.
and concluding his life with Prayer, submitted himself to the stroke of the Ax.

He was a Person of so great Abilities (which are the Designations of Nature to
Dignity and Command,) that they raised him from low beginnings to the highest
Office the Protestant Profession acknowledges in the Church. And he was equal
to it. His Learning appeared eminent in his Book against Fisher, and his Piety
illustrious in his Diary (although published by One that was thirsty of his
blood, and polluted with many malicious Comments and false Surmises to make him
odious.) He was of so Public a Spirit, that both the Church and State have
lasting Monuments of the Virtuous use of his Princes favor; at his Admittance
into which he dedicated all the future Emoluments of it to the Glory of God and
the Good of Men, by a Projection of many noble Works: most of which he
accomplished, and had finished the rest had not the Fate of the Nation checked
the current of his Designs, and cut off the Course of his Life. He was not
contented by himself only to serve his Generation, (for so he might have
appeared more greedy of Fame, than desirous of the Universal Benefit) but he
endeavored to render all others as heroic, if they aimed at a Capacity for
his Friendship: for (I have heard it from his Enemies) no geat man was admitted
to a confidence and respect with him, unless he made his Address by some Act
that was for the Common Good, or for the Ornament and Glory of the Protestant
Faith. Learned men had not a better Friend, nor Learning it self a greater
Advancer; he searched all the Libraries of Asia, and from several parts of the
World purchased all the Ornaments and Helps of Literature he could, that the
English Church might have (if possible) by his Care as many Advantages for
Knowledge as almost all Europe did contribute to the Grandeur of that of Rome.
The outward Splendor of the Clergy was not more his Care than their Honor by
a grave and pious Conversation; he would put them into a power of doing more
good, but was severe against their Vices and Vanities. He scorned a private
Treasure, and his Kindred were rather relieved than raised to any greatness by
him. In his Election of Friends, he was determinated to the Good and Wise, and
such as had both Parts and Desires to profit the Church had his closest
Embraces; if otherwise it happened, their frauds, not his choice, deserved the
blame. Both Papists and Sectaries were equally his Enemies; one party feared,
and the other hated his Virtues. Some censured him of too much Heat, and a Zeal
for Discipline above the Patience of the Times. But his geatest unhappiness,
was, that he lived in a Factious Age, and Corrupt State, and under such a
Prince, whose Virtues not admitting an immediate approach for Accusations, was
to be wounded in those whom He did Caresse. But when Faction and Malice are
worn out by time, Posterity shall ingrave him in the Albe of the Most Excellent
Prelates, the most indulgent Fathers of the Church, and the most injured
Martyrs. His blood was accompanied with some tears that fell from those Eyes
which expected a pleasure at his Death, and it had been followed with a more
general mourning, had not the Public Miseries, and present fears of Ruin
exacted all the Stock of Grief for other objects.

About this time the Faction clove into two Sects, the Presbyterian and
Independent, which hitherto had been united under one name of Patriots, or
Godly, had jointly conspired War and disturbed the Peace, and by various Arts
had acted all their lusts under the name and Authority of Parliament. For they
would either early in the morning before the House was full, or late at night,
when those whose cares were most for the Public were absent, being assured of
the Speaker, propose and Vote what served for their Design. If any thing
contrary to it was about to be resolved in a full Assembly, they by multitude
of Scruples would so disturb the Debates, that the determination was deferred
to a desired Opportunity. But if these failed, then would they surprise the
House with another Vote that should weaken and hinder the Execution of the
former. When the most conscientious were too numerous for them, then would they
make necessities to send the less pliant to their wills into the Country. Thus
the Lesser, but more industrious, Party did circumvent the Greater, that were
not so wary nor diligent. While they thus jointly contrive the Public Ruin,
they had gotten themselves into the most considerable and profitable Offices of
the Kingdom. But the Presbyterians having the advantage in Number and Power,
and the dissension in their Opinions growing still higher, by the Animosities
of the inferior and obscurer parts of their Sects, there was neither Faith nor
Love among them, but what Fear and Necessity did force them unto. The
Independents, who comprehended all the several herds of Heretics, Anabaptists,
Seekers, Millenaries, etc. though they were the Disciples of the other, yet
excelled their Masters in Art and Industry, had their private Junto's and
meetings apart to mould their Projects, and assign to each of their Confidents
their several Scenes and Methods; and, by proper Applications to men's several
humors, had exceedingly increased their strength in the Multitude, only they
wanted the Power of the Sword, and the most useful Offices to perfect their
Empire.

This they effected by those very practices they had learned from the
Presbyterians: and by procuring the Ordinance of Self-denial, (as they called
it) they turned out Essex (whom they had before secretly caused to be
suspected, and who had neither glory in his War, nor security or quiet in his
Peace) from his Generalship, and with him also the other Leaders that were
favorers of the Presbytery, under pretense that it was not fit that any
Members of Parliament should be encouraged to a continuance of the War, by
enjoying the profitable and powerful Offices in the Army, to which they would
now give a new Module. Having by this Artifice displaced those whose Power they
feared, they brought in as many Candidates of their own Sect as they could to
be Colonels, and Sir Thomas Fairfax was appointed General. This Man both
Parties did the more easily consent in, because he was known to be of
sufficient Personal Valor, and of no private Designs, obstinate by a natural
Melancholy, rather than pertinacious in any Interest, and rather free from
Baseness, than ambitious of Vainglory; by all these Qualities they supposed he
would be obedient to the Resolves of his Masters. But the Independents, that
were better informed of his ductile Spirit, and how easily he might be imposed
upon by a Species of Religion, got the great Patron of all the wildest and most
unreasonable Sectaries, Oliver Cromwell, at first to be admitted into his
Counsels, and afterward to be the Director of all his actions, under the title
of Lieutenant General. For although he likewise by the Self-denying Ordinance
was made incapable of any Office in the Army, being a Member of the Parliament;
yet those Troops of Fanatics whom he had amassed, and formerly led under the
Command of the Lord Gray of Wark, and the Earl of Manchester, (both which he
had cast off) were instructed to refuse the Conduct of any one but him. He was
therefore permitted by the Parliament, as the General desired, for a time to
continue in the Army; but he never left it till he had changed that, ruined the
Parliament, and turned out the General, that thus was the Author of his
unlawful Power. For this Man, having a long time been poor and necessitous, the
Patrimony that was left him being profusely spent, and nothing remaining but
the Instruments of his Crimes, a bloody and fierce nature, a greedy soul full
of bold and unjust hopes, yet able to conceal them with a profession of
Modesty, a contempt of Religion and Friendship, yet highly pretending to both,
till he had smote under the fifth rib those credulous hearts that trusted him;
he was fitted for the most impious enterprises, for vexed by a pressing and
tedious poverty, he resolved to endeavor the utmost distance from such a
Condition, though by the greatest wickedness, therefore used the Power he had
now gotten to overthrow the whole State, and establish himself in an absolute
and unsupportable Tyranny, which is the common issue of assaulting a Just and
Lawful Prince with Arms.

With these Tragedies and Changes was the Winter spent at London, while the
King at Oxford waits for the Issue of the Treaty at Vxbridge, which, as all
other Consultations for Peace, was vain and fruitless. For the Faction would
always obstruct those endeavors by their proper Methods. If the Condition of
their affairs were prosperous, then would they make their Demands like
Impositions on conquered Slaves, detesting to supplicate that the acquisitions
of their Swords and Blood should be confirmed by a worsted Enemy. In a more
humble fortune they would deprecate their drooping Party, not then to think of
a Reconciliation which their unprosperous Arms must necessarily render harder
than their hopes; and that it was not for the Honor of a Parliament to seem to
yield to any thing by fear or compulsion. Besides these devices, many
fictitious Letters were composed, false Rumors divulged, and witnesses
suborned, to make men suspect that many dangerous Plots and portentous Designs
were disguised in these Overtures of Accord. Therefore the Commissioners of
Parliament were instructed to offer no Expedient for an Accommodation, nor
hearken to such as were tendered to them in the Name of the King. His Majesty
seeing and bewailing his Condition, that He must still have to do with those
that were Enemies to Peace, prepares Himself for the War at the approaching
Spring: and although this Winter was infamous with many losses, either through
the neglects or perfidiousness of some Officers; yet before the season for
taking the field was come, His Counsels and Diligence had repaired those
damages.

[ Anno 1645.] In April He sends the Prince to perfect the Western Association,
and raise such Forces as the necessities of the Crown, which was His
Inheritance, did require: with Him is sent, as Moderator of His Youth, and
prime Counselor, Sir Edward Hide, now Lord High Chancellor of England, whose
Faithfulness had endeared him to His Majesty, who also judged his Abilities
equal to the Charge; in which He continued with the same Faith, through all the
Difficulties and Persecutions of his Master, till it pleased God to bring the
Prince back to the Throne of His Fathers, and him to the Chief Ministry of
State. After their departure the King draws out His Army to relieve His
Northern Counties and Garrisons. But being on His march, and having stormed and
taken Leicester in His way, He was called back to secure Oxford, which the
Parliament Army threatened with a Siege. But Fairfax having gotten a Letter of
the Lord Goring's (whom a Parliament Spy had cajoled to trust him with the
delivery of it) to His Majesty, wherein he had desired Him to forbear engaging
with the Enemy, till he could be joined with Him; he leaves Oxford, and made
directly toward the King that was now come back as far as Daventrey, with a
purpose to fight Him before that addition of strength, and at a place near
Naseby in Northamptonshire both Armies met on Saturday, June 14. Cromwell
having then also brought some fresh Horse to Fairfax; whose absence from the
Army at that time the King was assured by some (who intended to betray Him)
should be effected. Nevertheless, the King would not decline the Battle, and
had the better at first, but His vanquishing Horse following the chase of their
Enemies too far (a fatal error that had been twice before committed) left the
Foot open to the other wing, who pressing hotly upon them, put them to an open
rout, and so became Masters of His Canon, Camp, and Carriage, and among these,
of His Majesty's Cabinet, in which they found many of His Letters, most of them
written to the Queen: which, not contented with their Victory over His Forces,
they Print, as a Trophee over His Fame, that by proposing His secret Thoughts,
designed only for the breast of His Wife, to the debauched multitude, and they
looking on them through the Prejudices which the Slanders of the Faction had
already formed in their minds, the Popular hatred might be increased. But the
publication of them found a contrary effect, every one that was not barbarous
abhorred that Inhumanity among Christians, which Generous Heathens scorned to
be guilty of, and the Letters did discover, that the King was not as He was
hitherto characterized; but that He had all the Abilities and Affections, as
well as all the Rights, that were fit for Majesty: and (which is not usual) He
grew greater in Honor by this Defeat, though He never after recovered any
considerable power.

For the Fate of this Battle had an inauspicious influence upon all His
remaining Forces, and every day His losses were repeated. But though Fortune
had left the King, yet had not His Valor; therefore gathering up the scattered
remains of His broken Army, He marches up and down to encourage those whose
Faith changed not with His Condition. At last attempting to relieve Chester,
though He was beset behind and before, and His Horse wearied in such tedious
and restless Marches, yet at first He beat Poyntz off that followed; but being
charged by Fresh Soldiers from the Leaguer, and a greater Number, He was
forced to retreat, and leave some of His gallant Followers dead upon the place.
After this He draws toward the North-East, and commands the Lord Digby with
the Horse that were lest to march for Scotland, and there to join with
Montross, who with an inconsiderable company of men had got Victories there so
prodigious that they looked like Miracles. But this Lord was surprised before
he could get out of Yorkshire; for His Horse having taken 700 of the Enemies
Foot, were so wanton with their Success, that they were easily mastered by
another Party, and he himself was compelled to fly into Ireland. These several
Overthrows brought another mischief along with it; for the King's Commanders
and Officers broke their own Peace and Agreement, which is the only Comfort and
Relief of the Oppressed, and which makes them considerable, though they are
despoiled of arms, by imputing (as it uses to be in unhappy counsels) the
criminous part of their misfortunes to one another. But many gallant Persons,
whom Loyalty and Religion had drawn to His Service, endured the utmost hazards
before they delivered the Holds He had committed to their trust; and by that
means employing the Enemies Arms, gave the King time, who was at last returned
to Oxford, to provide for His Safety.

Hither every day sad Messages of Ruins from every part of the Nation came,
which though they seemed like the falling pieces of the dissolved world, yet
they found His Spirit erect and undaunted. For He was equal in all the Offices
of His Life, tenacious of Truth and Equity, and not moveable from them by
Fears, a Contemner of worldly Glory, and desirous of Empire for no other
reason, but because He saw these Kingdoms must be ruined, when He relinquished
the care of them. But that which most troubled Him were the Importunities of
His own disconsolate Party to seek for Conditions of Peace, which He saw was in
vain to expect would be such as were fit to accept; for His former experience
assured Him, that these men would follow the Counsels of their Fortune, and be
more Insolent now than ever. And for Himself, He was resolved not to sacrifice
His Conscience to Safety, nor His Honor to Life. This He often told those that
thus pressed Him, and did profess in His Letter to Prince Rupert, (who likewise
moved Him to the same,) that He would yield to no more now than what He had
offered at Uxbridge, though He confessed it were as great a Miracle His Enemies
should hearken to so much Reason, as that He should be restored within a Month
to the same Condition He was in immediately before the Battle at Naseby.

But yet to satisfy every One how tender He was of the Common Safety, He sent
several Messages to the Parliament for a Treaty, and offers to come Himself to
London, if He may have security for Himself and Attendants. All which were
either not regarded, or answered with Reproaches. And because the people began
to murmur at so great an earnestness of the Faction to continue the Wounds of
the Nation open and bleeding, (since there were many Forts yet held out for the
King by Gallant Persons, besides the Lord Hopton had an Army yet unbroken, and
Ormond and Montross had considerable Interests in Ireland and Scotland; all
which might be persuaded in a Treaty to part with those Arms which could not be
taken from them without much blood;) and it was the common belief that these
men sought for Victory, not Peace and Liberty, which was now tendered: therefore
to raise suspicions in the Vulgar, it is suggested that the Cavaliers who came
to Compound would take the advantage of the King's Presence, if He were
permitted to be there, and kindle a new flame and War in the City. And that it
might be thought they had real grounds for these fears, the Disarmed
Compounders were commanded to depart above twenty miles from London; and to
injealous the people more, all the transactions of the King in the Irish
Pacification were published, and amplified with the malicious Slanders and
Comments of the implacable and conscious Demagogues, that so the terrors of the
Vulgar being augmented, they might be frighted into a longer patience.

The King finding these men irreconcilable to Peace, and that they had
declared against His Coming, though without a Caution, tryes the Leaders of the
English Army; but they proved no less pertinacious, and were now approaching to
besiege Oxford. Providence not leaving any more Choice, but only showing Him a
way for a present Escape, He goes in a Disguise (which when Necessity clothes
Royal Persons with, seems like an Ominous Cloud before the Setting of the Sun,)
to the Scottish Camp that was now before Newark, where the Ambassador of the
King of France, who was then in the Leaguer, had before covenanted for His
Majesty's Safety and Protection; and the Scottish Officers had engaged to
secure both Him and as many of His Party as should seek for Shelter with them,
and to stand to Him with their Lives and Fortunes.

[ Anno 1646.] The King being come thither May 4. made a great alteration in
affairs; Newark was surrendered by the King's Command, and Sir Thomas Glemham
having gallantly defended Oxford till the besiegers offered honorable
Conditions, delivered up that also. But the greatest Change of Counsels were at
London, where when it was related, among whom the King had sought a Sanctuary,
various and different Discourses were raised. Some wondered that His Majesty had
sought a Refuge there where the Storm began, and how He could apprehend to find
Relief from those that were not only the Authors of His Troubles, but now the
great Advancers of His Overthrow: And they conceived no Promises or Oaths can
be a sufficient Caution from those People that have been often Persidious.
Others judged that in those necessities wherein the King was concluded, it was
as dangerous not to trust as to be deceived; no Counsel could be better, than
to try whether a Confidence in them would make them faithful, and whether they
would then be honest, when they had the Critical Opportunity to testify to the
world, that they intended not what they did, but what they said; That they
fought not against Him, but for Him. But a last sort bewailed both the
greatness of the King's Dangers, that should make Him seek for Safety in a
tempestuous Sea and false bottom; as also the debaucheries of the English
Genius, which was now so corrupted, that their Prince was driven to seek an
Asylum from their injuries among a people that were infamous and polluted with
the Blood of many Kings.

While others discoursed thus of the King's journey, the Parliament heated by
the Independents fiercely declared against the Scots, who were removing the
King to Newcastle, and used several methods to make them odious and drive them
home. For they kept back their Pay, that they might exact Free Quarter from the
Country; then they did extenuate their Services, derogate from their famed
Valor, upbraid them as Mercenaries, threaten to force them out by the Sword.
All which while the English Presbyterians, though they wished well to their
Brethren, yet lest they should seem to indulge the Insolences of a strange
Nation, did not dare to plead in their defense. But the Scots themselves for a
time did justify their Reception and Preservation of His Majesty by the Laws
of Nature, Nations, and Hospitality, which forbid the delivery and betraying of
those that have fled to any for Succor. The Democratick Faction urged that it
was not lawful for the Scots, their Hirelings, and in their Dominion, to
receive the King into their Camp without the leave of their Masters, and keep
Him without their Consent. These Debates were used to raise the King's price.
Which when the Scots were almost assured of, to make their ware more valuable,
they solicit the King, in hopes of their Defense, to command Montross to
depart from his noble Undertakings in Scotland, where he had almost recovered
the Overthrow Roxbrough and Traquaire had betrayed him unto, and was become
formidable again; as also the Loyal Marquess of Ormond to desist from his
gallant Oppositions both of the Irish Rebels, and English Forces. Which when
the King had done, being not willing those Gallant Persons should longer Hazard
their brave Lives, and after both these Excellent Leaders had more in anger
than fear parted with their unhappy Arms: that they might have a color of
betraying Him, whom the General Assembly of Scotland (which uses to hatch all
the Seditions to the heat and strength of a seeming Authority) had forbid to be
brought into His Native and Ancient Kingdom (as He affectionately called it)
they tender Him the Covenant; pretending without that Chain upon Him, they did
not dare to lead Him into Scotland. This His Majesty refused not, if they would
first loose those Scruples of Church Government which lay upon His Conscience:
Therefore to untie those Knots, Master Henderson, that was then the Oracle of
the Kirk, and the great Apostle of the Solemn Covenant, was employed to
converse with Him. But the Greatness of the King's Parts, and the Goodness of
His Cause made all his attempts void (for the Papers being published, every one
yielded the Victory to His Majesty) and unfortunate; for he returned home, and
not long after died, as some reported, of a Grief contracted from the sense of
his Injuries to a Prince whom he had found so Excellent.

While these things were acting at Newcastle, the bargain was stroke at London,
and for 200000 l. His Majesty, stripped of those Arms He had when He came among
them, was delivered up, as it were, to be scourged and crucified to some
Commissioners from the Parliament: But to Honest their Perfidiousness, they add
this Caution, That there should be no attempt made upon the King's Person, but
being entertained at one of His own Palaces, He should there be treated with
upon Propositions from both Nations, which should speedily be sent to Him. But
the Parliament never thought of sending any Propositions till He came under the
Power of the Army, who had malicious Designs upon His Person. The Commissioners
receiving Him, convey Him to His own House at Holmeby. This was a very curious
and stately Building yet was not therefore chosen because it might be a
Majestic Prison; but because it was within Ken of Naseby, which was infamous
with His Overthrow, that so the Neighborhood to it might more afflict His
grieved Spirit. To this unpleasingness of the Place they added other
discomforts, by making the restraint so strict that they suffered none to come
near Him, that by owning His Cause were assured of their Welcome; yea, even His
Chaplains (which most troubled Him) were debarred from their Ministry. But God
supplied this Want by more plentiful Assistances of His Holy Spirit, and made
Him, like the Ancient Patriarchs, both a King and a Priest (at least for
Himself:) and here He sacrificed Praises even to that God that hid himself, and
composed those most Divine Meditations and Soliloquies that are in His Book,
spending that time in Converse with Heaven, which He was not suffered to employ
with Men in whom He delighted.

While the King's Soul was thus winged above the walls of His Prison and the
Fortune of His Enemies, they that had put an end to the War, yet could not find
the way to Peace; for their Souls were unequal to the Victory, and could not
temper their Success, the two Sects falling to dissension, and turning all
their Arts and arms one against another. The Presbyterians had the richer and
more splendid followers, but the Independents the most fierce, subtle, and most
strongly principled to Confusion; the first was Powerful in the Parliament, but
the latter in the Army. After they had a long time practiced on one another the
very same Methods they had acted against the King, and such as favored Him in
the Parliament (of which there were always some Number among them) the
Independents still gained upon their Opposites, making the Presbyterians
odious, by Libels composed to render their Government Ridiculous and
Tyrannical, by putting them upon all the most envious Employments, as Reforming
the Universities, and Sequestring Ministers that refused to take the Covenant.
Not contented thus to deal with their elder Brethren, by spoiling them of their
Honor, they proceeded to strip them of the relics of their armed Power,
surprising them in Parliament with a Vote to disband all the Soldiers that
were not in Fairfax's Army: then the General turns out those Commanders of
Garrisons that were any way inclined to them. Besides this, they either
corrupted with Gifts or frighted some of the most busy, yet obnoxious,
Presbyterians either wholly to come over to them, or be their Instruments in
disturbing and revealing the Counsels of that Party; which was done under the
Scheme of Moderation, and reconciling the Godly one to another.

[ Anno 1647.] The Presbyterians at last awakened with the daily wounds of
their Power, and the dishonor of their Party, began now to be more afraid of
their Stipendiaries than they were of their Sovereign; for they found that they
lost all that by the Victory which they sought by the War: therefore to break
the confidence of the Independents, and make themselves free, they Vote in the
Parliament, where they had most Voices, That to ease the Commonwealth of the
Charges in maintaining the Army, 12000 of the Soldiers should be sent over to
Ireland, and all the rest to be disbanded, except 6000 Horse, 2000 Dragoons,
and 6000 Foot, who should be disposed in different and distant places in the
Nation, to prevent any Rising. The Commanders and Independents soon discovered
the Artifice, that it was not to ease the Nation, but weaken them; therefore
they employ the Inferior Officers (being persons that by dissimulation and
impudence having accustomed themselves to much speaking, did at last imagine
their Vices were Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and so were fit to disquiet the minds
of men,) to possess the common Soldiers with a fear of Disbanding without
their Arrears, or else to be sent into that unquiet Island to perish with
hunger and cold, and the surprises of a treacherous Enemy. This presently set
the Army to Mutiny, which while it was in the Beginnings, the Commanders make
semblance of Indignation at it, seem very busy to compose it; and Cromwell, to
make the Parliament secure, calls God to witness, that he was assured the Army
would at their first Command cast their Arms at their Feet; and again solemnly
swears, that he had rather himself with his whole Family should be consumed
than that the Army should break out into Sedition. Yet in the mean time he and
his Creatures in the Army administer new fuel to the flames of it; and when
they had raised their Fury to such heat that it was at last concocted to a
perfect defection from all obedience to the Parliament, they lay aside their
disguises, and post from London to the Head Quarters, where the Synagogue of
Agitators was seated, and to whom was committed the management of this
Conspiracy. This Conventicle was made up of two of the most unquiet and
factious in every Regiment of Foot, and each Troop of Horse: their business was
to consult the Interests of the whole Army, and when they had molded their
Pretenses and Arts to their grand Design, to instruct the ruder part of it in
their Clamours and Injuries, and to corrupt all the Garrisons by Emissaries to
the same enterprises. At last they extended their Cares to the whole British
Empire, and dictate what their pleasures are concerning England and Ireland.
Which was in both Kingdoms to establish the Power and Liberty of the People;
for they openly professed an intent for Democracie. And because about an
hundred Officers in the Army would not be forward in the Sedition, they were by
this Committee of Adjutators, and the secret intimations of the Commanders,
cashiered.

Thus the Counsels of both Parties being directed to overthrow their contrary,
each thought the Person and Presence of the King would be no vain advantage to
their Designs, for they would Honest their actions with a care of Him:
therefore the Presbyterians had it in Consultation, to Order Col. Greves, who
had the Command of the Guard about the King at Holmeby, to remove His Majesty
to London; the Intelligence of which coming to the Army by the treachery of a
certain Lord, they immediately send a Body of Horse to prevent them, and to
force Him into their own Quarters. Thus was that Religious Prince made once
more the mock of Fortune, and the sport of the Factions, and was drawn from His
peaceful Contemplations, and Prospect of Heaven, to behold and converse with
men set on Fire of Hell. These, to tempt Him to a Confidence in their
integrity, (that they might the more easily to His disgrace ruin Him, and
murder Him by His own Concessions, if He would be deluded by them) highly
pretend to a Compassionate Sense of His Sufferings, and complain of the
Parliaments Barbarous Imprisoning Him in His own Palaces, wondering they had no
more Reverence for Majesty; and to beget a belief of this, they profess (which
they would have to be conceived with them was more sacred than any Oaths) that
they will never part with their Arms till they have made His way to His Throne,
and rendered the Condition of His Party more tolerable. Besides these Promises
and Compassions, they permit Him the Ministry of His Chaplains in the Worship
of God, (which, it is said, He took with so great a Joy, that He almost
believed Himself free and safe, it being His most heavy burden while He was the
Parliaments Captive) the Commerce of Letters with the Queen, the Visits of His
own Party, and the Service of His Courtiers; some of whom they also admitted to
their Council of War, mould Propositions which they will urge in His behalf,
and alter them to the King's Gust and at His Advice. In their public
Remonstrances against the Covetousness, Ambition, Injustice, Cruelty and
Self-mindedness of the Parliament, they do sometimes obliquely, sometimes
plainly, profess, that the King, Queen, and the Royal Family must be restored
to all their Rights, or else no hope of a solid Peace; but then they would
intermix such Conditions as argued they sought Reserves for a perfidious
escape. For Cromwell did among his Confidents boast of his fine Arts, and that
by these Indulgences was intended nothing but His Destruction.

By all these Impostures they prevailed nothing upon the Hopes or Fears of the
King; nor did He commit any thing unworthy His former Fortune, and the
Greatness of His Integrity and Wisdom, or which any of the Disagreeing Factions
could use to His reproach. But they found another kind of Success upon the
Parliament, for they sacrificed to the Commands of their Stipendiaries eleven
Members of the House of Commons, and seven of the Peers, causing them to
forbear sitting among them, because they had been accused by the Army in a very
frivolous Charge. All men wondering at the inequality of those men's Spirits,
who had so furiously rejected the Articles of their lawful Sovereign against
five or six of their Body, and yet did now so tamely yield to the slight Cavils
and dislike of their Mercenaries above thrice that Number. They therefore
concluded, that neither Religion, Justice, or the Love of Liberty, which are
always uniform, but unworthy Interests and corrupt Souls, which vary with
fears and hopes, had been the Principles and first Movers of their attempts.
Besides this, they were so prone to Slavery, that they had gone on to Vote all
the lusts of the Army, had not a Tumult (their Arts being now turned upon their
own heads,) from London stopped them in their violent speed, and kept the
Speaker in his Chair till they had voted more generously, that it was neither
for their Honor nor Interest to satisfy the demands of the Soldiers; and
that the King should come to London to treat.

These contrary desires of the divided Faction, which had jointly oppressed
their Sovereign, showed, that Ill men will more easily conspire together in
War, than consent in Peace; and that Combinations in Crimes will conclude in
Jealousies, each Party thinking the advantages of the other too great; and that
Power is never thought faithful which is accounted excessive. Therefore both
prepare for War. With the 140 Members that sat in Parliament were joined the
City, and the cashiered Soldiers and Officers that had served in their pay.
With the Army were the Speakers of both Houses; who had sled to them with about
fifty of their Members that projected the Change of Government, being either
for an Oligarchy or Democracie, yet left some of the same judgment behind, to
betray and disturb the Counsels at London. To these did adhere the Neighboring
Counties, who were cajoled by the splendid Promises of the Army, of Restoring
the King, (which they much boasted) Dissolving the Parliament, and Establishing
Peace and Government: and they more willingly credited these, because they had
conceived an hatred of the Parliament and City both for beginning the War, and
now obstructing Peace. The Army entitle their attempts for King and People:
Their Adversaries, for bringing the King to His Parliament. The Commanders were
greedy of that War which promised an easy Victory, and made the poor Soldiers
hope for the Plunder of the City.

For the advantage was clear on the Army's side, which consisted of veterane
Soldiers, united among themselves by a long Converse, and known Commanders:
but the force of the other was made up of a tumultuary Multitude, gathered
under new Leaders, and so had no mutual confidence; their meetings were full of
doubts and fears, none could determine in private, nor in public Consult,
because they dared not trust one another; and it was observed that those who
were most treacherous talked most boldly against the Enemy. Therefore in the
very beginnings the Parliament and City desert their Enterprise, Treat with,
and open their Gates to the Army, who march in Triumph through London, bringing
the Speakers and their Fellow-Travellers to their Chairs, seize upon the Tower,
dismantle the Fortifications, pull down all the Chains and Posts of the City,
send the Lord Mayor and the Chief Citizens to the Tower, and reduce all the
Power of the Nation in Obedience to the Commanders. For Fairfax is made General
of all the Forces both in England and Ireland, and Rainsbrough, a Leveller, and
a violent Head of the Democraticks, High Admiral. The impeached Presbyterians
fled beyond Sea, others of that Sect drooping complied with the Fortune of the
Conquerours; and that which grieved good Men most, was, a Public Thanksgiving
(which is not to be observed but for the happy endeavors of a Nation in their
virtuous and glorious undertakings for Liberty and Safety, but now was
profaned for our Slavery and Misery) to God was appointed for the Army, and
they were entertained now at a Feast, whom before the City would have forced
from their Walls.

While these things were in Motion, the King consults Heaven for Direction, and
his Party modestly abstain from either side, thought both to be abhorred, and
knew that Party would be the worst which should overcome. The Army having now
the greatest strengths of the Nation, the Parliament and City at their
obedience, make no mention of their former promises to the King; only the
Adjutators were fierce for breaking that Parliament, and calling another, as
they called it, more equal Representative. But both their Synagogue and the
Council of War, being now delivered from fear of the Presbyterians, began to
contrive the destruction both of the King and Monarchy. As for the King, whom
they had now brought to Hampton Court, some that had before contrived His
Death, and to murder Him while He was in the Scotch Camp, (so at once to
satisfy their own Revenge, and Load their Enemies with the Infamy of the
Murder,) yet could not then perform it, were now fiercefor a speedy and secret
Assassination by Pistol or Poison. Others would have Him tried and condemned by
their Council of War. But the Chiefs thought fit to proceed more artisicially
in their Crime, and when they should get more Authority, destroy Him by a
Parliamentary way of Justice. To bring this about, they must proceed to make
Him more odious, that the People might be patient while they kill Him, and undo
them. To proceed therefore to their Impiety, Cromwell and his Creatures stickle
fiercely in the House of Commons, and cause the Parliament to send, not
Conditions of Peace to be treated on, but Propositions like Commands that
admitted no dispute: which if the King had yielded unto, He had despoiled
Himself of Majesty, and been thought guilty of so much want of Spirit as would
conclude an unfitness for Empire; besides, such a voluntary Diminution would
have been equally unsafe, as unglorious: And if He did not, then He was to be
esteemed the only Obstacle of the Universal Peace. And lest the King should put
them to more tedious Arts by signing them, they themselves to divert Him
privately procure more soft Articles, and professed to be sorry the
Presbyterian Sowreness and Rigor did yet leaven the House, which made these
Propositions so unpleasant.

The King could not but perceive the practices of the Army, yet being resolved
that no Dangers whatsoever should make Him satisfy those unreasonable Demands
of the Parliament, which granted would have been the heaviest oppression on His
Subjects, and the greatest injury to His Posterity He could possibly be guilty
of; For to good Princes the Safety of their People, and their own Memory, which
is built upon the Happiness of Posterity through their Counsels, are more
precious than Life and Power; and although Providence, and the Malice of His
Enemies had obstructed His way to Glory by Victories and Success, yet He would
trace it in the unenvied and unquestionable paths of Constancy and Justice:
Therefore to make His denial of them advantageous to Himself, by a seeming
confidence in the Army's profers, thereby to oblige, if it were possible, those
that had no sense either of Faith or Honor, or at least, to injealous those
two Rivals for His Power, and commit them, the King absolutely rejects the
Parliaments Propositions, and requires the Demands of the Army as more equal,
and fit for a Personal Treaty, and that the Army also should nominate
Commissioners. Cromwell and His Accomplices seemed to be joyful for this Answer
of His Majesty, which had preferred them before their Competitors to the Honor
of Justice and Moderation in the Eyes of the People; but yet secretly did they
exasperate the minds of the more short-sighted Commons against the King for
this Affront. And to the King they profess a shame and trouble upon their
Spirits (for so they loved to speak) that they could not now perform their
Promises: sometimes they excused themselves by a Reverence to the Parliament,
at other times by the fierceness of the Adjutators; and when by these excuses
they had colored their delays to some length, they began to interpret their
sayings otherwise than the King apprehended them, to forget what they had
assured Him of, and at last openly to refuse any performance. To all these
Perfidies they add other Frauds, to beget a fear in Him of the Adjutators and
the Levellers, who they informed Him meditated His Murder, professed they could
not for the present moderate their bloody and impetuous Consultations, but when
they should recover the lost Discipline of their Army, then they might easily
and speedily satisfy their engagements to Him. To give credit to their words,
the Fury of the Adjutators was blown to a more conspicuous Flame, their Papers
were published for a change of Government, called The Case of the Army, and,
The Agreement of the People; the animations of Peter's, and another of the same
Diabolical spirit, saying, His Majesty was but a dead Dog, were divulged, and
all were communicated to some Attendants about the King, with an Advice from
the Chiefs of the Army to escape for His Life: for they were unwilling He
should be killed while they helplesly looked on.

The fury and threatenings of men of such destructive and bloody Principles, who
accounted all things lawful that they could do, that Providence administering
Opportunity did invite and license their impieties, and who imputed all their
lusts, that had no color from Justice, to the Persuasions of the Holy Spirit,
were not to be despised; nor was the King to abandon His Life, if He could
without sin preserve it to a longer waiting upon God. Therefore with three of
His most trusted Attendants, in the dark, tempestuous and ominous night of
Novem. 11. He leaves Hampton Court, some say, uncertain where to seek safety;
others, that He intended to take Ship, but being disappointed in His
Expectation, He was at last fatally led into the Power, and, when He could not
escape, committed Himself to the Loyalty and Honor of Col. Hammond, (a
Confident of Cromwell's, who had been but a little before made Governor of the
Isle of Wight for this very purpose,) and was by him conveyed to
Carisbrook-Castle, the very Pit His Enemies had designed for Him. For it was
discoursed in the Army above a fortnight before, that the King e're long would
be in the Isle of Wight: and the very night He departed from Hampton Court, the
Sentinels were withdrawn from their usual Posts, on purpose to facilitate His
flight. The all-wise God not permitting Him to fly from those greater Trials,
and more Glorious Acts of Patience He had designed for Him. Being here in this
false Harbor, He minds that business which lay most on His Heart, the
Settlement of the Nation; He sends Concessions to the Parliament more benign
and easy than they could desire or hope, together with His Reasons why He
could not assent to their Demands; and earnestly solicites them to pity the
Languishing Kingdom, and come to a Personal Treaty with Him, on His Concessions
and the Army's Demands.

But the Conspirators, to cut off all hopes of a Treaty, take this Occasion to
send four Preliminary Articles, which if He would pass as Acts, they would
treat of the rest. These were so unjust, that the Scotch Commissioners in the
Name of their Kingdom declare against them in public Writings, and following
the Messengers of Parliament to the Isle of Wight, do in the presence of His
Majesty protest against them as contrary to the Religion, the Crown, and
Accords of both Kingdoms. The King, according to His wonted Wisdom and
Greatness of Mind, presently returns them an Answer, to show the Injustice of
having Him grant the chief things before the Treaty, which should be the
Subject of it, and to give them such an Arbitrary Power, to the ruin of all
the People. This Answer He delivered sealed to their Messengers, who desired
that they might hear it read, and that they might be dealt with as
Commissioners, not as bare Carriers (a greater trust than which their Masters
had not committed unto them) and promise upon their Honor that it should not
be any prejudice to Him. But His Majesty had no sooner read it, than they
finding it not to the Gust of those that sent them, notwithstanding the Faith
they had given, cause their Just Sovereign to be kept close Prisoner, force
away His Chaplains, Dr. Sheldon, now Lord Bishop of London, and Dr. Hammond,
both which He highly valued for their Integrity, Wisdom, Piety and Learning,
and His other Servants, even those whom the Parliament had placed formerly
about Him, and in whom His Goodness had wrought both an Affection and
Admiration of Him, and permit none about Him but such as they hoped would be a
Watch upon Him, and whose barbarous Souls might trample on His Fortune. Besides
they set strict Guards at His Doors and Windows, lest any Letters might come to
Him, or be sent from Him.

The like reception His Letter found with the Parliament. For Cromwell and His
Officers were resolved to go on with their Design, and having so long used the
Adjutators, as served to frighten the King into the Toils they had set, they
soon quiet them, (which was not difficult, being a Company of hotheaded
fellows, that could only talk, not form a Counsel or a Party, to endure a
Storm,) by executing some of their most pertinacious Leaders; and being free of
that care, applied their practices wholly to the Destruction of His Majesty. To
this purpose they mould the Four Votes for No Addresses to the King; but before
they bring them into Public, they send into their several Counties about forty
or fifty of the principal Members, who they thought would oppose them, to raise
Money for the Soldiers. Nevertheless the first of those Votes was contested
against so strongly, that the Debates lasted from ten of the Clock in the
Morning till seven in the Evening; and though they thus wearied the more Honest
Party, yet could it not pass till the Conspirators had engaged that no worse
thing should be done to the King. The remaining Votes were dispatched in half
an hours time, when those of the more sober Principles were gone forth to
refresh themselves, and the Conspirators still kept their Seats. The House of
Peers were not so hasty in them as the Commons had been, and their Debates
vexed the Conspirators with Delays, till those who were sent by the Army to
thank the Lower House for their Consent to these Desires of the Soldiers, did
also threaten the Upper for their long Deliberations: some new Terrors were
also added, for they quartered two of their Regiments at White Hall, under
color of guarding the Parliament, but in truth to work upon the Lords; which
had its effect, for many that had the most Honorable thoughts in this
business, forsook the Parliament, and then three or four (which often was the
fullest Number about those times in that Honse,) join with the Commons in their
Votes for no Addresses.

This prodigious Persidiousness in Parliament and Army, both which had so
frequently declared and engaged themselves by Oaths and Promises to preserve
the King in His Just Rights, filled all men with amazement and indignation, to
see how little they valued their Faith, who pretended so high to Religion;
therefore each of them were put to satisfy the Common Fame. Cromwell to some
would have covered this Impiety with another, that as He was praying for a
blessing from God on his undertakings, to restore the King to his pristine
Majesty, his tongue cleaved to the roof of his mouth, that he could not speak
one word more; which he took as a return of Prayer, and that God had rejected
Him from being King. To others he did impudently assert, That it was lawful to
circumvent a wicked man with deceit and frauds. The Conspirators in the
Parliament strove to honest their Proceedings by a Declaration, and assign in
it for Causes of their Perjuries, all the Calumnies that had been raised
against the King by His most professed Enemies, or from those uncertain Rumors
which themselves had invented, adding and repeating others which had even in
the Parliament House been condemned as Forgeries, (yet now were used as
necessary Veils for a more execrable Falsehood.) Which infamous Libel they cause
to be sent to all the Parishes of the Kingdom, to be divulged, supposing that
none did dare to refute their black and most malicious Slanders, or that none
could publicly do it, because they set strict Watches upon all the
Printing-Presses. They likewise Commanded the Curates to read it in their
several Churches, and commend it to the People. And that these might the more
readily observe their Orders, they at the same time strictly enjoin the payment
of Tithes, and Vote that the Dean and Chapiter's Lands (which they had designed
for profane Uses, and never intended they should be for the Emolument of
Churchmen) should be set apart for Augmentations for their Preachers,
pretending a fervent zeal for the propagation of the Gospel, when they did most
dishonor it. By their Agents, and the Anabaptists, with other Heretics and
Schismatics, they solicit the unacquainted Rabble to sign to Gratulatory
Addresses to approve what they had already done, and petition for a speedy
progress in the Ruin of His Majesty.

But all these their cursed Projects failed, for several Answers to their
Defamations were published, One writ by the King Himself, another by A full
Answer.
Sir Edward Hyde, and a third by The Regal Apology.
Dr. Bates: all which proved the Monstrous Falsehoods of their Paper, and that
the Faction were guilty of what they imputed to the King; and this with such
evidence, that none of their most mercenary Writers, or the most foul-mouthed
Conspirators, did dare or hope with Success to reply unto. The Curates coldly,
if at all, observed their Orders, and there came so few Petitions, and those
signed by such contemptible and lewd Persons, as they rather loaded the Faction
with more hatred, than gave them any credit. While generally in every place
none of the People could contain their fury against these Impostors, but
publicly cursed them and their Infamous Adherents.

For their Miseries made them sensible of the want of that Prince whose gentle
and just Rule had brought them to such an inebriating Prosperity, that they had
forgot the Minister of their Happiness. But now they found Government when it
was out of His hand, like Moses's Rod cast on the ground, transformed to a
Serpent; and that those who pretended to free them from Tyranny had deluded
them into the most insufferable Slavery: wherein they were either totally
despoiled of all things that render our Being comfortable, or they were not
secure in the use of them. Religion, the Ornament of the present, and the
Pledge of a future Life, was so dishonored by Schisms and Heresies (fomented
to weaken the People by Divisions, to a tameness under their Oppressors) by
Fasts for the most impious Designs, and Thanksgivings for prosperous Crimes;
that some men concluded it to be nothing else but the Invention of Tyrants, and
the Disguise of Villains, and therefore did forsake it, and turn Atheists.
Others that did still find the Inward Consolations of it, yet feared openly to
profess it, lest they should be taken for those that pretended a Love to God,
that they might more securely destroy men. Liberty also was now but an empty
name: for all the Common Prisons were too narrow to receive even those that did
not dare to break the Laws; so that the Houses of Noblemen were converted to
Gaols, for those that were unfortunate in honest enterprises; where they were
to languish with want and sickness, and not be called to know their Offense or
their Accusers, because they had not guilt enough for a public Condemnation.
Some were put a Shipboard in the midst of Summer, there to contract Diseases:
Others were sold Slaves to foreign Plantations. Many to escape such nasty
Confinements, or an ignominious Torture, fled from their Native Soil either to
the Neighboring Countries, where they were the Evidences of the Infamy and
Barbarousness of our Nation; or seeking for Shelter in the Isles and Deserts of
America, polluted those Rocks and Seas with English Blood.

Propriety was no longer hedged up by Law; but whom the Violence of the
Soldier did not impoverish, the frauds of Committee men would, from whose
Rapines none were secure that had not been as criminal as themselves, and few
safe that did not seek their favor, and bow down to their Greatness: These men
taking advantage of the common evils, to satisfy either their private revenge,
or lusts: for their Proceedings were not regulated by the known Laws; but the
secret Instructions of their Masters in Parliament and Army, or their own
Pleasures, were the Rules of administering Justice. An honest Fame likewise was
a Mark for Ruin: for if any by just Arts had got the Esteem of the People and
the Affections of His Neighborhood, and did not comply with their Interest,
first he was vexed with Slanders and Reproaches, and afterward with
Sequestration; especially if he were a Minister: and it was their common
Principle, that an Honest Cavalier was the worst Enemy, and a Cavalier Saint
did the most hurt; so that both their Vices and Virtues were equally hated.
Common Converse was dangerous; for they had Informers in every place, and Spies
almost in every Family of Note: Servants were corrupted to accuse their
Masters, and the Differences in Religion did injealous and arm the nearest
Relations one against another: Men out of a mutual distrust would hasten from
Company, to consult in private their peculiar Safety, for they knew their Words
were observed, and their Secrets sought after. Few Families but had by the
Civil War some loss to bewail; some mourned over their disagreeing Members in
different Camps, and had cause to fear which side soever prospered they must be
miserable in some part.

These and many more Miseries were more highly embittered by the uncertainty of
a Remedy: For the Parliament, that had the name of Government, were guilty of
all these Reproaches of a Community, being Slaves to those whose interest it
was to keep us thus miserable; and if at any time they were free from the yoke
of the Army, the two Sects kept them so divided, each Party laboring by Votes
and Counsels to circumvent the other, that they could not mind the Universal
Benefit. Besides the Power they exercised was too much to be well used, for
they engrossed the Legislative Authority, and the Exercise of Jurisdiction. So
that they would make Laws according to their Interest, and execute them
according to their Lust; this day's Vote should contradict the former day's
Order, and to morrow we must violate what to day we solemnly swore to observe:
so that men knew not what to obey, nor where to rest. Thus all hopes of Liberty
and Peace were lost in the Confinement of the King, who only was found able and
willing to determine our Miseries. For His Principles were Uniform, and His
Endeavors for a Settlement constant; besides His Adversities had illustrated,
if not calcined, His Endowments. For now when He had no Friends, Counselors,
or Secretaries, His Discourses with Commissioners upon their several Addresses,
and His Declarations of His own Injuries, the Nations Slavery, the Injustice of
His and their Adversaries, were so excellently and prudently managed, that they
undeceived the greatest part, and reconciled many of His bitter Enemies:
therefore the whole Nation now panted for a Return to the Obedience of such an
inestimable Prince.

These Considerations caused several attempts for His Deliverance, some
Private, and others more Public. The first was managed by those Servants whom
the Parliament had placed about Him; for these won by His Goodness, of which
they were daily witnesses, twice plotted His Escape, and ventured their Lives
for His Liberty, but failed in both designs: and the last being discovered
before it could be put into action, One Rolfe, a bloody Villain, (that had also
endeavored to poison Him, for which though he was publicly accused, yet was
acquitted by that Judge whom the Conspirators had employed to hear that cause)
waited to kill Him as He should descend from His Chamber.

[ Anno 1648.] The more public was that of the whole Nation: for enraged with
their own Oppressions and the Miseries of their Prince, men in most Counties,
even of those that had adhered to the Parliament, but now vexed that they had
been so basely deluded, draw up Petitions for a Personal Treaty with the King;
that the Armies Arrears being paid they should immediately be disbanded; that
Relief should be sent into Ireland, and England quite eased of the
Contribution, which they could no longer bear. To these Petitions there were
such innumerable Subscriptions, that the Officers of the Army, and Parliament
were mad to see their Threats of Sequestration, Imprisonment and Death, to make
no Impression; and the Promises they likewise made were slighted, because
discredited by their former Perjuries. The first Petitioners were the Essex
men, who came in such Numbers as had not been seen before, as if they would
force, not entreat for, what was necessary. After them those of Surrey, whom,
by the command of the Officers and Parliament Men, the Soldiers assault at the
Parliament-Doors, kill some, wound more, and plunder all: and for this brave
Exploit upon unarmed Petitioners, they have the Thanks of the Commons, and a
Largess for their Valor; that so the People might be affrighted from offering
Petitions, which before the very same men had declared to be the Birthright of
every Englishman. While men see and admire the Returns of the Divine Justice,
and the reciprocal motions of the Popular heat, that the very same Parliament
that first stirred up this way of tumultuary Petitions against the King, now
complained that the Honor and Safety of Parliaments was endangered by
Petitious.

But all their Tyranny upon the complaining Nation prevailed nothing but to
provoke them to a higher Indignation and more frequent Petitions. And when they
perceived they dealt with men obstinate to their own Interests, which were not
to be gained but by the Public ruin, they fly from Prayers to Arms, and
entitle their just War, For the Liberty of King and People. And in several
places, as in Kent, Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cornwall, Yorkshire, Wales, and
at last in Surrey, multitudes take Arms for this Righteous Cause. The Navy also
fall off, and setting Rainsbrough their levelling Admiral on Shore, seventeen
Ships deliver themselves up to the Prince of Wales. The Scots likewise by an
Order of their own Parliament send into England (to recover the Liberty and
Majesty of the King) an Army under Hamilton. But all was in vain, God had
decreed other Triumphs for His Majesty, and to translate Him to another
Kingdom. For the English being but tumultuarily raised, having no train of
Artillery or Ammunition considerable, were soon suppressed by a veterane Army
provided with all necessaries. The Scots, either through weakness or wickedness
of their Commanders, who made so disorderly a march that their Van and Rear
were forty miles asunder, were easily worsted by Cromwell, who surprised their
main Body, and Hamilton was taken Prisoner. Cromwell follows the scattered
Parties into Scotland, where they were likewise assaulted by Argyle, a
domestic Enemy, and forced to submit those Arms the Parliament had put into
their hands to the Faction of that false Earl; who calls another Parliament,
from which all were excluded that in the former Voted for the King's Delivery,
and all the Orders of that Convention made void. Cromwell had the Public
Thanks, and the Private Faith of Argyle to endeavor, as opportunity permitted,
the extirpation of Monarchy out of Scotland.

The Navy also deserts the Prince, being corrupted by the Earl of Warwick, who
was appointed for this Service; and when he had ingloriously bought off their
Faith to their lawful Prince, himself was ignominiously cashiered by the
Conspirators. These great disappointments and overthrows of just Enterprises
men variously attributed to different Causes. Some to the Perfidiousness,
others to the Weakness of those that managed them; as also to the Treachery of
some Presbyterians, who in hatred to the Army first encouraged, and then in
Jealousy of the Royallists basely deserted them. For the Rabbis of the Kirk
cursed Hamilton in the beginning of his Enterprise. Another sort thought them
unhappy, because the greatest part of the Undertakers were such that formerly
had either fought against the King, or else had betrayed Him, and God would not
now bless their unexpiated Arms. And some to the Fate of the Kingdom, which God
had decreed to give over to numerous and impious Tyrants, because of their
unthankfulness and impatience under so Incomparable a Prince.

But while these things were managed by the Army that were now at a distance,
and Cromwell's Terrors were greater in Scotland than here, the less guilty
Parliament Men seriously considering how impatient the People (who in London
and other places had gotten innumerable Subscriptions to a Petition for a
Personal Treaty) now were of those Injuries that were done to their Sovereign,
how hateful themselves grew, because they had betrayed and inslaved their own
Privileges, together with the Liberties of the Subject to an insatiable and
Phanatick Army, and how an evident Ruin attended even their Conquests of Him
whom it was unlawful to assault, did at last (though too late) contrary to the
clamours of their Factious and Democratick Members, Repeal those Votes which
they had formerly made, of No more Addresses to the King. This being passed in
both Houses, they afterward with a strong Consent Vote a Treaty with the King,
in Honor, Freedom and Safety. The Factious Party in the Parliament found
themselves too few and weak to oppose this impetuous tendency of the Two Houses
and the whole Kingdom to Peace. But yet they endeavored to frustrate the
labors of their more sincere Members, and to bassle the People's just desires
of it, by imposing many unequal Conditions, and obstructive restrictions.

For they procured that the Treaty should be in the Isle of Wight, and not at
London; that it should be by Commissioners, and not immediately with the two
Houses, as was Petitioned. The Propositions that were sent to be Treated were
the same which had before been offered to the King at Hampton Court, and were
then rejected by Him, and also condemned by the Army it self as too unjust. The
Commissioners were so straightened in Power, that it was not lawful for them to
soften any one of the Conditions of Peace, not to alter the Preface, or change
the Order of the Propositions, nor to debate a Subsequent till the Precedent
were agreed on. They could conclude nothing; they were only to propose the
Demands, urge Reasons for the Royal Assent, receive the King's Answer, and
refer all in writing to the Parliament, whose slow Resolves, and the delays of
sending were supposed would consume that narrow measure of time which was
appointed to debate so many and so different things, for they were limited to
forty days. The Commissioners they sent, were Five of the Lord's House and
Twelve of the Commoners, and with them some of their Presbyterian Ministers,
who were to press importunately for their Church Government, to clude the
King's Arguments for Episcopacy, and only to impose, not to dispute, their own.

With all these, upon so many several and different Propositions, some relating
to the Law of the Land, others to Reason of State, and some to the practice of
the Apostolical Primitive Churches, the King was to deal without public
assistance. For though He was permitted the Ministry of some Officers of State,
Counselors and Divines, yet were they but of private advice, and to stand
behind the Curtain; He only Himself was to speak in the Debate, and singly to
manage matters of Policy with their most exercised Statists, and the points of
Divinity with their best-studied Divines. The Vulgar, to whom the Arts of these
men were not so obvious, were much pleased with the Name of a Treaty, and now
hoped to exchange their Servitude under so many importunate Tyrants, for the
moderate and easy Government of one Lawful King. Others that had a clearer
insight, and observed with what difficulties it was burdened, hoped for no
benefit from it. Because that if His Majesty should I not Consent, as they
believed He would not, then He would be the object of the popular impatience:
And if He should Consent, He that now was thought to be most injuriously dealt
with, would then be conceived not to deserve the Pity even of His Friends; nor
could He gain any other thing by His Concessions, than to be ruined with more
Dishonor. So that considering both the inviolable Integrity of His Majesty,
and the implacable Malice of His Enemies, they despaired of any happy ^^ue.

But beyond the Faith of these men, and the Hopes of the other, the King's
incredible Prudence had found Temperaments for their most harsh Propositions.
And by a present Judgment and commanding Eloquence did so urge His own, and
refell their Arguments, that He forced an Admiration of Himself, and, which was
a Testimony of the Divine Assistance, drew many of the unwilling Commissioners
to His own Opinion (though their Commission, and the danger of their Lives,
necessitated them, contrary to the dictates of their own Consciences, to
prolong the Debates;) with a wonderful Lenity proved their Demands unjust, yet
granted what was not directly against His Honor and Conscience: Thus devesting
Himself of His own Rights, He demonstrated that He had those Affections which
might justly style Him the Father of His Country. For He endeavored by His own
Losses to repair the damages of His People. Yet the King saw by the Obstinacy
of the most Powerful of those He Treated with, that they intended nothing less
than Peace, nor any thing more than His Destruction; which that it might be
adequate to their Malice, they would have it accompanied with the damnation of
His Soul (as He Himself in bitterness complained to One of His Servants)
pressing Him to do those things which they themselves acknowledged sinful, as
the Alienation of Church Lands. Although His Majesty was thus sensible of their
insatiable thirst for His Blood, yet because He had passed His Royal Word not
to stir out of that Island, He did not hearken to the same Servant, who
persuaded Him to provide for His Safety by flight, which He assured Him was not
difficult, and in administering to which He offered to hazard his own blood. But
the King always thought His Life beueath the Honor of Faithfulness, and would
not give His Enemies that advantage over His Fame, which their unjust Arms and
Frauds had gotten upon His Person, choosing rather to endure whatsoever
Providence had allotted for Him, than by any approach to Infamy seek to
protract those days which He now began to be weary of: For that life is no
longer desirable to Just Princes, which their People either cannot or will not
preserve. And He thought it more Eligible to die by the Wickedness of Others,
than to live by His own.

While the Treaty thus proceeded, the Army under the Command of the Lord
Fairfax and Ireton, (this last was Bold, Subtle, Perfidious and Active in all
Designs; so that his Soul being congenial with that of Cromwell, had been the
cause of an Alliance betwixt them, for he had Married one of Cromwell's
Daughters, and therefore was left to hover about the General as an evil Genius,
that he might do nothing contrary to their Impious Design,) drew toward
London, and quartered within half a days march from the City; that if their
Interest did require, they might the more suddenly oppress those who were less
favorable to their Enterprises. The Officers did at first publicly profess a
great Modesty, as that they would quietly submit to the Orders of the
Parliament; that they did prefer the Common Peace to their own private
Advantages, and should be glad to be dismissed from the toyls of War: yet in
private practiced an universal Confusion, for mingling Counsels with their
Factious Party in the Two Houses, they set up again the Meetings of their
Adjutators, framed among themselves Petitions against the Treaty, and to
require that all Delinquents without difference (wherein they included the
Person of the King) might be brought to Trial; and by their Emissaries abroad
drew some inconsiderable and ignominious persons, (by representing large spoils
in the subversion of Monarchy, and imaginary advantages by the change of
Government,) to subscribe to them.

When they thought these practices had produced their desired effect, and they
had infected most of the Soldiers in the several Garrisons, and that more
Parties of their Army were gathered to their Quarters about London; Ireton,
under pretext of a Contrast betwixt him and Fairfax, withdraws himself
privately to Windsor Castle, where being met by some of his Accomplices in the
Parliament, they jointly frame a Declaration in an imperious and affected
Style. Wherein in the name of the Army he maliciously declaims against all
Peace with the King, and His Restitution to the Government: afterward he
impiously demands that he may be dealt with as the Grand and Capital
Delinquent: with these he mingles some things to terrify the Parliament, some
to please the Soldiers, and others to raise hopes of Novelty in the Rabble.

This being prepared, and the Treaty now drawing toward an End (which those of
the Faction had prolonged and disturbed, that the Army might have more time to
gather together) and the Commanders having a perfect Intelligence how all
things in the Isle of Wight and in the Parliament did strongly tend to an
Accommodation, they thought it now seasonable to begin their intended Crime.
Therefore they speedily call a Council of War, at which met the Colonels, and
other inferior Officers, all men of Mercenary Souls, Seditious, Covetous, and
so accustomed to Dissimulation, that they seemed to be composed by nature to
frame and color Impostures. They began their Meeting with Prayers and Fasting,
pretending to inquire and seek the Will of God concerning the Wickedness they
had predetermined to act. This is the constant practice of such who would most
securely abuse the Patience of the People, while they commit the most horrid
Crimes. For not being able to honest their Iniquities by any color of Reason,
or any Command of the known Will of God, they pretend to a guidance by
Revelation and Returns of Prayer. This Imposture they had hitherto successfully
used; and the credulous Rabble of the common Soldiers were drawn to a
persuasion, that God did counsel all the Designs of these armed Saints. Thus
having prefaced their Villainy, Ireton produces his Remonstrance, which being
read among them was received by the Soldiers (who, through a pleasure in
blood, and hopes of Spoil, are used to praise every thing of their Chiefs,
whether good or bad, that tends to disturbance, and continuance of War,) with
as great an Applause as if it had been an Oracle from Heaven; and to make it
the more terrible, they styled it the Remonstrance of the Army, and order it to
be presented to the Parliament in the name of the Army and People of England.

When this Remonstrance was published, the minds of men were variously
affected. Some wondered that persons of so abject a Condition should dare to
endeavor the alteration of an Ancient Government, an attempt so far above
their fortune; and to design against the Person of their Sovereign, who by the
Splendor of his former Majesty, and by a continued Descent from so many Royal
Progenitors, had derived all that challenges the Reverence of the People. And
they thought the act so full of a manifest Wickedness, that the Contrivers
could not really intend the Execution, but only used it as a Mormo to frighten
the King and Parliament to hearken to their Pretensions of a lesser guilt.
Others considering their former Crimes and Injuries both to King and People,
and their damnable blasphemies of the Almighty God, did truly judge that their
preceding Iniquities had now habituated and tempered them for the extremest
mischiefs; and that having proceeded thus far, they would think their Safety
consisted in an accumulation of their Sins. Only they admired that these men
would discredit their ancient Arts of pretending to God's Direction, (in which
they could not so easily by every Vulgar judgment be deprehended) by boasting
of the Concurrence of the People, which was too evident a Cheat, for not one in
a thousand through the whole Nation but did abominate their practices. But
others more Speculative knew it was the accustomed Method of the Subverters of
a lawful Magistracy and Invaders of a Tyranny, first to seek the favor of the
Rabble by high pretenses of Liberty and Justice, and then to boast of it as
though they had it, and were entrusted by the People to recover what they
presented to their hopes and desires; and that these men following the same
practices would be the greatest Oppressors of those whom they pretended to
vindicate.

The Parliament though hitherto they had been very obsequious to the Army, yet
the Members now meeting in greater Numbers than usually, and preferring the
utmost hazards to a Compliance with this Remonstrance, laid it aside, and fell
to debate the King's Concessions which then lay before them. This free and
stout Carriage of theirs was much resented by the Soldiers, who stormed at the
contempt of those whose Grandeur depended upon their Arms. And lest they should
miscarry in their Chief Design, and lose the Sacrifice to their Ambition, they
immediately sent a Party of their Army into the Isle of Wight, to secure the
King: these laying hold upon Him, with a most Insolent Rudeness, not permitting
the delay of a Breakfast, forced Him from the Island into Hurst Castle, an
unwholesome and sordid place. The other part of their Army they cause to march
toward London, with all the imaginable signs of terror, as if they went to
sack and plunder an Enemies Town. When they had entered, they were quartered in
those Houses of the King and Nobility which were nearest the Parliament House,
hoping by the greatness and nearness of the danger, so to affright those
Members who were not so wicked as to comply with them, that they should
voluntarily withdraw, and hiding themselves, leave the possession to their own
scanty Party. For then the Violence would seem less, and give more Authority to
their unjust Decrees.

But the honest Members were more in love with Justice, and therefore not
terrified with the Menaces and Clamours of the Soldiers, but as inspired with
some unaccustomed Courage at this time, and thinking themselves guarded by the
Privileges of Parliament, with a greater boldness than usually they did upon
just designs, they appear in the House. Where the Commoners re-assuming the
consideration of the King's Concessions, continued that Debate till past
Midnight; the Factious Party, and the Creatures of the Army still raising new
Doubts and Scruples, multiplying Cavils, and by tedious harangues wasting the
time, that the more Just Party, which consisted most of Gentlemen of Fortunes,
not accustomed to such Watchings and Fastings, might be wearied out, and leave
them to their own Resolves: and also that they might give time to the whole
Army to march into the City that Night. Among the rest, Sir Henry Vane, (who
was born to disquiet the world, and to be a firebrand of Communities, yet still
carrying his designs of Confusion under a feigned meekness and simplicity of
the Gospel) This Man in the Isle of Wight had persuaded the King not to be
prodigal in His Concessions; that He had already yielded more than was fit for
them to ask, or Him to grant, and undertook to make it evident to the whole
world: yet now did most fiercely and perfidiously inveigh against the
Concessions, as designed by the King under the species of Peace to ruin the
Parliament and Commonwealth. Yet at last, notwithstanding those Terrors
without, and Troubles within, the House came to this Resolve, that The Kings
Concessions were a sufficient ground for Peace. Which was carried by Two
Hundred Voices, and there were searce Sixty Dissenters.

The next day the same Resolve was passed by the Lords in the very same terms,
not one dissenting. Who immediately adjourned for a week, to wait whether this
fury of the Army would spend it self after so generous an opposition. And the
House of Commons sent some of their own Members to acquaint the Lord Fairfax
and his Officers of this their Vote. This free and public detestation of the
Crime, that was designed, did extremely enrage the Projectors of it, and the
Democratick Party in the House mingled Threatenings with their Advices. For One
of the Chiefs of the Faction could not forbear to assure them, that If they
continued in this their Resolve, they should never after have Liberty of
meeting there again. Which accordingly was executed: for the next day they were
to meet there, the Colonels had placed a guard of two Regiments of Foot and one
of Horse upon the House of Commons, who strictly keeping all the Avenues
thereto, that none might enter without their License, laid hold upon Forty
Members that were Persons of the most known Integrity and highest Resolution;
they denied admission to One hundred and fifty more, and suffered none to enter
of whose servile compliance they were not well assured. Some that had escaped
their observation, and got into the House, by tickets, as from Friends or
Servants, they invite forth; whom being once without doors they violently force
away, while they in vain pleaded the Privileges of Parliament.

The imprisoned Members they vex and torture with great Indignities, exposing
them to the mockeries and insolences of the Common Soldiers: although there
were among them many that had before Commanded Armies, Brigades and Regiments
in the Parliament's cause against the King; and others that had been most
importunate assertors of their first injustice to their Prince. Those that
beheld these vicissitudes wondered, and acknowledged the just Judgment of God,
that had thus visibly and properly punished the Injustice of these men against
their Lawful Sovereign, by the ministry of their own more vile and mercenary
Soldiers, and did thus upbraid them with the falseness of their Principles by
which they acted against the King; the very same now serving to honest this
violence that was committed on them: for both equally pretended to a Necessity
of Reformation, and Self-preservation. Others were inquisitive for the faith of
these men, who taking up Arms for the Sacred Privileges of Parliament, had now
left nothing but the Walls of that House. For the Number that would serve them
was not equal to the Name of a Parliament, being scarce the eighth part of that
Convention, and not much above Forty in all, and those the reproach of that
Assembly. For besides those that were violently excluded, others that did abhor
the Conditions of sitting there withdrew themselves to their own homes. And
many of those who formerly deluded by their pretensions to Religion, Justice
and Liberty, had hitherto been of the Faction, yet now awakened by these
clamorous Crimes, sorsook their bloody Confederacy.

Yet did not this contemptible Number, of which in most Votes there were Twenty
Dissenters, blush to assume the Authority of managing the weightiest Assairs of
the English Empire, to alter and change the Government, to expose His Majesty
to a violent Murder, and to overthrow the Ancient Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom. For being wholly devoted to the service of the Army, they communicated
counsels with them; and whatsoever was resolved at the Council of War, pasled
into a Law by the Votes of this Infamous Remnant of the House of Commons, who
now served the Soldiers in hopes of part of the Spoil, and a precarious
Greatness, which being acquired by so much Wickedness could not be lasting. In
order therefore to the Army's design they revive those Votes of No Addresses to
the King; (which had at first but surreptitiously, and by base practices
passed, and had been afterward Repealed by a full House.) Those Votes of a
Treaty with the King, and of the Satisfactoriness of His Concessions, with
scorn they rased out of the Journal Book. And then proceeded to Vote,

1. That the People under God are the Original of all Just Power. 2. That the
Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, being Chosen by, and Representing
the People, have the Supreme Authority of this Nation. 3. That whatsoever is
enacted and declared for Law by the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament
(by which they understood themselves) has the sorce of a Law. 4. That all the
People of this Nation are concluded thereby, although the Consent and
Concurrence of the King and House of Peers be not had thereunto. 5. That to
raise Arms against the People's Representative or Parliament, and to make War
upon them, is High Treason. 6. That the King Himself took Arms against the
Parliament, and on that account is guilty of the blood shed throughout the
Civil War, and that He ought to expiate the crime with His own blood.
Those that were less affected with the common Fears and Miseries could not
temper their mirth and scorn at such ridiculous Usurpers, that thought to
adjust their Crimes by their own Votes; that in one breath would adorn the
People with the Spoils of Monarchy, and in the next rob the People to invest
themselves. And (it is said that) even Cromwell (who intended to ruin our
Liberty,) was ashamed, and scorned their so ready Slavery, and afterward did
swear at the Table of an Independent Lord, that he knew them to be Rascals, and
he would so serve them. Others of more melancholy Complexions, considering the
baseness of these servile Tyrants, and the humors of their barbarous Masters
the Soldiers, all whose inhumanities they were to establish by a Law; and that
Power gotten by Wickedness cannot be used with the Modesty that is fit for Just
Magistrates; justly feared that as under the King they had enjoyed the height
of Liberty, so under these men they were to be overwhelmed in the depth of
Slavery: and that these Votes which overturned the very Foundation of our Laws,
could not be designed but for some horrid Impiety, and our lasting Bondage,
which came so to pass.

For in their next Consultations, they Constitute a Tribunal to Sentence their
Sovereign (which afterward they used as a Shambles for the most Loyal and
Gallantest of the Nobless and People) of the most abject Subjects; and to
procure a Reverence to the Vilest of men, they give it the specious name of The
High Court of Justice. For which they appoint One hundred and fifty Judges
(that the Number might seem to represent the whole Multitude) of the most
violent and heady of all the Faction: To whom they give a Power of Citing,
Hearing, Judging and Punishing CHARLES STVART King of England. To make up this
Number they had named six Peers of the Upper House, and the twelve Judges of
the Land. But the greatest part were Officers of the Army (who having
confederated against His Majesty, and publicly required His Blood, could not
without a contempt to the light of Reason be appointed His Judges) and Members
of the Lower House, who were most violent against Monarchy, and indeed all
Government wherein themselves had no share. The rest were Persons picked out of
the City of London and Suburbs thereof, who they imagined would be most
obsequious to their Lusts.

Those that surveyed the List, and knew the Men, deemed them most unfit for a
Trust of Justice, and proper Instruments for any wicked undertaking; for of
these Judges one or two were Cobblers, others Brewers, one a Goldsmith, and many
of them Mechanics. Such among them as were descended of Ancient Families, were
men of so mean worth, that they were only like the Statues of their Ancestors,
had nothing but their Names to make them known unto the World. Some of them
were Spend-thrifts, Bankrupts, (such as could be neither safe nor free, unless
the Kingdom were in Bondage) and most notorious Adulterers, whose every Member
was infamous with its proper Vice; Vain and Atheistical in their Discourse,
Cowardly and Base in Spirit, Bloody and Cruel in their Counsels, and those
Parts that cannot honestly be named were most dishonest. One of them was
accused of a Rape; Another had published a Book of Blasphemies against the
Trinity of the Deity. Some of them could not hope to get impunity for their
Oppressions of the Country and Expilations of the public Treasure, but by
their Ministry to this Murder. Others could not promise themselves an
advancement of their abject or declining Fortune but by this Iniquity. Yet all
these by the Faction were enrolled in the Register of Saints, though fitter to
stand as Malefactors at the Bar, than to sit upon Seats of Judgment. And
notwithstanding their diligent search for such a Number of men, who would not
blush at nor fear any guilt, some of those whom they had named, in abhorrency
of the Impiety, refused to fit; and some that did, yet met there in hopes of
disturbing their Counsels.

All this while the House of Peers were not Consulted, and it was commonly
supposed that most of them terrified with those Preparations against the King
(the only defense of the Nobless against the Popular Envy) would absent
themselves from that House, except four or five that were the Darlings of the
Faction; and they deemed the Names and Compliance of those sew were enough to
give credit and Authority to their bloody Act. But in them they were
disappointed also; for some of the Peers did constantly meet, and on that day
wherein the Bill for Trial of the King was carried up to that House, there were
Seventeen then present (a greater Number than usual,) who all Unanimously (even
the Democratick Lords not dissenting) did reject the Bill as Dangerous and
Illegal. This so highly provoked the Fury of the Faction, that they meditated a
severe revenge, and for the present blotted out those Peers, whose Names they
had before put into their Ordinance, to make their Court more splendid. After
this they did also raze out the names of the Judges of the Land; for they being
privately Consulted concerning these Proceedings against the King, (although
they had been all raised to that Dignity and Trust by the Faction, yet)
answered, that It was contrary to the known Laws and Customs of England, that
the King should be brought to Trial.

To heal these two wounds which the Lords and Judges had branded their Cause
with, they use two other Artifices to keep up the Spirits and Concurrence of
their Party. First, they bring from Heart ford shire a Woman (some say a Witch)
who said, that God by a Revelation to her did approve of the Army's
Proceedings. Which Message from Heaven was well accepted of with Thanks, as
being very seasonable, and coming from an humble Spirit. A second was the
Agreement of the People, which was a Module of a Democratical Polity, wherein
those whose abject Condition had set them at a great distance from Government,
had their hopes raised to a share of it, if they conspired to remove the great
Obstruction, which was the Person and Life of the King. This was presented to
the House of Commons by Sir Hardress Waller and sixteen other Officers, as a
temporary remedy; for when they had perpetrated their Impiety, they
discountenanced and fiercely prosecuted those that endeavored it.

In considence of these their Arts and their present Power, notwithstanding all
these Public Abhorrencies and detestations by all Persons of Honor and
Knowledge, they Enacted their Bill. And for President of this Court, they chose
one of the Number, John Bradshaw; A person of an equal Infamy with his new
employment. A Monster of Impudence, and a most fierce Prosecuter of evil
purposes. Of no repute among those of his own Robe for any Knowledge in the
Law: but of so virulent and petulant a Language, that he knew no measure of
modesty in Speaking; and was therefore more often bribed to be silent, than
fee'd to maintain a Client's Cause. His Vices had made him penurious, and those
with his penury had seasoned him for any execrable undertaking. They also had a
Solicitor of the same Metal, John Cook, A needy man, who by various Arts, and
many Crimes had sought for a necessary Subsistence, yet still so poor, that he
was forced to seek the shelter of obscure and sordid corners to avoid the
Prison. So that vexed with a tedious Poverty, he was prevailed upon through the
hopes of some splendid booties to venture on this employment, which at the
first mention he did profess to abhor. These were their Chief Agents: other
inferior Ministers they had equally qualified with these their prime
Instruments, as Dorislaus a German Bandito, who was to draw up the Charge;
Steel, another of their Counsel, under pretense of sickness covered his fear
of the Event, though he did not abhor the wickedness of the Enterprise, having
before used his Tongue in a cause very unjust, and relating to this, the
Murder of Captain Burleigh. The Sergeants, Clerks and Crier were so obscure,
that the world had never taken notice of them, but by their subserviency to
this Impiety.

These were the Public Preparations; In private they continually met to
contrive the Form of their Proceedings, and the Matter of their Accusation.
Concerning the first, they were divided in Opinions. Some would have the King
first formally degraded and divested of all His Royal habiliments and Ensigns
of Majesty, and then as a private person exposed to Justice. But this seemed to
require a longer space of time than would comport with their project, which, as
all horrid acts, was to be done in a present fury, lest good Counsels might
gather strength by their Delay. Others rejected this course as too evidently
conforming with the Popish procedure against Sovereign Princes, and they feared
to confirm that common Suspicion, that they followed Jesuitical Counsels (whose
Society (it is reported) upon the King's offering to give all possible Security
against the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, at a Council of theirs did
decree to use their whole Interest and Power with the Faction to hasten the
King's death.) Which sober Protestants had reason enough to believe, because
all or most of the Arguments which were used by the Assertors of this Violence
on His Majesty, were but gleanings from Popish Writers. These Considerations
cast the Determination on their side who, designing a Tyrannical Oligarchy,
whereby they themselves might have a share in the Government, would have the
King proceeded against as King, that by so shedding His Blood they might
extinguish Majesty, and with Him murder Monarchy. For several of them did
confess, that indeed He was guilty of no Crime more than that He was their
King, and because the Excellency of His Parts, and Eminent Virtues, together
with the Rights of His Birth, would not suffer Him to be a private Person.

In their second Debate about the Matter of Accusation, all willingly embraced
the Advice of Harrison (who was emulous of the Power of Cromwell, and though
now his Creature, yet afterward became the Firebrand and Whirlwind of the
following Times) to blacken Him as much as they could; yet found they not
wherewith to pollute His Name. For their old Scandals which they had amassed in
their Declaration for no more Addresses to the King, had been so publicly
refuted, that they could afford no color for His Murder. Therefore they
formed their Accusation from that War to which they had necessitated Him. And
their Charge was, that He had levied War against the Parliament; that He had
appeared in Arms in several places, and did there proclaim War, and executed it
by killing several of the Good People; for which they impeached Him as a
Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and an implacable Common Enemy. This Charge, in the
Judgment of Considering men, argued a greater guilt in those that prosecuted
it than in Him against whom it was formed: for they seemed less sensible of the
instability and infirmities of humane Nature, than those that had none but her
light to make them generous, for such never reproached their conquered Enemies
with their Victory; but these men would murder their own Prince, against whom
they had nothing more to object than the unhappy issues of a War, which leaves
the Conquered the only Criminal, while the names of Justice and Goodness are
the spoils of the Conqueror. How false those Imputations of Tyranny, Treason
and Murder were, was sufficiently understood by those who considered the
peaceful part of the King's Reign; wherein it was judged, that if in any thing
He had declined from the safest Arts of Empire, it was in the neglect of a just
Severity on Seditious persons whom the Laws had condemned to die. And in the
War it was known how often His Lenity had clipped the wings of Victory. But it
appeared that these men, as they had broken all Rights of Peace, so they would
also those of Conquest, and destroy that which their Arms pretended to save.

How little credit their Accusation found appeared by the endeavors of all
Parties to preserve the King's Person from Danger, and the Nation from the
guilt of His Blood. For while they were thus engaged to perpetrate their
intended Mischiefs, all Parties declare against it. The Presbyterian Ministers,
almost all those of London, and very many out of the several Counties, and
some, though few, also of the Independents, did in th^^^ Sermons and
Conferences, as also by Monitory Letters, Petitions, Protestations and
Remonstrances, publicly divulged, adjure the Assassinates not to draw so great
a guilt upon themselves and the whole Nation by that Murder. For it was
contrary to those numerous and fearful Obligations of their many Oaths; to the
Public and Private Faith, which was expressed in their Protestations and many
Declarations; to the Laws of the Land, those of Nature, and Nations, and the
Commands of Scripture. That is was to the dishonor of our Religion, and
against the public good of the Kingdom. But all was fruitless, for they had
lost their Ministerial Authority by serving the Faction so long, till they
needed not their Assistance, and despised their admonitions: Besides, the very
same Principles they preached to kindle the War were now beat back into their
faces, and made use of against them to adjust the Murder. The People also
contemned them for their short-sightedness, in that they would be the heady and
indiscreet Instruments of such men, and in such practices as must of necessity
at last ruin them and all Ministers, as well as the King and Bishops.

The Scots also by their Commissioners declare and protest against it. The
States of Holland by their Ambassadors (if they were faithful in their trust)
did intercede, and deprecate it as most destructive to the Protestant Interest.
Some of the most eminent of the Nobility, as the Earl of Southampton, the Duke
of Richmond, the Marquess of Hertford, the Earl of Lindsey, and others, neglect
no ways, either by Prayers or Ransom, to save the King. Yea, they offered
themselves, as being the prime Ministers of the King's Commands, as Hostages
for Him, and if the Conspirators must needs be fed with blood, to suffer in His
stead for whatsoever He had done amiss. The Prince piously assaies all ways
and means to deliver His Father from the danger. For besides the States
Ambassadors (whom He had procured) both He and the Prince of Orange did daily
send as Agents the Kindred, Relations, and Allies of Cromwell, Ireton, and the
other Conspirators, with full power to propose any Conditions, make any
Promises, and use all Threatenings to divert them, if it were possible, from
their intended Cruelty, or at least to gain some time before the Execution. But
all was in vain, for no Conditions of Peace could please them who were
possessed with unlawful and immoderate desires: their Ambition (that is more
impetuous than all other affections) had swallowed the hopes of Empire;
therefore they would remove the King to enthrone themselves. Some thought that
their despair of Pardon had hardened them to a greater Inhumanity, for if after
all these attempts they continued the King's Life, they must beg their own;
which they knew Justice would not, and they resolved Mercy should not give; for
this is reckoned among the benefits which we hate to receive, and Men are
usually ashamed to confess they deserved death.

Whatsoever it was that truly made them thus cruel, they publicly pretended no
other Motive than the Calls and Ducts of Providence, and the Impulses of the
Blessed Sp^^^^ To carry on this Cheat, Hugh Peter's ( the Pulpit-Buffoon, of a
luxuriant Speech, skilled ^o move the Rabble by mimical Gest^^^^) Impudent, and
Prodigal of his own and others fame, Ignominious from his Youth, for then
suffering the contumely of Discipline, being publicly whipped, at Cambridge, he
was ever after an Enemy to Government, and therefore leagued himself with
unquiet Sectaries) preaches before these fictitious Judges upon that Text,
Psalm. 149.8. To hind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of
iron. He assures them undoubtedly that this was prophesied of them, that they
were the Saints related to in that Scripture, that they should judge the Kings
of the Earth, often calling them in his profane Harangue the Saint-Judges. Then
he professed, that he had for a certain found upon a strict Scrutiny, that
there were in the Army 5000 Saints, no less holy than those that now in Heaven
conversed with God. Afterward kneeling in his Pulpit, weeping and lifting up
his hands, he earnestly begs them in the name of the People of England, that
they would execute Justice upon that Wretch CHARLES, and would not let Benhadad
escape in Safety. Then he inveighs against Monarchy, and wrests the Parable of
Jotham to his purpose, wherein when the Trees would choose a King, the Vine and
the Olive refused the Dignity, but the Bramble received the Empire, and he
compared Monarchy to the Bramble. And all the while of contriving and executing
this Murder he preached to the Soldiers, and in some places about the City,
bitterly and contemptuously railing against the King. Others also of the
Congregational persuasion acted their parts in this Tragedy, but more closely,
and not so much in the face of the Sun.

The Conspirators taking heat from their infamous Preachers, whom they
themselves had first kindled, and somewhat doubting that these several strong
Applications from all Parties to save the King, and the Universal Discontents,
might take some advantage from their delay, with more speed hasten the
Assassination. In order to which they send a Sergeant of Arms with a guard of
Horse (lest the People should stone him for his Employment) into
Westminster Hall, and other places in London, to summon all that could lay any
crime to the King 's charge, to come, and give in their evidence against Him.
Having proclaimed their wicked purposes, and dressed up a Tribunal at the upper
end of Westminster Hall, with all the shapes of terror, where the President
with his abject and bloody Assistants were placed, thither afterward they
bring this most Excellent Monarch, whom having despoiled of three Great
Kingdoms, they now determined also to deprive of Life.

Into which Scene the King entered with a generous Miene, showing no signs of
discomposure, nor any thing beneath His former Majesty; but as if He were to
combat for Glory the Monsters of Mankind, He undauntedly took the Seat which
was set for Him, with scorn looking upon the fictitious Judges, and with pity
upon the People, who crouding in (the great Gates of the Hall being flung open)
did bewail in Him the frailty of our Humane condition, whose highest Greatness
has no Security: A sad Spectacle even to those that were not in danger.

He being set, the Charge against Him was read, with all those reproachful
terms of Tyrant, Traitor and Murderer; after which He was impleaded in the
name of the People of England. This false Slander of the People of England was
heard with Impatience and Detestation of all, and stoutly attested against by
the Lady Fairfax, Wife of the Lord Fairfax, who by this act showed her self
worthy of her Extract from the Noble Family of the Veres; for from an adjoining
Scaffold where she stood, she cried out with a loud voice (but not without
danger) that It was a Lie, not the Tenth part of the People were guilty of such
a Crime, but all was done by the Machinations of that Traitor Cromwell.

But the King after the Charge was read, with a countenance full of Majesty and
Gravity, demands by what Authority they proceeded with Him thus contrary to the
Public Faith, and what Law they had to try Him that was an absolute Sovereign.
Bradshaw replying, that of the Parliament; His Majesty showed the detestable
Falsehood in pretending to what they had not, and if they had it, yet it could
not justify these Practices. To which reply when they could not answer, they
force Him back to the place of His Captivity.

The Magnanimity of the King in this days contest with these inhumane
Butchers, did much satisfy the People, and they were glad (while they thought
not of His Danger) that He wanted not either Speech or Courage against so
powerful Enemies; that He had spoken nothing unworthy of Himself, and had
preserved the Fame of His Virtues even in so great Adversities. For He seemed
to triumph over their Fortune whose Arms He was now subject to. The Parricides
sought to break His Spirit by making His appearances frequent before such
contemptible Judges, and often exposing Him to the contempt of the armed
Rabble; therefore four days they torture Him with the Impudence and Reproaches
of their Infamous Solicitor and President. But He still refused to own their
Authority, which they could not prove lawful, and so excellently demonstrated
their abominable Impiety, that He made Col. Downs, one of their Court, to
boggle at, and disturb their Proceedings. They therefore at last proceeded to
take away that Life which was not to be separated from Conscience and Honor,
and pronounced their Sentence of Death upon their Lawful and Just Sovereign,
Jan. 27. not suffering Him to speak after the Decree of their Villainy, but
hurrying Him back to the place of His Restraint.

At His departure He was exposed to all the Insolences and Indignities that a
phanatick and base Rabble, instigated by Peter's and other Instructors of
Villainy, could invent and commit. And He suffered many things so conformable to
Christ His King, as did alleviate the sense of them in Him, and also instruct
Him to a correspondent Patience and Charity. When the barbarous Soldiers cried
out at His departure, Justice, Justice, Execution, Execution, as those deceived
Jews did once to their KING, Crucify Him, Crucify Him; this Prince, in
imitation of that most Holy King, pitied their blind fury, and said, Poor
Souls! for a piece of Money they would do as much for their Commanders. As He
passed along, some in defiance spit upon His Garments, and one or two (as it
was reported by an Officer of theirs, who was one of their Court, and praised
it as an evidence of His Soldiers Gallantry, while others were stupefied with
their prodigious baseness) polluted His Majestic Countenance with their
unclean spittle: the Good King, reflecting on His great Exemplar and Master,
wiped it off, saying, My Savior suffered far more than this for me. Into his
very face they blowed their stinking Tobacco, which they knew was very
distastefull to Him; and in the way where He was to go, just at His feet, they
flung down pieces of their nasty pipes. And as they had divested themselves of
all humanity, so were they impatient and furious if any one showed Reverence or
Pity to Him as He passed. (For no honest Spirit could be so forgetful of humane
frailty, as not to be troubled at such a sight; to see a Great and Just King,
the rightful Lord of three flourishing Kingdoms, now forced from His Throne,
and led captive through the streets.) Such as pulled off their Hats, or bowed
to Him, they beat with their Fists and Weapons, and knocked down one dead but
for crying out, God be merciful unto Him.

When they had brought Him to His Chamber, even there they suffered Him not to
rest, but thrusting in and smoking their filthy Tobacco, they permitted Him no
privacy to Prayer and Meditation. Thus through variety of Tortures did the King
pass this day, and by His Patience wearied His Tormentors: nothing unworthy His
former greatness of Fortune and Mind by all these Affronts was extorted from
Him, though Indignities and Injuries are unusual to Princes, and these were
such as might have forced passion from the best-tempered meekness, had it not
been strengthened with assistance from Heaven. In the Evening the Conspirators
were acquainted by a Member of the Army, of the King's desire, that seeing His
death was nigh, it might be permitted Him to see His Children, and to receive
the Sacrament, and that Doctor Juxon, then Lord Bishop of London, (now
Archbishop of Canterbury) might be admitted to pray with Him in His private
Chamber. The first they did not scruple at, the Children in their power being
but two, the Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of Gloucester, and they very young. The
second they did not readily grant. Some would have had Peter's to undertake that
employment for which the Bishop was sent for: But he declined it with some
Scoffs, as knowing that the King hated the Offices of such an unhallowed
Buffoon. So that at last they permitted the Bishops access to the King, to whom
his eminent Integrity had made him dear. For with so wonderful a prudence and
uprightness he had managed the envious Office of the Treasury, that that
accusing age, especially of Churchmen, found not matter for any impeachment,
nor ground for the least reproach.

The next day being Sunday, the King was removed to St. James's, where the
Bishop of London read Divine Service, and preached before Him in private on
these words, In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men by Jesus
Christ according to my Gospel. While the King and the Bishop at this time, and
also at other times, were performing the Divine Service, the rude Soldiers
often rushed in, and disturbed their Offices with vulgar and base Scoffs, vain
and frivolous Questions. The Commanders likewise, and other impertinent
Anabaptists did interrupt His Meditations, who came to tempt and try Him, and
provoke Him to some unnecessary disputations. But He maintained His own Cause
with so irrefragable Arguments, that He put some to silence, the petulancy of
others He neglected, and with a modest contempt dissembled their Scoffs and
Reproaches. In the narrow space of this one day, and under so continued
Affronts and Disturbances, the King (whose whole Soul was totally composed to
Religion,) applied Himself, as much as was possible, to the Reading Holy
Scriptures, to Prayer, Confession of Sins, Supplications for the forgiveness of
His Enemies, the receiving the Eucharist, holy Conferences, and all the Offices
of Piety: so under the utmost Malice and Hatred of men, He labored for the
Mercy of God, and to fit Himself for His last victory over Death.

While the King thus spent this day, the Ministers in the several Churches in
London, and in those parts of the Kingdom where His danger was known, were very
earnest in their Prayers to God for His Deliverance and Spiritual Assistance.
Some of them in their Sermons declared the horror of that sin that was about
to be committed, detested the Impiety of the Parricides, and denounced the
heavy Judgments which such a sinful Nation polluted with their Prince's blood
were to expect. The Congregations were dissolved into Tears. Some bewailed the
sad Condition of the King, as the effect of the Sins of the Nation. Others
cursed their damnable Credulity of the Slanders of that Just Man, and the
promises of Liberty by their Impostors. And another sort wept, because their
Fears did prognosticate those Miseries which the Issue of His blood would let
in upon them. And every one found matter of grief, fear, and indignation in the
loss of so Excellent a Prince. All countenances were full of sadness and
astonishment, there was no Tumults nor any Quiet, every one listening and
harkening, either as impatient to know the greatness of their Misery, or greedy
to receive some hopes of Comfort in their Sovereign's Safety; otherwise there
was a stilness like that which too strong Passions effect, and might be thought
a Stupidity rather than a Calmness.

The next day, being Jan. 29. the King was permitted the sight of His Children.
His conference and words with them was taken in writing and communicated to the
World by the Lady Elizabeth His Daughter, a Lady of most eminent Endowments;
who though born in the supremest Fortune, yet lived in continual Tears, the
passages of her Life being spent in beholding the Ruins of her Family, and the
Murder of her dear Father, whom she not long survived, but died in that
Confinement to which they had cheated His Majesty, in Carisbrook Castle in the
Isle of Wight.

While these things were done in public, the Conspirators meet in private in a
Committee, to appoint every one their part in this Tragedy, determine what
Gestures they were to affect, what Words they were to use, as also for the
manner, place and time of the Murder. In which Consultations, both now and
before the Sentence, each one, according to the bloodiness of his temperament,
or servilely to flatter Cromwell, by their Cruelty to Him that did obstruct his
Ambition, did propose several ways either of contempt or hatred in killing
their sentenced, yet anointed, Sovereign. Some would have His Head and Quarters
fastened upon Poles (as it is usual with Traitors) that the marks of their
Cruelty might out-last His Death. Others would have Him hanged, as they
punished Thieves and Murderers. Others gave their Vote that He should suffer
in His Royal Habiliments with His Crown, and in His Robes, that it might be a
Triumph of the Peoples power over Kings.

At last they think it sufficient that He should lose His Head by the stroke of
an Axe on a Scaffold near White Hall Gates before the Banqueting House, that so
from thence where He used to sit on His Throne, and show the Splendor of
Majesty, He might pass to His Grave; there parting with the Ensigns of Royalty,
and laying them down as Spoils, where He had before used them as the Ornaments
of Empire. Thus did they endeavor to make their Malice Ingenious, and provided
Triumphs for their revenge. And because they suspected, or were informed, that
as the King had not owned their Authority, so He would not submit to their
Execution, nor willingly stoop to the Block, they caused to be fastened in it
some Iron Staples and Rings, that by them with Cords they might draw Him down,
if He would not comply. But His prudent Meekness prevented this Inhumanity; and
He died disowning their Authority, though He could not escape their Power.

In the midst of these Preparations, they cause some Soldiers to offer to His
Majesty certain Articles and Conditions, to which if He would subscribe, they
promise Life, and the continuance of a precarious Empire: either out of a
Terror and Fear of the consequents of their Impieties; for the confidence of
contriving great Crimes is often turned into a solicitude when they come to be
acted: or out of Design to ruin His Conscience and Honor, together with His
mortal Life, if He should consent. But when one or two of them had been read to
Him, He refused to hear any more, saying, I will suffer a thousand deaths ere I
will so prostitute my Honor, or betray the Liberties of my People. Thus
mindful of Justice, He would not deface the Splendour of His former Virtues with
a too impotent desire of Life.

At last that Fatal Day, Jan. 30. approached: and that morning, a little before
His Death, the Conspirators ordered some of their Ministers, viz. Marshal, Nigh,
Caryl, Salway and Dell, to pray with Him, as they said, in order to His passage
out of this Life; but when these sent to let Him know the end of their coming,
He returned answer that He was busy: they sent a second time, and He replied
that He was at His Devotions: they importunately sent a third time, and my Lord
of London then desiring to know what answer he should give to satisfy them;
His Majesty then as unconcerned in their Ministry said, My Lord, you may give
them what answer you please, but I am resolved, that they who have so often and
so causelessly prayed against Me, shall not in this My Agony pray with Me, they
may pray for Me if they please. Therefore the King arming Himself with His own
Devotions in the Offices of the Church of England, in them found an unexpected
Comfort; for the Gospel for that Day being the History of the Passion of our
Savior, did by that Example strengthen the King to follow Jesus, and to take
up His Cross; and His Majesty was thankful for that Pattern. Being thus
confirmed by the Blood (for He took the Sacrament that Morning) and sufferings
of His LORD (whose Vicegerent He was) together with His own Innocence, against
the Terrors of Death, He was brought from St. James's through the Park to
White Hall, walking very fast, and with as cheerful a Countenance as if He were
going to Hunting, (a Recreation He was much pleased with,) often advising His
slow Guards to move faster, adding, I now go before you to strive for an
Heavenly Crown, with less solicitude than I formerly have led My Soldiers for
an Earthly Diadem. And being come to the end of the Park, He with much Alacrity
went up the Stairs leading to the long Gallery in White Hall, and so into the
Cabinet-Chamber, where He continued some time in Devotion, while they were
fitting the Theater of His Murder.

While these things were acting, the Lord Fairfax, who had always forborne any
public appearance in the practices of this Murder, had taken up (as is
credibly reported) some Resolutions, (either in abhorrency of the Crime, or by
the Solicitations of others) with his own Regiment, though none else should
follow him, to hinder the Execution. This being suspected or known, Cromwell,
Ireton and Harrison coming to him, after their usual way of deceiving,
endeavored to persuade him, that the LORD had rejected the King, and with such
like Language as they knew had formerly prevailed upon him, concealing that
they had that very morning signed the Warrant for the Assassination; they also
desired him with them to seek the LORD by Prayer, that they might know his mind
in the thing. Which he assenting to, Harrison was appointed for the Duty, and
by compact to draw out his profane and blasphemous Discourse to God in such a
length as might give time for the Execution, which they privately sent to their
Instruments to hasten; of which when they had notice that it was past, they
rose up, and persuaded the General that this was a full return of Prayer, and
God having so manifested his pleasure they were to acquiesce in it. There was
likewise another attempt made by Col. Downs, who had disturbed them in their
Court, to obstruct them in their Execution; for it is said, that he endeavored
to make a Mutiny in the Army to hinder the Wickedness, but the have of the
Assassinates prevented him.

While these men acted their Wickedness by Prayers, to the lasting reproach of
Christianity, the King, after He had sinished His Supplications, was through
the Banqueting House brought to the Scaffold, which was dressed to terror, for
it was all hung with Black, where were attending two Executioners in Disguises,
and the Axe and the Block prepared. But it prevailed not to affright Him whose
Soul was already panting after another Life. And therefore He entered this
ignominious and ghastly Theater with the same mind as He used to carry to His
Throne, showing no fear of death, but a Solicitude for those that should live
after Him. Looking about He saw diverse Companies of Horse and Foot so placed on
each side of the Street and about the Scaffold, that the People could not come
near Him, and those that saw could not be Hearers; therefore omitting that
Speech which it was probable He would have spoken to the People, He spoke to
the Officers, and those that were then about Him, that which is now printed
among His Works.

Having ended His Speech, He declared His Profession of Religion; and while He
was preparing for the Block, He expressed what were His Hopes (for all the
Righteous have such) in Death, saying, I have a good Cause and a Gracious God
on my side; I go from a Corruptible to an Incorruptible Crown, where no
disturbance can be, no disturbance in the world. After this composing Himself
to an Address to God, having His Eyes and Hands like forerunners lifted up to
Heaven, and expressing some short and private Ejaculations, He kneeled down
before the Block as at a Desk of Prayer, and meekly submitted His Crowned Head
to the pleasure of His God, to be profaned by the Axe of the disguised
Executioner: which was suddenly severed from His Body by one strong stroke. So
sell CHARLES the First, and with Him expired the Glory and Liberty of Three
Nations.

Thus the King finished His Martyrdom, but His Enemies not their Malice, who
extended their Cruelty beyond His Life, and abused the Headless Trunk. Some
washed their hands in the Royal Blood, others dipped their staves in it; and that
they might indulge their insatiate Covetousness as well as their boundless
Inhumanity, they sold the chips of the Block, and the sands that were
discolored with His Blood, and exposed His very Hairs to sale: which the
Spectators purchased for different uses. Some did it to preserve the Relics
of so Glorious a Prince, whom they so dearly loved. Others hoped that they
would be as means of Cure for that disease which our English Kings (through the
Indulgence of Heaven) by Their touch did usually heal: and it was reported that
these Relics experienced failed not of the effect. And some out of a brutish
malice would have them as spoils and trophies of their hatred to their Lawful
Sovereign. Cromwell, that he might feed his eyes with Cruelty, and satisfy his
sollicitous Ambition, which aspired at Monarchy when the Lawful King was
destroyed, curiously surveyed the murdered Carcass when it was brought in the
Coffin into White Hall, and to assure himself the King was quite dead, with his
singers searched the wound, whether the Head were fully severed from the body
or no.

Afterward they delivered the body to be unbowelled to an infamous Empirick of
the Faction, together with the rude Chirurgions of the Army (not permitting the
King's own Physicians to this Office) who were all most implacable enemies to
His Majesty, and commanded them to search (which was as much as to bid them so
report) whether they could not find in it Symptoms of the French disease, or
some evidences of Frigidity, and natural impotency: that so they might have
some color to slander Him who was eminent for Chastity; or to make His Seed
infamous. But this wicked design was prevented by a Physician of great
Integrity and Skill, who intruding himself among them at the Dissection, by his
Presence and Authority kept the obsequious Wretches from gratifying their
Opprobrious Masters. And the same Physician also published that Nature had
tempered the Royal Body to a longer life than commonly is granted to other men.
And as His Soul was fitted by Heroic Virtues to Eternity, so His Body by a
Temperament almost ad pondus made as near an approach to it as the present
Condition of Mortality would permit.

Failing in these Opportunities of Calumny, with more Impudence and Rancor they
use other ways to make Him odious, and raze the Love of Him out of the
People's hearts. They conclude from the outward unhappinesses of His Reign unto
an hatred of God against Him; and with the same Confidence as they enrolled
themselves in the List of the Saints, and entered their own names in the Book of
Life, they blotted His out, and placed Him in some of the dark and comfortless
Cells of the damned: and they commonly professed it among the Disciples of the
Faction as an Article of their belief, that it was impossible for Him or any of
His party to be saved.

Not content with these Injuries to His Body and Soul, they endeavor likewise
to murder His Memory. For they pulled down His Statue which was placed at the
West end of St. Paul's Church, and that other in the Old Exchange, and leaving
the Arch void, they writ over, Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus. But the Providence
of God has showed them to be not only deceivers, but also deceived. For that
Just Prince has of His own Seed to sit upon His Throne. And Posterity shall
wonder at the Vanity as well as the Falseness of those men, that they should
think to destroy the Memory of that Prince whose true and lasting Glory
consisted not in any thing wherein it was possible for Successors to show the
Power of their Malice, but in a solid Virtue, which flourishes by Age, and
whose Fame gathers strength from multitude of Years, when Statues and Monuments
are obnoxious to the flames of a Violent Envy, and the Ruins of Time.

Besides this, they take care to suppress all those more Lively figures of Him
and most lasting Statues, His Writings, and therefore force from My Lord of
London, whom they kept prisoner, all those Papers His Majesty had delivered to
him, and make a most narrow search of his Clothes and Cabinets, lest any of
those Monuments of Piety and Wisdom should escape to the Benefit of Mankind.
Yet by the gracious Goodness of the Almighty God, to their eternal infamy, and
for a perpetual Record of the King's great Virtues, there escaped their Search,
and was published to the World, The Book of His Meditations and Soliloquies. In
the Composition of which a Sober Reader cannot tell which to admire most,
either His incredible Prudence, His ardent Piety, or His Majestic and truly
Royal Style. Those parts of it which consisted of Addresses to God corresponded
so nearly in the Occasions, and were so full of the Piety and Elegancy of
David's Psalms, that they seemed to be dictated by the same Spirit.

His very Assassinates confessed the goodness of the Book, though they were
ashamed He whom they had murdered should be the Author. For Bradshaw in his
Examination of Royston who Printed it, asked him, How he could think so bad a
man (for such would that Monster have this Excellent Prince thought to be)
could write so good a Book. Therefore they labored by all ways and means to
suppress it, as the greatest witness against them to Posterity, and which would
make them odious in all Generations. For the Blood of the Holy, Wise and
Eloquent, leaves eternal stains of Infamy upon those that spilled it; because
no man reads their Works, but they curse those cruel hands which cut the veins
and stopped the streams of so much Goodness; and we esteem them barbarous and
inhumane Monsters who did not Reverence the Persons of those whose Writings we
admire.

But their fury became ridiculous, while they thought by their present power to
corrupt His Memory, and take off the admiration of the following Ages; for the
more they hindered the Publication, the more earnestly it was sought after: yet
they endeavored it another way, and therefore hired certain mercenary Souls to
despoil the King of the Credit of being the Author of it. Especially one base
Scribe, naturally fitted to compose Satyrs and invent Reproaches, who made
himself notorious by some licentious and infamous Pamphlets, and so approved
himself as fit for their service. This man they encouraged (by translating him
from a needy Pedagogue to the Office of a Secretary) to write that Scandalous
Book (...), (an Invective against the King's Meditations) and to answer the
learned Salmasius his Defense of Charles the First. But all was in vain, for
those that were able to judge of Styles found it must be the same Pen which
wrought these Meditations, and drew those Letters which the Faction had
published for His. Others, that were not able to satisfy themselves by such a
Censure, were assured of it by the Relations of Colonel Hammond that was His
Keeper, who did attest to several Persous that he saw them in the King's hand,
heard Him read them, and did see Him to correct them in his presence. The
Archbishop of Armagh did also affirm to those he conversed with, that he was
employed by a Command from the King to get some of them out of the hands of the
Faction, for they were taken in His Cabinet at Naseby. And Royston that Printed
them did testify to those that enquired of him, that the King had sent to him
the Michaelmas before His death; to provide a Press for some Papers He should
send to Him, which were these, together with a design for a Picture before the
Book; which at first was Three Crowns indented on a Wreath of Thorns, but
afterward the King recalled that, and sent that other which is now before His
Book. Thus these several Testimonies did secure the faith of the World against
the Slanderers, and made their endeavors as contemptible as themselves were
hateful.

While the Parricides were seeking for fresh Occasions to express their Malice,
the whole Kingdom was composed to Mourning and Lamentation; for never any King,
not only of the English, but of whatsoever Throne, had His death lamented with
greater Sorrows, nor left the World with a higher regret of the People. When
the news of His Death was divulged, Women with Child for grief cast forth the
untimely Fruit of their Womb, like Her that fell in Travel when the Glory was
departed from Israel. Others, both Men and Women, fell into Convulsions and
swounding Fits, and contracted so deep a Melancholy as attended them to the
Grave. Some unmindful of themselves, as though they could not, or would not,
live when their beloved Prince was slaughtered, (it is reported) suddenly fell
down dead. The Pulpits were likewise bedewed with unsuborned Tears; and some of
those to whom the living King was for Episcopacie's sake less acceptable, yet
now bewailed the loss of Him when dead. Children (who usually seem unconcerned
in public Calamities) were also affected with the news, and became so prodigal
of their Tears, that for some time they refused comfort; even some of those who
sat as Judges could not forbear to mingle some Tears with His Blood when it was
split. Many composed Elegies and serious Poems to preserve the memory of His
Virtues, to express their own Griefs, and to instruct the Mournings of others;
and their Passions made them above their usual Strain more elegant. Many who
writ the Acts of His time did vindicate His Honor, and divulged the base Arts
of His Enemies, even while their Power was dreadful.

Men of all Sorts, Degrees and Sects (there being none among which He had not
some Admirers) then freely and without Envy recounted His several Virtues,
which now appeared as great as Mortality refined by Industry was capable of.
For though Prosperity makes the Severest trials of Virtues, yet Adversity
renders them most Orient. As the night best acquaints us with the Splendour of
the Stars.

That which first challenged their Wonder, was the Composure and Inclination of
His Soul to Religion, His Majesty's Religion.
which He used not as an Artifice of Empire, but as the Ornament and Comfort of
a private breast; for He never affected a Magnifick Piety nor a Pompous Virtue,
but labored to approve Himself in secret to that God who rewards openly. All
His Offices in this were, like His Fortune, far above those of other men; His
Devotion in Prayer was so raised, that His Soul seemed to be wholly swallowed
up in the Contemplation of that Majesty He did adore, and as in an Ecstasie to
have left His senses without its Adsistency. An instance of this was given at
the Death of the Duke of Buckingham, the news of whose Murder being whispered
to the King while He was at Prayers, He took no notice of it (although it was
so weighty an Occurrence to have His prime Minister cut off in the busy
Preparations for a great Design) till He had finished His Addresses to Heaven,
and His Spirit was dismissed from the Throne of Grace to attend the Cares of
that on Earth. This was so clear an Evidence of a most fixed Devotion, that
those who built their Hopes upon His Reproaches, slanderously imputed it to a
secret Pleasure in the fall of him whose Greatness was now terrible to the
Family that raised it; which both His Majesty's care of the Duke's Children
afterward, as also the Consideration of His Condition, did evince to be false,
and that the King neither hated him, nor needed to fear him whom He could have
ruined with a Frown, and have obliged the People by permitting their fury to
pass upon him.

Besides, His Majesty's constant Diligence in those Duties did demonstrate,
that nothing but a Principle of Holiness, which is always uniform, both moved
and assisted Him in those sacred Performances, to which He was observed to go
with an exceeding Alacrity as to a ravishing pleasure, from which no lesser
Pleasures nor Business were strong enough for a Diversion. In the morning
before He went to Hunting (His beloved Sport) the Chaplains were before Day
called to their Ministry: and when He was at Brainford among the Noise of
Arms, and near the Assaults of His Enemies, He caused the Divine that then
waited to perform his accustomed Service, before He provided for Safety, or
attempted at Victory; and would first gain upon the Love of Heaven, and then
afterward repel the Malice of men. Those that were appointed by the
Parliament to attend Him in His Restraints wondered at His constant Devotions in
His Closet; and no Artifice of the Army was so likely to abuse Him to a
Credulity of their good Intentions, as the Permission of the Ministry of His
Chaplains in the Worship of God, a mercy He valued, to some of His Servants,
above that of enjoying Wife and Children.

At Sermons He carried Himself with such a Reverence and Attention (that His
Enemies which hated, yet did even admire Him in it,) as if He were expecting
new Instructions for Government from that God whose Deputy He was, or a new
Charter for a larger Empire: and He was so careful not to neglect any of those
Exercises, that if on Tuesday mornings, on which Days there used to be Sermons
at Court, He were at any distance from thence, He would ride hard to be present
at the beginnings of them.

When the State of His Soul required, He was as ready to perform those more
severe parts of Religion which seem most distastful to Flesh and Blood. And he
never refused to take to Himself the shame of those acts wherein He had
transgressed, that He might give Glory to His God. For after the Army had
forced Him from Holmeby, and in their several removes had brought Him to
Latmas, an house of the Earl of Devonshire, on Aug. 1. being Sunday, in the
morning before Sermon He led forth with Him into the Garden the Reverend Dr.
Sheldon (who then attended on Him, and whom He was pleased to use as His
Confessor) and drawing out of His pocket a Paper, commanded him to read it,
transcribe it, and so to deliver it to Him again. This Paper contained several
Vows, which He had obliged His Soul unto for the Glory of His Maker, the
advance of true Piety, and the emolument of the Church. And among them this was
one, that He would do Public Penance for the Injustice He had suffered to be
done to the Earl of Strafford, His consent to those Injuries that were done to
the Church of England (though at that time He had yielded to no more than the
taking away of the High Commission, and the Bishops power to Vote in
Parliament) and to the Church of Scotland: and adjured the Doctor, that if ever
he saw Him in a Condition to observe that or any of those Vows, he should
solicitously mind Him of the Obligations, as he dreaded the guilt of the breach
should lie upon his own Soul. This voluntary submission to the Laws of
Christianity exceeded that so memorable humiliation of the good Emperor
Theodosius, for he never bewailed the blood of those seven thousand men which
in three hours space he caused to be spilt at Thessalonica, till the resolution
of St. Ambrose made him sensible of the Crime. But the Piety of King Charles
anticipated the severity of a Confessor for those offenses to which He had been
precipitated by the Violence of others.

This Zeal and Piety proceeded from the Dedication of His whole Soul to the
Honor of His God, for Religion was as Imperial in the Intellectual as in the
Affectionate Faculties of it. The Profession of the Church of England was His
not so much by Education, as Choice, and He so well understood the Grounds of
it, that He valued them above all other Pretensions to Truth, and was able to
maintain it against all its Adversaries. His Discourse with Henderson shows how
just a Reverence He had for the Authority of the Catholic Church, against the
Pride and Ignorance of Schismatics; yet not to prostitute His Faith to the
Adulterations of the Roman Infallibility and Traditions.

Nevertheless the most violent Slanders the Faction labored to pollute Him
with, were those that rendered Him inclinable to Popery. From which He was so
averse, that He could not forbear in His indearments to the Queen, (when He
committed a secret to Her Breast which He would not trust to any other, and
when He admired and applauded Her affectionate Cares for His Honor and Safety)
in a Letter, which He thought no Eye but Hers should have perused, to let Her
know that He still differed from Her in Religion; for He says, It is the only
thing of Difference in Opinion betwixt Us. Malice made the Slanderers blind,
and they published this Letter to the World, than which there could not be a
greater Evidence imaginable of the King's most secret Thoughts, and Inward
Sincerity, nor a more shameful Conviction of their Impudence and damnable
Falsehood. Nor did He only tell the Queen so, but He made Her see it in His
Actions. For as soon as His Children were born, it was His first Care to
prevent the Satisfaction of their Mother in baptizing them after the Rites of
Her own Church. When He was to Die, a time most seasonable to speak Truth,
especially by Him who all His Life knew not how to Dissemble, He declares His
Profession in Religion to be the same with that which He found left by His
Father King James.

How little the Papists credited what the Faction would have the World believe,
was too evident by the Conspiracies of their Fathers against His Life and
Honor, which the Discovery of Habernefield (to whose relations the following
practices against Him and the Church of England gained a belief) brought to
light. They were mingled likewise among the Conspirators, and both heated and
directed their Fury against Him. They were as importunate in their Calumnies of
Him, even after His Death, as were the vilest of the Sectaries; which they had
never done, could they have imagined Him to be theirs; for His Blood would in
their Calendar have out-shined the Multitude of their fictitious Saints. For
His sake they continued their hatred to His Family, abetted the Usurpations of
the following Tyrant, by imposing upon the World new Rules of Obedience and
Government, invented fresh Calumnies for the Son, and obstructed by various
Methods His return to the Principality, because He was Heir as well of the
Faith as of the Throne of His Father. Although this Honor is not to be denied
to many Gallant Persons of that persuasion, that their Loyalty was not so
corrupted by their Faith to Rome, but that they labored to prevent the
Father's Overthrow, and to hasten the Son's Restitution.

He was not satisfied in being Religious as a particular Christian, but would
be so as a King, and endeavored that Piety might be as Universal as His
Empire. This He assaied by giving Ornaments and Assistances to the External
Exercise and Parts of it, (which is the proper Province of a Magistrate, whose
Power reaches but to the Outward man) that so carnal minds if they were not
brought to an Obedience, might yet to a Reverence, and if men would not honor,
yet they should not despise Religion. This He did in taking Care for the Place
of Worship, that Comeliness and Decency should be there conspicuous where the
God of Order was to be adored. And it was a Royal Undertaking to restore St.
Paul's Church to its primitive strength, and give it a beauty as magnificent as
its Structure. He taught men not to contemn the Dispensers of the Gospel,
because He had so great an esteem for them, admitting some to His nearest
Confidence and most Private Counsels, as the Archbishop of Canterbury; and the
greatest Place of Trust, as the Bishop of London to the Treasury: consulting at
once the Emolument of Religion, whose Dictates are more powerfully impressed
when the Minister is honored by the Magistrate; and the Benefit of the State,
which wise Princes had before found none to seek more faithfully, if any did
more prudently, than Churchmen.

Though a Voluntary Poverty did much contribute to the luster and increase of
the Church in the Purer times, yet a necessitated would have destroyed it in a
Corrupt age; therefore the King, to obstruct all access of Ruin that way,
secured her Patrimony, and recovered as much as He could out of the Jaws of
Sacrilege, which together with time had devoured a great part of it. His
endeavors this way were so strong, that the Faction in Scotland found no
Artifice able to divert them but by kindling the flame of a Civil War; the
Criminals there seeking to adjust their Sacrilegious Acquisitions by Rebellious
practices, and to destroy that Church by force which His Majesty would not
suffer them to torture with Famine. In Ireland the Lord Lieutenant Wentworth,
by His Command and Instructions, retrived very great Possessions, which the
tumults of that Nation had advantaged many greedy Persons to seize upon, and
would not suffer Sedition to be encouraged with the hopes of Impiety. In
England He countenanced those just Pleas which Oppressed Incumbents entered
against Rapacious Patrons; and this way many Curates were put into a Condition
of giving Hospitality, who before were contemptible in their Ministry, because
they were so in their Fortune. His Enemies knew how Inviolable was the Faith of
His Majesty in this, and therefore pressed Him with nothing more to obstruct
Peace than the Alienation of Church Lands, rather than which He did abandon His
Life, and parted sooner with His Blood than them. He used to say, Though I am
sensible enough of the Dangers that attend My Care of the Church, yet I am
resolved to defend it or make it My Tombstone, (alluding to a Story which He
would tell of a Generous Captain, that said so of a Castle that was committed
to His trust.) He had so perfect a Detestation of that Crime, that it is said
He scarce ever mentioned Henry the 8. without an Abhorrency of His Sacrilege.
He neglected the Advices of His own Party, if they were negligent of the
Welfare of the Church.

Those Concessions He had made in Scotland to the prejudice of the Church
there, were the subject of His grief and penitential Confessions both before
God (as appears in His Prayers) and men. For when the Reverend Dr. Morley, now
Lord Bishop of Winchester, (whom He had sent for to the Treaty in the Isle of
Wight, where he employed his diligence and prudence to search into the
Intrigues and Reserves of the Commissioners) had acquainted Him how the
Commissioners were the more pertinacious for the abolishing of Episcopacy here,
because His Majesty had consented to it in Scotland, and withal told Him what
answer he himself had made to them, That perchance the King was abused to those
grants by a misinformation that that Act which was made in King James 's
Minority against Bishops was yet unrepealed, and that His Concession would but
leave them where the Law had; The King Answered, It is true, I was told so, but
whenever you hear that urged again, give them this answer, and say, that you
had it from the King Himself; That when I did that in Scotland, I sinned
against My Conscience, and that I have often repented of it, and hope that God
has forgiven Me that great Sin, and by God's grace for no Consideration in the
World will I ever do so again.

He was careful of Uniformity, both because He knew the Power of Just and
Lawful Princes consisted in the Union of their Subjects, who never are cemented
stronger than by a Unity in Religion; but Tyrants, who measure their greatness
by the weakness of their Vassals, work that most effectually by caressing
Schisms, and giving a License to different Persuasions (as the Usurpers
afterward did:) Besides, He saw there was no greater Impediment to a sincere
Piety, because that Time and those Parts which might improve Godliness to a
Growth, were all Wasted and Corrupted in Malice and Slanders betwixt the
Dissenters about forms. He was more tender in preserving the Truths of
Christianity than the Rights of His Throne. For when the Commissioners of the
Two Houses in the Isle of Wight importunately pressed Him for a Confirmation of
the Lesser Catechism which the Assembly at Westminster had composed, and used
this motive, because it was a small matter; He answered, Though it seem to you
a small thing, it is not so to Me: I had rather give you one of the Flowers of
My Crown, than permit your Children to be corrupted in the least point of their
Religion. Thus though He could not infuse Spiritual Graces into the minds of
His Subjects, yet He would manage their Reason by Pious Arts; and what the
Example of a King (which through the Corruptions of men is more efficacious to
Impiety than to Virtue) could not do, that His Law should, and He would
restrain those Vices which He could not extirpate.

Religion was never used by Him to veil Injustice; for this was peculiar to His
Adversaries, His Justice.
who when they were plotting such acts as Hell would blush at, they would fawn
and smile on Heaven; and they used it as those subtle Surprisers in War, who
wear their Enemies Colors till they be admitted to butcher them within their
own Fortresses. But His Majesty consulted the Peace of His Conscience not only
in Piety to God, but also in Justice to Men. He was, as a Magistrate should be,
a speaking Law. It was His usual saying, Let Me stand or fall by My own
Counsels. I will ever, with Job, rather choose Misery than Sin. He first
submitted His Counsels to the Censure of the Lawyers before they were brought
forth to Execution. Those Acts of which the Faction made most noise, were
delivered by the Judges to be within the Sphere of the Prerogative. The causes
of the Revenue were as freely debated as private Pleas, and sometimes decreed
to be not good; which can never happen under a bad Prince. The Justice of His
Times showed that of His Breast, wherein the Laws were feared and not Men. None
were forced to purchase their Liberty with the diminution of their Estates, or
the loss of their Credit. Every one had both security and safety for His Life,
Fortune, and Dignity; and it was not then thought, as afterward, to be a part
of Wisdom to provide against Dangers by obscurity and Privacies. His Favors in
bestowing Great Offices never secured the Receivers from the force of the Law,
but Equity overcame His Indulgences. For He knew that Unjust Princes become
Odious to them that made them so. He submitted the Lord Keeper Coventrey to an
Examination when a querulous person had accused him of Bribery. He sharply
reproved one whom He had made Lord Treasurer, when he was petitioned against by
an Hampshire Knight, on whose Estate, being held by Lease from the Crown, that
Treasurer had a design; and He secured the Petitioner in his Right. The
greatest Officer of His Court did not dare to do any the least of those
injuries which the most Contemptible Member of the House of Commons would with
a daily Insolency act upon His weaker Neighbor. In the Civil Discords He
bewailed nothing more, than that the Sword of Justice could not correct the
illegal Furies of that of War. Though by His Concessions and Grants He
diminished His Power, yet He thought it a Compensation, to let the World see He
was willing to make it impossible for Monarchy to have an unjust Instrument,
and to secure Posterity from Evil Kings. Although He proved to a Leading Lord
of the Faction, That a People being too cautious to bind their King by Laws
from doing Ill, do likewise fetter Him from doing Good, and their fears of
Mischief do destroy their hopes of Benefit. And that such is the weakness of
Humanity, that he which is entrusted only to Good, may pervert that Power to
the extremest Ills. And indeed there is no security for a Community to feel
nothing in Government besides the Advantages of it, but in the Benignity of
Providence, and the Justice of the Prince, both which we enjoyed while we
enjoyed Him.

Though He was thus in Love with Justice, yet He suffered not that to leven His
Nature to Severity and Rigor, His Clemency.
but tempered it with Clemency, especially when His Goodness could possibly
find out such an Interpretation for the Offense, that it struck more at His
Peculiar than the Public Interest. He seemed almost stupid in the Opinion of
Choleric Spirits as to a sense of His own Injuries, when there was no fear
lest His Mercy should thereby increase the Miseries of His People. And He was
so ambitious of the Glory of Moderation, that He would acquire it it in
despite of the Malignity of the times. For the Exercise of this Virtue depends
not only on the temper of the Prince, but the frame of the People must
contribute to it; because when the Reverence of Majesty and fear of the Laws
are proscribed, sharper Methods are required to form Obedience. Yet He was
unwilling to cut off, till He had tried by Mercy to amend, even guilty Souls.
Thus He strove to oblige the Lord Balmerino to peaceful practices, by
continuing that Life which had been employed in Sedition, and forfeited to the
Law.

Soon after His coming into the Isle of Wight (by which time He had experienced
the numerous Frauds and implacable Malice of His Enemies) being attended on by
Dr. Sheldon and Dr. Hammond (for they were the earliest in their Duties at that
time) a Discourse passed betwixt His Majesty and the Governor, wherein there
was mention made of the fears of the Faction that the King could never forgive
them. To which the King immediately replies, I tell thee, Governor, I can
forgive them with as good an appetite as ever I eat My Dinner after an hunting,
and that I assure you was not a small one; yet I will not make My self a better
Christian than I am, for I think if they were Kings I could not do it so
easily. This showed how prone His Soul was to Mercy, and found not any
obstruction but what arose from a sense of Royal Magnanimity.

He sooner offered and gave life to His captive Enemies than their Spirits
debauched by Rebellion would require it, and He was sparing of that blood of
which their fury made them Prodigal. No man fell in battle whom He could save.
He chose rather to enjoy any Victory by Peace (and therefore continually
solicited for it when He seemed least to need it) than make one triumph a step
to another; and though He was passionate to put all in Safety, yet He affected
rather to end the War by Treaty than by Conquest. The Prisoners He took He used
like deluded men, and oftener remembered that God had made them His Subjects,
than that the Faction had transformed them to Rebels. He provided for them
while in His Power, and not to let them languish in Prison, sent them by Passes
to their own homes, only engaging them by Oath to no more injuries against that
Sovereign whom they had felt to be Gracious: for so He used those that were
taken at Brainford. But yet the Casuists of the Cause would soon dispense with
their Faith, and send them forth to die in contracting a new guilt. Those whom
the fury of War had left gasping in the Field; and fainting under their wounds,
He commends in His Warrants, (as in that to the Major of Newbury) to the care
of the Neighborhood, either tenderly to recover, or decently bury: and His
Commands were as well for those that sought to murder Him as those that were
wounded in His Defense.

This made the Impudence and Falsehood of Bradshaw more portentous, when in his
Speech of the Assassination he belched out those Comparisons of Caligula and
Nero: the first would kill numbers of Senators to make himself Sport, and the
last thought it just enough that Paetus Thraseas should die, because he looked
like a Schoolmaster. But this Prince's Anger was without Danger to any, His
Admonitions were frequent, Corrections seldom, but Revenge never. He grieved
when His Pity had not Power or Skill to save Offenders, and then He punished
the bad, but yet gave them space to repent, and make their Execution as near as
He could like a natural Death, to translate them from hence to a place where
they could not Sin. He had nothing of the Beast in Him, which Machiavel
requires in such Princes as make Success the only end of their Counsels, and
consult a prosperous Grandeur more than an unspotted Conscience. He scorned to
abuse the Character of God upon Him by turning a Fox to dissemble, and abhorred
to think that He whom Heaven had made above other men should degenerate to the
Cruelty of a Lion. He sooner parted with Mortality than Mercy; for He ended His
days with a Prayer for His Enemies, and labored to make His Clemency
immortal, by commanding the practice of it to His Son.

None of His Virtues were in the Confines of Vice, and therefore this Admirable
Clemency proceeded not from a defect of Spirit, as His Detractors imputed it,
His Fortitude.
and the Vulgar, who mistake Cruelty for Valor, imagined; but like the Bowels
of the Supremest Mercy which are incircled with an Infinite Power, so this Pity
to guilty and frail men was attended with an Incomparable Fortitude. For this
Virtue consisting in despising Dangers and Enemies in those Causes that render
Death comely and glorious, the King gave several Evidences of a Contempt of all
Power beneath that of Heaven. When the Lord Rey first acquainted Him with the
Conspiracy of Ramsey and Hamilton, He was upon a Remove to Theobalds, where the
Marquess was to wait upon Him as Gentleman of the Bedchamber; who having some
notice given him of the Discovery, besought His Majesty to spare his attendance
till he could clear his innocence, and return the Treason upon the Accuser. The
King answered, that He would therefore make him wait, to let him see He did as
little fear his strength as distrust his Loyalty; for He knew he durst not
attempt His Life because He was resolved to sell it so dear. And to make good
His Confidence, He made him ride alone with Him in His Coach to Theobalds, and
lie in His Chamber that Night: while the sollicitous Court admired, and even
censured, His Magnanimity, for it went beyond His pattern, and did more than
that Emperor who was styled the Delight of Mankind, who being informed of a
Conspiracy against him, invited the two Chiefs of it to accompany him to the
Spectacula, and caused them both to sit next on each side to him in the
Theater; and to give them more advantage for their design, put the swords of
the Gladiators (under color of enquiring their judgments concerning their
sharpness) into their hands, to show how little dread he had of their fury. But
the British Prince's Magnanimity exceeded that of the Excellent Roman's, as
much as the privacies of a Bedchamber, and the darkness of Night make up a
fitter Scene for the Assassination of a beloved Sovereign than a public
Theater.

As He never provoked War, so He never feared it; and when the miserable
Necessity lay upon Him to take up Arms to preserve Himself from an unjust
Violence, He showed as much if not more Valor than those can boast of that
with equal force finished Wars with Conquest: in the success of these, Fortune,
the Vanity of an Enemy, and the assistances of Friends may challenge a part of
the Praise, but in that none but His own brave Soul had the Glory. For to
attempt at Victory against an Enemy that had almost more Forts and Garrisons
than He had Families to join with Him, that with Cannon out-vied the Number of
His Muskets, that had gotten from Him a Navy which His Care had made the most
formidable in the World, and not left Him the command of a Cock-boat, that were
prodigal with the Treasure of a Nation and His Revenues, when He begged for a
subsistence; was such a Courage that would have made that Senate of Gallant
Persons, who were the most competent Judges of Valor, and never censured
Virtue by the Success, but thanked their Imprudent Consul for not despairing of
the Commonwealth, when he gathered up those broken Legions which his Rashness
had obtruded to an Overthrow, to have decreed a Triumph for CHARLES, had His
life been an Honor to that Age, or could those Generations have reckoned Him
among their great Examples. Most men indeed thought the King's side most
glorious, yet they concluded the other more terrible: those that minded their
Duty were in the Royal Camp, but such as cared for Safety took part with the
Faction, or at least did not oppose them. As He first entered the War, so did He
continue in it. His Moderation always moved Him to desire Peace, and His
Fortitude made them sometimes sue for it. His Adversaries never prevailed upon
His Fears, but upon the Treachery and Covetousness of some of His Party, who
could not endure an Honorable Want: and on such their Gold was stronger than
their Iron on Him, and He was rather Betrayed than Overcome.

His Greatness of Mind forsook Him not with His Fortune, Arms and Liberty, it
being Natural, and not built upon them; this made Him tenacious of Majesty when
His Power was gone. For when Whaley, that had the Command of the Guards upon
Him while He was in the Army, insolently intruded into His Presence to hear His
Discourse with a Foreign Minister of State, and being bold in his Power and
Office, refused to obey the Command for a greater Distance, the King caned him
to an Observance. When the Parricides sent their party of Soldiers to force Him
from the Isle of Wight to the Slaughter, Cobbet that commanded them thrust
himself into the Coach with Him: but the King sensible that the nearness of
such a Villain was like a Contagion to Majesty, with His Hand forced him away
to herd among his bloody fellows. His Spirit always kept above the barbarous
Malice of His Enemies, and of their rudest Injuries would seem unsensible. He
told a faithful Servant of His, that the Conspirators had kept Him for two
Months under a want of Linen and Shirts: But (said He) I scorned to give them
that pleasure as to tell them I wanted. Thus all the strokes of Fortune upon
His Magnanimous Soul were but like the breaking of Waves upon a Rock of
Diamonds, which cannot shake, but only wash it to a greater Brightness.

But though He knew not how to submit to the Power of Men, His Patience.
yet He would tremble under the Frowns of God. His great Spirit made Him not
unquiet or furious under the Corrections of the Almighty: But with a wonderful
Patience (a Virtue not usual with Kings, to whom the bounds of Equity seem a
restraint, and therefore are more restless in Injuries) He did submit to the
Will of His eternal Sovereign. He never murmured nor repined at that Providence
which had given Him plenty of tears to drink: But His Meditations still breath
the Justice of God and the Holiness of all His ways with Him. He would take
Occasions from displeasing Occurrences to thank God that had sitted Him for the
Condition he had brought Him unto. For when He marched after His Carriage in
pursuit of Essex into the West, one of them broke in a very narrow Lane, which
made Him stop till an intolerable Shower of Rain came pouring upon Him; from
which that He might seek for a Shelter in the Neighboring Village, His
Courtiers offered to hew Him out a way through the Hedge with their Swords, but
He refused: and when they wondered at it, He lifting up His hat and Eyes to
worship the Fountain of All Grace, said, As God has given me Afflictions to
exercise My Patience, so He has given me Patience to bear My Afflictions. The
Indignity He received from Hotham provoked no Curse from Him, nor could the
Injuries from Scotch and English move Him to any thing more than Prayers for
God's sanctifying them to Him. He wanted not Temptations to Passion from His
own Party; for in a Letter to the Queen, He tells Her that She could not but
Pity Him in His Condition as to them: yet He so managed their several Humors,
and so cherished their Expectations with Patience and Meekness, that they
quietly waited for a return of His Fortune.

When He was in His Captivity at Carisbrook under the strictest Restraint,
those that attended Him never almost observed Him but cheerful and pleasant in
His Discourses, and sometimes breaking out into pleasing Reparties and Jests.
When in the Treaty at Newport, (where He had occasions of Passion daily
administered by the Perverseness to Peace of the Party He was to deal with) one
of the Commissioners was importunate with Him for more Concessions, and minded
Him of His saying, That if there were another Treaty, it should not lie in the
power of the Devil's Malice to hinder Peace: the King answered, It would be so
when there was a Treaty, but as for this it could not be thought a Treaty, but
He was like the man in the Play, that cried out he had been in a Fray, and when
they asked him what Fray, he replied there was a Fray and no Fray, for there
were but three blows given, and he took them all: So this is a Treaty and not a
Treaty, for there be many Concessions, but I have made them all. Another time,
when He met one of the Presbyterian Ministers near His Chamber enquiring for
Captain Titus, (who then waited on Him, and had been faithful to Him in that
Service) the King told him, He wondered he would have any more to do either with
Titus or Timothy, since he fared so ill in meddling with them in his Disputes
about Episcopacy the day before. These showed how free His Soul was, and
uncontrolled in the greatest and most displeasing perplexities.

He would never take any indirect courses to avoid the Cross, nay, He scrupled
at such expedients as some deemed most conducing to His great end. For at the
Treaty in the Isle of Wight there being offered to Him an expedient, to secure
His Conscience and satisfy the Commissioners in the Propositions about the
Church, and it being urged by a great and faithful Counselor, that He must
grant what possibly He could to preserve His own Life for the good of the
Church, for (it was said) her safety depended on His; with a present and pious
indignation He replied, Tell not Me what I should do for saving of My Life, but
what I may do with a safe Conscience: God forbid that the Life or Safety of the
Church should depend upon My Life, or upon the Life of any mortal man; and I
thank God I have a Son whom I have reason to believe will love the Church as
well as I do. Another time, a little after the Treaty was ended, Dr. Morley
showing to Him a billet he had received by the Lady Wheeler the King's
Laundress (who often conveyed much Intelligence) from an Officer of the Army,
that the King's Death was resolved on; His Majesty answered, I have done what I
can to save My Life without losing of my Soul. I can do, I will do no more:
God's will be done.

In the Pomp of His Murder, wherein He was made a Spectacle to the World,
Angels and Men, no Trials were ever greater, nor ever were any better born: the
Parricides found it was easy to take away His Life, but impossible His Honor
and Patience; His Passions being then so low and quiet, that the natural
Insirmity of His Speech did not in the least measure appear, which uses to be
most evident in the smallest discomposure of the Spirit. After the Regicides
had passed their Decree for His Assassination, and caused Him to be persecuted
with all the Indignities of the fanatic Soldiers, there fell from Him nothing
like Passion or Indignation, but that He gave the Authors of those Impieties
the title that was due to them: for when my Lord of London came to Him, (which
was not till eight a Clock on Saturday Night,) He told him, My Lord, that you
came no sooner I believe was not your fault; but now you are come, because
these Rogues pursue My Blood, you and I must consult how I may best part with
it. Yet even this was spoken without any Fury or Violence; for though all about
Him was tumultuous with Horror, Destruction and Contempt, His Soul seemed
unconcerned, enjoyed a Calm Serenity, and was full of its own Majesty. This
Virtue made Him forget He was a Prince born to Command, and only consider that
He was a Christian whose Calling obliges to Suffer.

He had found out a way to Glory by Humility. For the supreme Power, to which
nothing can be added, His Humility.
has no better way to increase, than when secured of its own Greatness it
humbles it self. And the Dignity of Princes is in nothing farther from Envy
and Danger than in Humility. He despised the converse of none, though poor, if
honest: He showed to Sir Philip Warwick (who had much of His Trust and
Affections) in the Isle of Wight, a poor ragged Old Man, and told him he was a
very honest fellow, and had been His best Company for two months together. He
would have those about Him converse rather with Himself than with His Majesty,
and with them would He mingle Discourses as One of the People: none made an end
of speaking till His own Modesty, not Pride in the King, thought it was enough:
and He never did contradict any man without this mollifying Preface, By your
favor, Sir. His discourse as it was familiar, so it was directed to raise
those that heard it to a nearer approach to Himself by perfection; for He did
not proudly scoff at, but gently labored to mend the defects of His Subjects.
When Doctor Hammond had in some degree lost the Manage of His Voice, His
Majesty showed him his Infirmity, and taught him to amend it; which that
Excellent Person often mentioned as an instance of a Gracious Condescension of
Majesty. When Noble Youths came to take their leaves of Him before they went to
foreign travel, He would not let them go without His Instructions, of which
this was one, My Lord, Keep always the best Company, and be sure never to be
Idle. Thus He would confer the Virtues as well as the Titles of Nobility, He
labored to keep them as Majesty had made them, and that that blood might not
be tainted in them which was honored in their Ancestors. Nor did He desire
that they should be otherwise than He directed, as Tyrants and weak Princes
will commend those Virtues which they are afraid of, for they dread or envy
their Subjects Parts and Abilities. Aristotle observes that a Tyrant cares not
to hear his Vassals speak any thing that is either Grave or Generous; and it is
reckoned among the Usurpations of such Monsters, that they would have the
opinion to be the Only Wise and Gallant. Plato endangered his Life when he
conversed with the Sicilian Tyrant, because he was thought to understand more
than his Host. It was observed of Cromwell, (by one of his confident Teachers)
that in the time of his Tyranny he loved no man that spoke Sense, and had
several Artisices to disparage it among his Slaves that attended him; and he
would highly extol those Pulpit-Speakers that had most Canting and least
Reason. But the King thought it the Honor of Principality to rule over
Excellent persons, and affected to be Great only by being Better; and to raise
their Spirits would stoop with His own.

Of these He always chose the most accomplished that He knew, to be His
Ministers of State and closest Confidents: His Choice of Ministers of State.
for as the fortune of Princes stands in need of many Friends, which are the
surest supports of Empire; so He would always seek the Best, and those He
thought fittest for His Employments, which a bad or weak King would hate or
fear. Therefore He had always the finest Pens and ablest Heads in His Cause,
and Persons likewise of Integrity in His Service: for the Archbishop and Earl
of Strafford, that were clamoured against as the greatest Criminals, were not
guilty enough, even by those accusations which they were loaded with, and yet
not proved, to receive the Censure of the Law, but were to be condemned in an
unaccustomed way of spilling English blood. When some discovered their
Abilities even by opposing His Counsels, He preferred the Public Benefit which
might be by their Endowments to His private Injuries; He would either buy them
off to His Service by some Place of Trust, or win them to His Friendship;
unless He saw them to be such whose Natures were corrupted by their Designs,
(for He had a most excellent Sagacity in discerning the Spirits of men) or they
were such who polluted their parts by prostituting Religion to some base ends
(the injuries of which He could never neglect:) and such He neither conceived
Honorable in a Court, nor hoped they would ever be faithful and quiet in a
Community. Among these Purchases were reckoned the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
the Lord Falkland, and others now living, whose Perfections honored His
Judgment, and justified His Choice.

He had no Favorite, as a Minister of Pleasures, His Assection to His People.
to gratisie whose Lusts and Vanities He might be solicited to do things
contrary to the benefit of the Community; but all were Instruments of
Government, and must be able to serve the Public, whom He took to serve
Himself. For no Prince was ever more assectionate of His People than He was,
nor did He think His Interest separate from theirs. Those nice distinctions,
and cautious limits of Prerogative and Liberty which the Faction invented to
enjealous the People with, were all indistinctly comprised by Him in an Uniform
and Constant care of a just Government: none dared to advise Him to attempt at
a power His Predecessors had parted with, or the Laws had concluded Him from.
For He told the Lords, when He purged the Earl of Strafford from the Accusation
of Sir Henry Vane, (that he had advised His Majesty to make use of some Irish
to reduce this Kingdom; on which, though it had but a single and various
testimony, the Faction built their Practices against His Life) I think no body
durst ever be so impudent as to move Me to it, for if they had, I should have
made them such an Example, and put such a mark upon them, that all Posterity
should know My Intentions by it. For My Intention was ever to govern by the
Law, and not otherwise. He thought He could not be happy unless His People were
so; as we found our selves miserable when He was not prosperous. Therefore He
parted with so much of His Prerogative to buy our Peace, and purchase our
Content. He sought their Love by affecting them, the only way of gaining it,
because that Passion only is free and impatient of Command. Nor was He ever
more pleased than in the enjoyment of it: When His Third Parliament granted
five Subsidies, and it was told Him that there was not One Voice dissenting, it
is said, He wept for joy; and it had been happy for the People, if the King had
always had such cause of Tears, and His Eyes had been always wet with the
same.

Contests for Liberty could never have been more unseasonable than under this
Prince, for He never denied His Subjects the removal of any just Grievance,
yea, He parted sometimes, through their own importunity deluded by the Faction,
with that which should have kept them Free: And when He made such Concessions
which tended to the prejudice of those that desired it, He would say to some
about Him, that He would never have granted these things, but that He hoped
they would see the Inconvenience of that power which they begged from Him, yet
themselves could not manage, and return it to its proper place, before it
became their Ruin. He was far from the ambition of Ill Princes to seek an
unlimited power; but He thought it the Office of the best Sovereign to set
bounds to Liberty. He despised His Life if it were to be bought by the Misery
of the Nation, and therefore rejected the Propositions of the Army as the
Conditions of His Safety, when tendered to Him the day before His Murder,
because they would inslave the People. Neither would He expose particular
persons to an evident and inevitable danger, though it were to secure Himself:
for when my Lord Newburgh and his Noble Lady, at whose house in Bagshot He did
stay as He was removed from Carisbrook to Windsor, proposed to Him a way to
escape from that bloody Guard that hurried Him to the Slaughter, He rejected
it, saying, If I should get away, they would cut you in Pieces; and therefore
would not try their design, though it seemed feasible.

With these Arts He did seek to oblige the Community; but the Faction's
Slanders hindered the Success: His Obliging Converse.
which they the more easily obstructed, because the King never affected
Popularity, for that consists in an industrious pleasing of the People in
minute and ordinary Circumstances; but He always endeavored by a solid Virtue
their real Happiness, and therefore in confidence of that neglected a specious
Compliance with the less beneficial humors of the Vulgar: so that the
Multitude, who are taken with things of the lightest consideration, could not
sufficiently value Him, being not able to apprehend His worth: for a Statist
observes, Moderate Princes are always admired, but Heroic are never
understood. On particular Persons (if not the sworn Creatures of the
Conspirators, and by Treason made inhumane) He seldom failed by conversing to
take them. His Trophies in this kind, even when He was despoiled of means to
bribe their hopes, were innumerable; and those that engaged against Him ere
they knew Him, after their knowledge of Him did curse their Credulity and their
prosperous Arms. A clear instance of this (to mention no more) was in Master
Vines, one of the Presbyterian Ministe^^ who are conceived to be too tenacious
of a prejudice against those that dislike their Government) that were sent to
dispute against Episcopacy: for he admiring the Abilities of the King which He
manifested in asserting of it, professed to Master Buroughs, (one whose
Attendance the King required, and found him faithful to the extremest dangers
in those enterprises in which he several times engaged for His Safety,) how he
had been deluded to unworthy thoughts of the King, but was now convinced to an
exceeding Reverence of Him, and hoped so of others; and earnestly solicited
those that attended on Him, to use all means to rescue Him from the intended
Villainy of the Army; saying, Our Happiness was great in such a Prince; and our
Misery in the Loss of Him would be unspeakable. Yet He never courted, although
He won them, but His passage to their hearts was through their brain, and they
first Admired and then Loved Him.

As He was powerful to gain, so He was careful to keep Friends. His Fidelity.
Fidelity to the Public and Private was His chiefest Care; for He knew how
necessary it is for Princes to be faithful, because it is so much their
Interest that others should not be false. Though it is a Mystery of Empire with
other Kings to proportion their Faith to their Advantage, yet He abhorred to
promise any thing which He could not Religiously observe. Some over-sine
Politici would have had Him grant all the Desires of the Faction, as the most
immediate way to their Ruin; for it was supposed they could never agree in
dividing the Spoil, and their dissensions would have opened a way for the
recovery of His abandoned Rights. But He was so constant in all that was good,
that He thought the purchase of Greatness too vile for the breach of His Faith,
and He hated those acquisitions which would give Him cause to blush. This
Heroic Expression often fell from Him, Leave me to My Conscience and Honor,
and let what will befall Me. His Enemies knew this so natural, that if they
could make their Propositions repugnant to His Conscience, they were sure no
Peace should obstruct their Designs. Nay, He was faithful in those Stipulations
wherein their first Breach would have justified a departure from His Promise;
though He saw this Virtue would be rewarded with His Murder. For when some of
His Attendants at Carisbrook daily importuned Him to provide for His Safety
from the perfidious Violence of the Army, which every day they had informations
of, He made this return; Trouble not your selves, I have the Parliaments Faith
and Honor engaged for My remaining here in Honor, Freedom, and Safety, and I
will not dishonor My self by Escaping.

As He was to the Public so to His Private Obligations. No assaults could take
the Duke of Buckingham from His Protection: for though His foreign Enterprises
required supplies of Money, and the Faction would not let the Bills for
Subsidies pass unless they might be gratified with the Dukes blood, or
Degradation from His Trust, the King would not buy them with the Life or
Dishonor of His Friend. And although he fell afterward as a Sacrifice to the
Common hate, (for so the Assassinate pretended, that he might give a Splendour
to his Crime, It being more specious to revenge the Public than private
Injuries,) yet was he not the Kings's Offering. In the Case of the Earl of
Strafford this Honor seemed to be clouded: But Posterity will see that that
Noble Person was rather ravished from Him, (on design by his Enemies to rob him
of the Glory of Fidelity,) than deserted by Him; for He never left him till the
Earl did abandon himself. And a Penitence for a Submission (not Consent) to the
Rape made a Satisfaction for the Offense, and repaired the damage of the
Injury. For His Majesty's Tears over him will embalm and preserve his name and
blood to the honor of Following Ages more than the remnant of his days would
have administered to his Glory.

It would be an Injury to His other Virtues to mention His Chastity and
Temperance, His Chastity.
because it is an Infamy to be otherwise; unless to let Posterity know, that no
injured Husband nor Dishonored Family conspired to His Ruin, but such who
were engaged to Him for preserving all their Rights in those Relations
unattempted, and securing them by His own example. He witnessed His Conjugal
Chastity the day before His Death, (a time not to be spent in falsities, which
was too little for necessary Preparations to appear before the God of Truth;)
when He commanded the Lady Elizabeth to tell her Mother, that His thoughts had
never strayed from Her, and His Love should be the same to the Last. The purity
of His Speech likewise testified the Cleanness of His Heart, for He did abhor
all Obscene and wanton Discourse. And He was so far from defiling the Beds,
that He would not pollute the Ears of His Subjects.

This Chastity found no Assaults from Intemperance, for He never fed to Luxury
but Health. His Temperance.
His strong Constitution required large Meals, but His Virtue took care they
should not be gluttonous; for He delighted not in Sawces or Artifices to please
the Palate and raise the Lust, but all was sincere and solid, and therefore He
never was subject to a Surfeit. He always mingled Water with His Wine, which
He never drank pure but when He eat Venison; and He was so nice in observing
the bounds of Sobriety, that most times Himself would measure and mingle both
together. He did usually at every Meal drink one Glass of Beer, another of
Wine, and a third of Water, and seldom drank between His Meals. These though
Ordinary Virtues, were yet eminent in Him, since they could not be corrupted by
the Power not the Flatteries of Fortune. And they are therefore mentioned to
gratify Posterity; for men are curious to know all, even the minute Passages
of Great and Virtuous Persons.

Being free from Incontinency and Intemperance, the gulphs of Treasure and
Drayners of the Largest Exchequer, His Frugality.
He had no other Vice to exhaust the Public Stock, and so necessitate Him to
sill it up by Oppressions, but He would by Frugality make His Revenue
sufficient for the Majesty of the Crown, and the Necessities of the State. His
own Nature indeed inclined Him to Magnificence, but the Vices of others did
instruct Him to moderate Expenses. For He had found the Treasury low, and the
Debts great, in His beginnings: He was assaulted with two expensive Wars from
the two great Potentates of Furope, and the Faction had obstructed the usual
way of Supplies by Parliaments. Therefore He was to find a Mine in Virtue; and
by sparing from Vanities, make provisions for necessary and glorious
Enterprises, which He did effect: for in that short time of Peace, which He
enjoyed, He satisfied all the Public Debts, so furnished and increased His
Navy, that it was the most considerable in the whole World, supported His
Confederate the King of Sweden, and by Money enabled him for the Victories of
Germany, and so filled His own Treasury, that it was able of it self to bear
the weight of the first Scotch Expedition without the Aids of the Subject, who
were never more able to contribute to their own safety, nor ever had more
reason, the swellings of that Nation breaking all the Banks and Fences of their
Liberty and Happiness. But the King would let them see that as by His
Government He had made them rich, He would also keep them so by His Frugality.
But those whose first care was to make Him necessitous, and the next odious,
did brand it with the name of Covetousness, which was as False as malicious;
For He never spared when Just Designs called for Expenses, and was magnificent
in Noble Undertakings, as in the Repair of Paul's. He was always Grateful,
although those men who measured their Services not by their Duties, or their
Merits, but by their Expectations from His Fortune, thought Him not Liberal. He
chose rather not to burden His People by Subsidies, than load particular
Servants with unequal Bounties. For Good Princes choose to be loved rather for
their Benefits to the Community than for those to private persons. And it may
be Vanity and Ostentation, but not Liberality, when the gifts of the Prince are
not proportioned to the Common Necessity. His sparings were like those of
Indulgent Fathers, that His Subjects as Children might have the more. He never,
like subtle and rapacious Kings, made or pretended a Necessity for Taxes, but
was troubled when He found it. The Contributions of Parliament He esteemed not
the increase of His peculiar Treasure, but the Provisions for the Common
Safety, of which He would rather be accounted a Steward than a Lord. When
Faction and Sedition so deluded the People that they could not see the
preservation of the whole consisted in contributing some small part, He freely
parted with His own Inhertance to preserve entire to them the price of their
Sweat and Labor.

As He had these Moral Virtues, which are both the signatures of Majesty, His
Intellectual Abilities.
and the Ornaments of a Royal Spirit, so He was no less complete in the
Intellectual. His Understanding was as Comprehensive as His Just Power, and He
was Master of more sorts of Knowledge than He was of Nations. How much He knew
of the Mysteries and Controversies of Divinity was evident in His Discourses
and Papers with Henderson, and those at the Isle of Wight, where He singly
Disputed for Episcopacy one whole day against Fifteen Commissioners and their
Four Chaplains, (the most experienced and subtle members of all the Opposite
Party) with so much Acuteness and Felicity, that even His Opposers admired Him.
He so dexterously managed His Discourse with the Ministers, that He made it
evident they persuaded Him to that which they themselves judged unlawful, and
had condemned as Sacrilege, when they pretended to satisfy the Scruples of
His Conscience, and to assure Him He might safely alienate the Church Lands.
And the Commissioners sensible how unequal their Ministers were to discourse
with Him, for ever after silenced them, and permitted no Disputes but by
Papers. At that time He exceeded the opinion of His friends about Him. One of
them said in astonishment, that Certainly God had inspired Him. Another, that
His Majestly was to a Wonder improved by His Privacies and Afflictions. But a
third; that had had the Honor of a nearer Service, assured them that the King
was never less, only He had now the opportunity of appearing in His full
Magnitude.

In the Law of the Land He was as knowing (as Himself said to the Parricides,
yet was no boaster of His own Parts) as any Gentleman in England, who did not
profess the Public Practice of it: especially those Parts of it which
concerned the Commerce between King and People. In that Art which is peculiar
to Princes, Reason of State, He knew as much as the most prosperous
Contemporary Kings, or their most exercised Ministers, yet scorned to follow
those Rules of it which lead from the Paths of Justice. The Reserves that other
Princes used in their Leagues and Contracts, to color the breaches of Faith,
and those inglorious and dark Intrigues of subtle Politicians, He did perfectly
abhor: but His Letters, Declarations, Speeches, Meditations, are full of that
Political Wisdom which is consistent with Christianity. He had so quick an
Insight into these Mysteries, and so early arrived to the Knowledge of it, that
when He was young, and had just gotten out of the Court and Power of Spain, He
censured the weakness of that Mysterious Council. For He was no sooner on
Shipboard, but the first words He spoke were, I discovered two Errors in those
great Masters of Policy; One that they would use Me so Ill, and another that
after such Usage they permitted Me to Depart.

As those former parts of Knowledge did enable Him to know Men, and how to
manage their different humors, His Skill in all Arts.
and to temper them to a sitness for Society, and make them serviceable to the
Glory of that God whose Minister He was: so His Soul was stored with a full
Knowledge of the Nature of Things, and easily comprehended almost all kinds of
Arts that either were for Delight or of a Public Use; for He was ignorant of
nothing but of what He thought it became Him to be negligent, (for many parts
of Learning that are for the Ornament of a Private person are beneath the Cares
of a Crowned Head.) He was well skilled in things of Antiquity, could judge of
Meddals whether they had the number of years they pretended unto; His Libraries
and Cabinets were full of those things on which length of Time put the Value of
Rarities. In Painting He had so excellent a Fancy, that He would supply the
defect of Art in the Workman, and suddenly draw those Lines, give those Airs
and Lights, which Experience and Practice had not taught the Painter. He could
judge of Fortifications, and censure whether the Cannon were mounted to
Execution or no. He had an excellent Skill in Guns, knew all that belonged to
their making. The exactest Arts of building Ships for the most necessary uses
of strength or good sailing, together with all their furniture, were not
unknown to Him. He understood and was pleased with the making of Clocks and
Watches. He comprehended the Art of Printing. There was not any one Gentleman
of all the three Kingdoms that could compare with Him in an Universality of
Knowledge. He encouraged all the Parts of Learning, and He delighted to talk
with all kind of Artists, and with so great a Facility did apprehend the
Mysteries of their Professions, that He did sometime say, He thought He could
get His Living, if Necessitated, by any Trade He knew of, but making of
Hangings: although of these He understood much, and was greatly delighted in
them; for He brought some of the most curious Workmen from Foreign Parts to
make them here in England.

His Writings show what Notions He had gathered from the whole store of
Learning, His Eloquence.
which He clothed with a Wonderful and most charming Eloquence. Which was
unquestionably so great, that those who endeavored to despoil Him of His Civil
Dominions granted Him a deserved Empire among famous Writers. The Book of His
Meditations is alone sufficient to make His Assassinates execrable to all that
in any Age shall have a sense of Piety, or a love to Wisdom and Eloquence. For
so great an affection in the Breasts of men do excellent Writings acquire for
their Authors, that though they may be otherwise blameable, yet their Works
render their Memories precious; and the violent Deaths of such increase their
Glory, while they load their Murderers with Ignominy. All men, especially
among Posterity, deeming so great Wits could not be cut off but to the Public
Injury, and by Persons brutishly mad, or by some horrid sins debauched to an
Enmity with mankind. So that all suture times shall admire and applaud His
Writings against them, and curse their Injustice to Him.

His Wisdom was not only Speculative in His Writings, but also Practical in His
Counsels. His Political Prudence.
None found out better means for accomplishing a Design, provided safer
expedients for the Ressorts of Difficulties, or more clearly foresaw the Event
at a Distance; nor were any Counsels so prosperous as His own, when they were
vigorously prosecuted by those whom He entrusted with the Execution; and He
seldom miscarried but when He inclined to follow the Advices of others; as He
did in that inauspicious Attempt to take Gloucester, wherein He forsook His own
Reasons, which He urged with all possible Evidence of Success, to march toward
London. He saw into the Intrigues of His Enemies; and had not the Treacheries
(which being secret are above the Caution of Humane Nature) of some that
followed Him opened to them His Designs, He had (by the Ordinary Course of
Providence) covered them with the shame both of Imprudence and Overthrow. Those
Miseries that the Faction after they got into Power brought upon the Nation,
and the Events of their destructive Enterprises, were discovered and foretold
by Him in the very beginnings to the deluded World, who notwithstanding were
Fatally blinded to choose their own Ruin.

Whenever His Secretaries had drawn up, by the Direction of the Council,
Declarations or any other Papers, and offered them to His perusal, though both
they and the Council had done their parts, yet He would always with His own
hand correct them both as to Matter and Form; He commonly using these words
when He took the Pen in His hand, Come, I am a good Cobbler: and the Corrections
were acknowledged by them all to be both for the greater luster and advantage
of the Writings. His Instructions to His Ambassadors, Commissioners, Deputies,
were so full of Wisdom, and such prudent provisions for all the Ressorts of
those they were to treat with, that there was nothing to be supplied on their
parts to make their Negotiations happy, but seasonable Applications, or a
fortune to deal with reasonable men. It was the Observation of a Noble Person
(who was dear to Him for his Wisdom and Faithluiness, and was of His Council in
all His Troubles) that had the King been a Counselor to any other Prince, He
would have gained the Esleem of an Oracle, all His Proposals being grounded
upon the greatest Reason, and proper to the Business consulted about. Those
that have been forward to interpret His Actions by the Suceess, and from thence
have proceeded to the Censure of His Prudence, considered not the numerous
Difficulties in forming any Resolution, nor the fallacious representations of
Affairs to Him, but only looked upon His unprosperous Resolves according to the
Fate of unhappy Counsels, which is to have that condemned which was put in
Execution, and that praised as best which was never tried.

Thus was He made for Empire as well as born unto it; and had all those
Excellencies, which, The Censure of His Fortune.
if we had been free to choose, must have determined our Election of a Sovereign
to Him alone, there being nothing wanting in Him that the severest Censors of
Princes do number among the Requisites of a complete Monarch. It was therefore
the wonder of those who conceive every man to be the Artificer of His own
Fortune, how it came to pass that He had not that (...), an uninterrupted
current of Success (which some men reckon among the constitutives of Happiness)
in all His Enterprises. To Others that impute all our affairs here below to an
inviolable Method of the Decrees of Heaven, which yet they acknowledge just,
though dark, it seemed one of the Riddles of Providence, that a King of so
great Virtues should yet be calamitous: for let Posterity judge how great and
how good this Prince was, that could not be ruined even after a War (which
usually embitters the Spirits of those that are molested by it) and a total
Overthrow (whose common Consequent is Contempt) but by so various and such
wicked Arts; and was judged by all men, though He wanted, yet to deserve
Prosperity (as to humane judgment,) which (as some think) is the truest
Happiness.

To these Doubts there appears no Resolution so obvious as that into the
Pleasure of the Divine Majesty, who provoked by our sins, which had profaned
his Mercies, and abused the Peace and Plenty he gave us, would chastise us by
the scourge of Civil War, the corrective of too much felicity, and taking away
the best of Kings leave us to the Pride and Violence of the basest of men. And
that it was a wrath directed against us was apparent, because the misfortunes
and fall of that Incomparable Prince opened upon us an avenue for all those
miseries that a Community is obnoxious unto in the want of a lawful Government,
while the Almighty secured the Glory of the King even in His Sufferings,
provided for the Support and Honor of the Royal Family in its lowest Estate,
and miraculously preserved the Chief of it from innumerable dangers, and made
us to see afterward in the Series of his Providence, that he had not
withdrawn his loving kindness from the House of King CHARLES, by restoring it
to its primitive Grandeur.

And this he was pleased to signify to the King by a Passage that appeared
little less than a Miracle. For while He was at Oxford, and the Earl of
Southampton, now Lord High-Treasurer of England, (a Person of unquestionable
Honor and Veracity, of an eminent Integrity, A Presage of His Fall, and the
future State of the Royal Family.
above the Flattery of Princes, who does attest this Occurrence) as Gentleman
of the Bedchamber lay one Night in the same Chamber with Him, the Wax Mortar,
which according to Custom the King always had in His Chamber, was in the
night, as they both conceived and took notice of it, fully extinguished. But my
Lord rising in the Morning found it lighted, and said to the KING, Sir, this
Mortar now burns very clearly: at which they both exceedingly wondered, as fully
concluding it had been out in the Night, and they could not imagine how any of
the Grooms, or any other could possibly light it, the Door being locked with a
Spring within. This busying the wonder of both for the present, the King
afterward when He saw the Malice of His Enemies press hard upon His Life and
Ruin, reflecting upon this Occurrence, drew it into this Presage, That though
God would permit His Light to be extinguished for a time, yet He would at last
light it again; which was verified in the Event: for though God suffered the
Faction to spill His blood, yet after many years of Troubles, and when he had
permitted those Monsters to bring us to the brinks of destruction, he restored
His Son to the Crown in as much Splendor and Greatness as any of His
Predecessors.

As His Abliities for the Public Administration of Government were all apt to
raise Admiration; His Recreations.
so His Recreations and Privacies gave a Delight to such as communicated in the
sight of them, and there needed no more to beget an Honor of Him than to
behold Him in His Diversions, which were all serious, and there was no part of
His time which either wanted benefit, or deserved not Commendation. In His
younger days, His pleasures were in Riding, and sometimes in breaking the
great Horse; and He did it so gracefully, that He deserved that Statue of Brass
which did represent Him on Horseback. Besides this, He delighted in Hunting,
an active and stirring Exercise to accustom Him to toils, and harden that body
whose mind abhorred the softness of Luxury and Ease, which Vicious Princes
think a part of Power and the Rewards of Public Cares: but He used this as the
way whereby the Ancient Heroes were habituated to Labors, and by contending
with some beasts in Strength and others in Swiftness, first to rout, then to
chase their flying Enemies. When the season of the year did not permit this
sport, then Tennis, Gough, Bowls were the ways of His Diversions, and in all
these He was wonderfully active and excellent.

His softer pleasures were Books, and of His time spent in these there were
many Monuments. In His Library at Saint James's there was kept a Collection of
His, of the excellent Sayings of Authors, written with His own hand, and in his
Youth, presented to His Father King JAMES: and there is yet extant in the hands
of a Worthy Person, His Extracts written with His own hand, out of My Lord of
Canterbury's Book against Fisher, of all the Arguments against the Papists,
digested into so excellent a Method, that He gave Light and Strength to them
even while He did epitomize them into a sheet or two of Paper. The same Care
and Pains He had bestowed in reading the most Judicious Hooker, and the Learned
Works of Bishop Andrews, out of all which He had gathered whatsoever was
excellent in them, and fitted them for His ready use. When He was tired with
Reading, then He applied Himself to Discourse, wherein He both benefited
Himself and others; and He was good at the Relation of a Story, or telling of
an Occurrence. When these were tedious by continuance, He would either play at
Chess, or please Himself with His Pictures, of which He had many choice pieces
of the best Masters, as Titian, Rafael, Tintoret and others, with which He had
adorned His most frequented Palaces, as also with most antique pieces of
Sculpture; so that to those that had traveled it seemed that Italy was
Translated to His Court.

As His Spirit was thus accomplished, so His Body had its Elegancies. His
Stature was of a just height, The Features of His Body.
rather decent than tall; His Body erect, and not enclining to a Corpulency,
nor meager, till His Afflictions wrought too strongly upon it to a Leanness;
His Limbs exactly proportioned, His Face full of Majesty, and His Brow large
and Fair: His Eyes so quick and piercing, that they went farther than the
Superficies of men, and searched their more Inward parts; for at the first
sight He would pass a judgment upon the frame of a Man's Spirit and Faculties,
and He was not often mistaken, having a strange happiness in Physiognomy, and
by reason of this He would remember any one He had seen but once many years
after. His Complexion was enclining to a Paleness, His Hair a brown, which He
wore of a moderate length, ending in gentle and easy curles: upon His left
side He indulged one Lock to a greater length in the youthful part of His Life.
His Beard He wore picqued, but after the Faction had passed those Votes of No
Addresses, He permitted it to grow neglectedly and to cover more of His face.
His Gestures had nothing of affectation, but full of Majestic Gravity. His
motions were speedy, and His gate fast: which showed the Alacrity and Vigor of
His Mind, for His Affections were temperate. He was of a most healthful
Constitution, and after the infirmities of His Childhood was never sick. Once
He had the small Pox, but the Malignity of it was so small, that it altered not
His Stomach, nor put Him to the abstinence of one Meal, neither did it detain
Him above a fortnight under the Care of His Physicians.

He was the Father of Four Sons and Five Daughters. His Children.


1. Charles James, born at Greenwich on Wednesday, May 13. 1628. but died
almost as soon as born, having been first Christened.

2. Charles Duke of Cornwall and Prince of Wales, born at Saint James's, May
29. 1630. whom, after a fellowship in the Sufferings of His Father, some brave,
but unsuccessful, attempts to recover the Rights of His Inheritance, and twelve
years various fortune abroad, God was pleased by a wonderful Providence,
without blood or ruin, to conduct to His Native Throne, and make Him the
Restorer of Peace to a People wearied and wasted, almost to a Desolation, by
several changes of Government and Variety of reproachful Usurpers, that they
became the Scorn of Neighbour^ (...) Nations, and the miserable Example of
(...) quiet Community, so torn in pieces by Factions in the State, and Schisms
in the Church; each party mutually armed to suppress its contrary, and destroy
the public, that it was impossible for them to reunite or consent in common
to seek the benefits of Society, until they had submitted to Him as to the
common Soul, to be governed by Him in the paths of Justice. He is now (and long
may He be so) our Dread Sovereign CHARLES II.

3. James, born in the same place October. 13. Anno 1633. entitled Duke of York
by His Majesty's Command at His Birth, and afterward so Created. He was a
Companion of His Brother in Exile, spending His time abroad both in the French
and Spanish Camps with Glory, and returned with Him into England.

4. Henry Duke of Gloucester, born in the same place July 8. 1639. who after
the Death of His Father was by the Parricides permitted to go beyond Sea to His
Mother, with the promise of an Annual Pension, which they never intended to
pay: A very hopeful Prince, who resisted the strong practices of some in the
Queen's Court to seduce Him to the Church of Rome, which His Brother hearing
sent for Him into Flanders; and He also attended Him to His Throne, but not
long after died of the Small Pox, Sept. 13. Anno 1660.

5. Mary, born on November. 4. Anno 1631. married to Count William of Nassau,
Eldest Son to Henry Prince of Orange, by whom she was left a Widow, and a short
time after the Mother of the now Prince of Orange; and coming over to visit her
Brothers and the place of her Nativity, she died also of the Small Pox, December.
24. Anno 1660.

6. Elizabeth, born Jan. 28. Anno 1635. who survived her Father, but lived not
to see the Restoring the Royal Family, dying at Carisbrook the place of her
Father's Captivity, being removed thither by the Murderers, that the place
might raise a grief to end her Days.

7. Anne, born March 17. Anno 1637. died before her Father.

8. Katharine, who died almost as soon as born.

9. Henrietta, born at Exeter June 16. Anno 1644. in the midst of the Wars,
conveyed not long after by the Lady Dalkeith into France to her Mother, and is
now married to the Duke of Anjou, only Brother to the King of France.

Having left this Issue He died in the forty ninth year of His Age, and 23. of
His Reign, having lived Much rather than Long, and left so many great and
difficult Examples as will busy Good Princes to imitate, and Bad ones to
Wonder at: A man in Office and mind like to that Spiritual Being, which the
more men understand the more they Admire and Love; and that may be said of Him
which was said of that Excellent Roman who sought Glory by Virtue,

Homo Virtuti simillimus, and per omnia Ingenio Diis quam Hominibus propior:
Qui nunquam recte fecit, ut recte facere videretur; sed quia aliter facere non
poterat: Cuique id solum visum est Rationem habere quod haberet Justitiam.
Omnibus humanis vitiis Immunis semper in Potestate sua Fortunam habuit. Vell.
Paterc. lib. 2.
AN APPENDIX.
THat the Piety and Charity of this Excellent and Incomparable PRINCE may yet
farther appear, it will not, I presume, be unacceptable to the Reader, to Annex
some few of His Majesty's Select Meditations and Declarations, such especially
as were Penned a little before His Martyrdom; when His Soul seemed to have been
inspired with a bigger Sense of His approaching Fate, and at once by a Generous
Scorn, to trample upon the Glories of the World, and to Triumph over the most
Insolent Villainies of His Enemies. Nor will the Reader repent the taking them
in His own Words, nothing being able to express the Sense of His Mind, like the
Native Elegancy of His own Pen.

Upon their denying His MAJESTY the Attendance of the Bishop of LONDON, Bishop
of SALISBVRY; And HIS Chaplains, Doctor Sheldon, Doctor Sanderson, Doctor
Hammond, Doctor Turner, Doctor Holdsworth, Doctor Heywood.

WHen Providence was pleased to deprive Me of all other civil Comforts and
secular Attendants, I thought the absence of them all might best be supplied by
the attendance of some of my Chaplains; whom for their Function I reverence,
and for their Fidelity I have cause to love. By their Learning, Piety and
Prayers, I hoped to be either better enabled to sustain the want of all other
enjoyments, or better fitted for the recovery and use of them in God's good
time: so reaping by their Pious help a spiritual harvest of Grace, amidst the
thorns, and after the plowings of temporal Crosses.

The truth is, I never needed or desired more the service and assistance of men
judiciously Pious and soberly Devout.

The Solitude they have confined Me unto adds the Wilderness to my Temptations:
For the company they obtrude upon Me is more sad than any Solitude can be.

If I had asked my Revenues, my Power of the Militia, or any one of my
Kingdoms, it had been no wonder to have been denied in those things, where the
evil Policy of Men forbids all just restitution, lest they should confess an
injurious Usurpation: But to deny Me the Ghostly comfort of my Chaplains, seems
a greater Rigor and Barbarity than is ever used by Christians to the meanest
Prisoners and greatest Malefactors; whom though the Justice of the Law deprives
of worldly comforts, yet the Mercy of Religion allows them the benefit of their
Clergy, as not aiming at once to destroy their Bodies, and to damn their Souls.

But My Agony must not be relieved with the presence of any one good Angel; for
such I account a Learned, Godly, and discreet Divine: and such I would have all
mine to be.

They that envy my being a King, are loath I should be a Christian; while they
seek to deprive Me of all things else, they are afraid I should save my Soul.

Other sense Charity it self can hardly pick out of those many harsh Repulses I
received, as to that Request so often made for the attendance of some of my
Chaplains.

I have sometime thought, the Unchristianness of those denials might arise from
a displeasure some men had to see Me prefer My own Divines before their
Ministers: whom though I respect for that worth and piety which may be in them;
yet I cannot think them so proper for My present Comforters or Physicians, who
have (some of them at least) had so great an influence in occasioning these
Calamities, and inflicting these Wounds upon Me.

Nor are the soberest of them so apt for that Devotional compliance and
juncture of hearts, which I desire to bear in those holy Offices to be
performed with Me and for Me; since their Judgments standing at a distance
from Me, or in jealousy of Me, or in opposition against Me, their Spirits
cannot so harmoniously accord with Mine, or Mine with theirs, either in Prayer
or other holy Duties, as is meet and most comfortable; whose golden Rule and
bond of Perfection consists in that of mutual Love and Charity.

Some Remedies are worse than the Disease, and some Comforters more miserable
than Misery it self: when, like Job's Friends, they seek not to fortify ones
mind with Patience, but persuade a man, by betraying his own Innocence, to
despair of God's Mercy; and by justifying their Injuries, to strengthen the
hands and harden the hearts of Insolent Enemies.

I am so much a friend to all Churchmen that have any thing in them beseeming
that Sacred Function, that I have hazarded My own Interest chiefly upon
Conscience and Constancy to maintain their Rights: whom the more I looked upon
as Orphans, and under the Sacrilegious eyes of many cruel and rapacious
Reformers; the more I thought it my duty to appear as a Father and a Patron for
them and the Church. Although I am very unhandsomly requited by some of them,
who may live to repent no less for My Sufferings than their own ungrateful
Errors, and that injurious Contempt and Meanness which they have brought upon
their Calling and Persons.

I pity all of them, I despise none: only I thought I might have leave to make
choice of some for my special Attendants, who were best approved in My
Judgment, and most suitable to My Affection. For I held it better to seem
undevout, and to hear no men's Prayers, than to be forced, or seem to comply
with those Petitions to which the Heart cannot consent, nor the Tongue say
Amen, without contradicting a man's own Understanding, or belying his own Soul.

In Devotions I love neither Profane Boldness, nor Pious Nonsense; but such an
humble and judicious Gravity, as shows the Speaker to be at once considerate of
God's Majesty, the Churches Honor, and his own Vileness; both knowing what
things God allows him to ask, and in what manner it becomes a Sinner to
supplicate the Divine Mercy for himself and others.

I am equally scandalized with all Prayers that sound either imperiously, or
rudely, or passionately; as either wanting Humility to God, or Charity to Men,
or Respect to the Duty.

I confess I am better pleased, as with studied and premeditated Sermons, so
with such public Forms of Prayer as are fitted to the Churches, and every
Christians daily and common necessities: because I am by them better assured
what I may join my Heart unto, than I can be of any man's Extemporary
sufficiency; which as I do not wholly exclude from public occasions, so I
allow its just liberty and use in private and devout retirements, where neither
the solemnity of the Duty, nor the modest regard to others, do require so great
exactness as to the outward manner of performance. Though the light of
Understanding, and the fervency of Affection, I hold the main and most
necessary requisites both in constant and occasional, solitary and social
Devotions.

So that I must needs seem to all equal minds, with as much Reason to prefer
the service of My own Chaplains before that of their Ministers, as I do the
Liturgy before the Directory.

In the one I have been always educated and exercised; in the other I am not
yet Catechized nor acquainted: And if I were, yet should I not by that, as by
any certain Rule and Canon of Devotion, be able to follow or find out the
indirect extravagancies of most of those men who highly cry up that as a piece
of rare composure and use, which is already as much despised and disused by
many of them, as the Common Prayer sometimes was by those men, a great part of
whose piety hung upon that popular pin of railing against and contemning the
Government and Liturgy of this Church. But I had rather be condemned to the woe
of Vae soli, than to that of Vae vobis, Hypocritae, by seeming to pray what I
do not approve.

It may be, I am esteemed by my Deniers sufficient of My self to discharge my
Duty to God as a Priest, though not to Men as a Prince.

Indeed I think both Offices, Regal and Sacerdotal, might well become the same
Person; as anciently they were under one name, and the united rights of
primogeniture: Nor could I follow better precedents, if I were able, than those
two eminent Kings, David and Solomon; not more famous for their Scepters and
Crowns, than one was for devout Psalms and Prayers, the other for his divine
Parables and Preaching: whence the one merited and assumed the name of a
Prophet, the other of a Preacher. Titles indeed of greater honor, where
rightly placed, than any of those the Roman Emperors affected from the Nations
they subdued; it being infinitely more glorious to convert Souls to Gods Church
by the Word, than to conquer men to a subjection by the Sword.

Yet since the order of Gods Wisdom and Providence has, for the most part,
always distinguished the Gifts and Offices of Kings and Priests, of Princes
and Preachers, both in the Jewish and Christian Churches; I am sorry to find My
self reduced to the necessity of being both, or enjoying neither.

For such as seek to deprive Me of my Kingly Power and Sovereignty, would no
less enforce Me to live many months without all Prayers, Sacraments and
Sermons, unless I become My own Chaplain.

As I owe the Clergy the protection of a Christian KING, so I desire to enjoy
from them the benefit of their Gifts and Prayers; which I look upon as more
prevalent than My own or other men's, by how much they flow from Minds more
enlightened and Affections less distracted than those which are encumbred with
Secular affairs: besides, I think a greater Blessing and acceptableness attends
those Duties, which are rightly performed, as proper to and within the limits
of that Calling to which God and the Church have specially designed and
consecrated some men. And however, as to that Spiritual Government by which the
Devout Soul is subject to Christ, and through his Merits daily offers it self
and its services to God, every private Believer is a King and a Priest,
invested with the honor of a Royal Priesthood; yet as to Ecclesiastical Order,
and the outward Polity of the Church, I think confusion in Religion will as
certainly follow every man's turning Priest or Preacher, as it will in the State
where every one affects to rule as King.

I was always bred to more modest, and, I think, more Pious Principles: The
consciousness to my Spiritual defects makes Me more prize and desire those
Pious assistances which holy and good Ministers, either Bishops or Presbyters,
may afford Me; especially in these Extremities to which God has been pleased
to suffer some of my Subjects to reduce Me, so as to leave them nothing more
but my Life to take from Me; and to leave Me nothing to desire, which I thought
might less provoke their Jealousy and offense to deny Me than this, of having
some means afforded Me for my Souls comfort and support.

To which end I made choice of men, as no way (that I know) scandalous, so
every way eminent for their Learning and Piety, no less than for their Loyalty:
nor can I imagine any exceptions to be made against them but only this, That
they may seem too able, and too wellaffected toward Me and my Service.

But this is not the first service (as I count it the best) in which they have
forced Me to serve My self: though I must confess, I bear with more grief and
impatience the want of my Chaplains than of any other my Servants, and next (if
not beyond in some things) to the being sequestered from my Wife and Children;
fince from these indeed more of humane and temporary Affections, but from those
more of Heavenly and Eternal Improvements may be expected.

My comfort is, that in the enforced (not neglected) want of ordinary means,
God is wont to afford extraordinary supplies of his Gifts and Graces.

If his Spirit will teach Me, and help my infirmities in Prayer, Reading and
Meditation, (as I hope he will) I shall need no other either Orator or
Instructor.

To thee therefore, O My God, do I direct my now solitary Prayers: What I want
of others help, supply with the more immediate assistances of thy Spirit, which
alone can both enlighten my darkness, and quicken my dullness.

O thou Sun of Righteousness, thou Sacred Fountain of Heavenly Light and Heat,
at once clear and warm my Heart, both by instructing of Me, and interceding for
Me. In Thee is all Fullness, from Thee is all Sufficiency, by Thee is all
Acceptance. Thou art company enough, and comfort enough: Thou art my King, be
also my Prophet and my Priest. Rule Me, teach Me, pray in Me, for Me, and be
Thou ever with Me.

The single wrestlings of Jacob prevailed with Thee in that Sacred Duel, when
he had none to second him but Thy self, who did assist him with power to
overcome Thee, and by a welcome violence to wrest a Blessing from Thee.

O look on Me thy Servant in infinite Mercy, whom Thou did once bless with
the joint and sociated Devotions of others, whose fervency might inflame the
coldness of my Affections toward Thee; when we went to or met in thy House
with the Voice of joy and gladness, worshipping Thee in the unity of Spirits,
and with the bond of Peace.

O forgive the neglect and not improving of those happy Opportunities.

It is now thy pleasure that I should be as a Pelican in the wilderness, as a
Sparrow on the house top, and as a Coal scattered from all those pious glowings
and devout reflections which might best kindle, preserve and increase the holy
fire of thy Graces on the Altar of my Heart, whence the sacrifice of Prayers
and incense of Praises might be duly offered up to Thee.

Yet, O Thou that breakest not the bruised Reed, nor quenchest the smoking
Flax, do not despise the weakness of my Prayers, nor the smotherings of my Soul
in this uncomfortable loneness, to which I am constrained by some men's
uncharitable denials of those helps which I much want, and no less desire.

O let the hardness of Their Hearts occasion the softnings of Mine to Thee and
for them. Let their Hatred kindle My Love, let their unreasonable denials of my
Religious desires the more excite my Prayers to Thee. Let their inexorable
deafness incline thine ear to Me, who art a God easy to be entreated: thine
Ear is not heavy, that it cannot, nor thy Heart hard, that it will not hear;
nor thy Hand shortened, that it cannot help Me thy desolate Suppliant.

Thou permittest men to deprive Me of those outward means which Thou have
appointed in thy Church; but they cannot debar Me from the communion of that
inward Grace which Thou alone breathest into humble hearts.

O make Me such, and Thou will teach Me, Thou will hear Me, Thou will help Me:
the broken and contrite heart, I know, Thou will not despise.

Thou, O Lord, can at once make Me thy Temple, thy Priest, thy Sacrifice, and
thine Altar; while from an humble Heart I (alone) daily offer up in holy
Meditations, fervent Prayers, and unfeigned Tears, My self to Thee, who
preparest Me for Thee, dwell in Me, and acceptest of Me.

Thou, O Lord, did cause by secret supplies, and miraculous infusions, that
the handful of Meal in the vessel should not spend, nor the little Oil in the
cruise fail the Widow, during the time of drought and dearth.

O look on my Soul, which, as a Widow, is now desolate and forsaken: let not
those saving Truths I have formerly learned now fail my memory; nor the sweet
effusions of thy Spirit, which I have sometime felt, now be wanting to my Heart
in this Famine of ordinary and wholesome food, for the refreshing of my Soul.

Which yet I had rather choose, than to feed from those hands who mingle my
bread with ashes, and my wine with gall, rather tormenting than teaching Me;
whose mouths are proner to bitter Reproaches of Me, than to hearty Prayers for
Me.

Thou know, O Lord of Truth, how often they wrest thy Holy Scriptures to my
destruction, (which are clear for their Subjection, and My Preservation:) O let
it not be to their Damnation.

Thou know how some men (under color of long Prayers) have sought to devour
the houses of their Brethren, their King, and their God.

O let not those men's Balms break my head, nor their Cordials oppress my heart:
I will evermore pray against their Wickedness.

From the poison under their tongues, from the sndres of their lips, from the
fire and the swords of their words, ever deliver Me, O Lord, and all those
Loyal and Religious hearts who defire and delight in the prosperity of my Soul,
and who seek by their Prayers to relieve this Sadness and Solitude of thy
Servant, O my King, and my God.

Penitential Meditations and Vows In The KINGS Solitude at Holdenby.
GIVe ear to my words, O Lord, consider my Meditation, and hearken to the voice
of my cry, my King and my God; for unto Thee will I pray.

I said in mine haste, I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes; nevertheless
Thou hear the voice of my supplication, when I cry unto Thee.

If Thou, Lord, should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who can abide
it? But there is Mercy with Thee, that thou may be feared; therefore shall
sinners fly unto Thee.

I acknowledge my Sins before Thee, which have the aggravation of my Condition;
the eminency of my Place adding weight to my Offenses.

Forgive, I beseech Thee, my personal and my peoples Sins, which are so far
Mine, as I have not improved The Power thou gave Me to thy Glory and my
Subjects good. Thou have now brought Me from the glory and freedom of a King,
to be a Prisoner to my own Subjects: Justly, O Lord, as to thy overruling
hand, because in many things I have rebelled against Thee.

Though Thou have restrained my Person, yet enlarge my Heart to Thee, and thy
Grace toward Me.

I come far short of David 's Piety; yet since I may equal David 's
Afflictions, give Me also the Comforts and the sure Mercies of David.

Let the penitent sense I have of my Sins be an evidence to Me that Thou have
pardoned them.

Let not the Evils which I and my Kingdoms have suffered seem little unto Thee,
though Thou have not punished us according to our Sins.

Turn Thee (O Lord) unto Me; have mercy upon Me, for I am desolate and
afflicted.

The sorrows of my Heart are enlarged; O bring Thou Me out of my Troubles.

Have Thou forgotten to be gracious, and shut up thy loving kindness in
displeasure?

O remember thy Compassions of old, and thy loving kindnesses which have been
for many Generations.

I had utterly fainted, if I had not believed to see thy Goodness in the Land
of the Living.

Let not the sins of our Prosperity deprive us of the benefit of thy
Afflictions.

Let this fiery trial consume the dross which in long Peace and Plenty we had
contracted.

Though Thou continuest Miseries, yet withdraw not thy Grace; what is wanting
of Prosperity, make up in Patience and Repentance.

And if thy Anger be not yet to be turned away, but thy hand of Justice must be
stretched out still; let it, I beseech Thee, be against Me and my Fathers
house: as for these Sheep what have they done?

Let my Sufferings satiate the malice of Mine and thy Churches Enemies.

But let their Cruelty never exceed the measure of My Charity.

Banish from Me all thoughts of Revenge, that I may not lose the reward, nor
Thou the glory of my Patience.

As Thou give Me a heart to forgive them, so I beseech Thee do Thou forgive
what they have done against Thee and Me.

And now, O Lord, as Thou have given Me an heart to pray unto Thee, so hear and
accept this Vow which I make before Thee.

If Thou will in mercy remember Me and my Kingdoms, in continuing the light of
thy Gospel, and settling thy True Religion among us;

In restoring to us the benefit of the Laws, and the due execution of Justice;

In suppressing the many Schisms in Church, and Factions in State:

If Thou will restore Me and Mine to the ancient Rights and Glory of my
Predecessors:

If Thou will turn the hearts of my People to Thy self in Piety, to Me in
Loyalty, and to one another in Charity:

If Thou will quench the flames and withdraw the fuel of these Civil Wars:

If Thou will bless us with the freedom of public Counsels, and deliver the
Honor of Parliaments from the insolency of the Vulgar:

If Thou will keep Me from the great offense of enacting any thing against my
Conscience; and especially from consenting to Sacrilegious Rapines and
spoilings of thy Church:

If Thou will restore Me to a capacity to glorify Thee, in doing good both to
the Church and State;

Then shall my Soul praise Thee, and magnify thy Name before my People:

Then shall thy Glory be dearer to Me than my Crowns, and the advancement of
true Religion both in purity and power be my chiefest care:

Then will I rule my people with Justice, and my Kingdoms with Equity.

To thy more immediate hand shall I ever owe, as the rightful Succession, so
the merciful Restoration of my Kingdoms, and the glory of them.

If Thou will bring Me again with Peace, Safety and Honor, to my chiefest City
and my Parliament:

If Thou will again put the Sword of Justice into my hand, to punish and
protect:

Then will I make all the world to see, and my very Enemies to enjoy, the
benefit of this Vow and Resolution of Christian Charity which I now make unto
Thee, O Lord.

As I do freely pardon, for Christ's sake, those that have offended Me in any
kind; so my hand shall never be against any man, to revenge what is past, in
regard of any particular injury done to Me.

We have been mutually punished in our unnatural Divisions; for thy sake, O
Lord, and for the love of my Redeemer, have I purposed this in my heart, That I
will use all means in the ways of Amnestie and Indemnity, which may most fully
remove all Fears, and bury all Jealousies in forgetfulness.

Let Thy Mercies be toward Me and Mine, as my resolutions of Truth and Peace
are toward my People.

Hear my Prayer, O Lord, which goes not out of feigned lips.

Blessed be God, who has not turned away my Prayer, nor taken his Mercy from
Me.

O my Soul, commit thy way to the Lord; trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass.

But if Thou will not restore Me and Mine, what am I that I should charge Thee
foolishly?

Thou, O Lord, have given, and thou have taken; Blessed be thy Name.

May my People and thy Church be happy, if not by Me, yet without Me.

His MAJESTY'S Declaration After the Votes of no further Address. Carisbrook,
Jan. 18. M DC XLVII.
To all My People, of whatsoever Nation, Quality or Condition.
AM I thus laid aside? and must I not speak for My self? No: I will speak, and
that to all My People, (which I would have rather done by the way of My two
Houses of Parliament, but that there is a public Order, neither to make
Addresses to, or receive Messages from me.) And who but you can be judge of the
differences betwixt Me and My two Houses? I know none else: for I am sure you
it is who will enjoy the Happiness, or feel the Misery of good or ill
Government; and we all pretend who should run fastest to serve you, without
having a regard (at least in the first place) to particular Interests. And
therefore I desire you to consider the state I am and have been in this long
time, and whether My Actions have more tended to the Public or My own
particular good. For whosoever will look upon Me barely as I am a Man, without
that liberty (which the meanest of My Subjects enjoyes) of going whither, and
conversing with whom I will; as a Husband and Father, without the comfort of My
Wife and Children; or lastly as a King, without the least show of Authority or
Power to protect My distressed Subjects; must conclude Me not only void of all
Natural Affection, but also to want common understanding, if I should not most
cheerfully embrace the readiest way to the settlement of these distracted
Kingdoms. As also on the other side, do but consider the form and draught of
the Bills lately presented unto Me, and as they are the Conditions of a Treaty,
ye will conclude, that the same Spirit which has still been able to frustrate
all My sincere and constant endeavors for Peace, has had a powerful
influence on this Message. For though I was ready to grant the substance, and
comply with what they seem to desire; yet as they had framed it, I could not
agree thereunto, without deeply wounding My Conscience and Honor, and
betraying the Trust reposed in Me, by abandoning My People to the Arbitrary and
Unlimited Power of the two Houses for ever, for the levying and maintaining of
Land or Sea Forces, without distinction of quality or limitation for Money
taxes. And if I could have passed them in terms, how unheard of a Condition
were it for a Treaty to grant beforehand the most considerable part of the
subject matter? How ineffectual were that debate like to prove, wherein the
most potent Party had nothing of moment left to ask, and the other nothing more
to give? so, consequently, how hopeless of mutual compliance? without which a
settlement is impossible. Besides, if after My Concessions the two Houses
should insist on those things from which I cannot depart, how desperate would
the condition of these Kingdoms be, when the most proper and approved remedy
should become ineffectual? Being therefore fully resolved that I could neither
in Conscience, Honor or Prudence, pass those Four Bills; I only endeavored to
make the Reasons and Justice of my Denial appear to all the World, as they do
to me, intending to give as little dis-satisfaction to the two Houses of
Parliament (without betraying My own Cause) as the matter would bear: I was
desirous to give My Answer of the 28. of December last to the Commissioners
sealed, (as I had done others heretofore, and sometimes at the desire of the
Commissioners) chiefly, because when My Messages or Answers were publicly
known before they were read in the Houses, prejudicial interpretations were
forced on them, much differing, and sometimes contrary to My meaning. For
example, My Answer from Hampton Court was accused of dividing the two Nations,
because I promised to give satisfaction to the Scots in all things concerning
that Kingdom: And this last suffers in a contrary sense, by making Me intend to
interest Scotland in the Laws of this Kingdom, (than which nothing was, nor is,
further from My thoughts) because I took notice of the Scots Commissioners
protesting against the Bills and Propositions, as contrary to the Interests and
Engagements of the two Kingdoms. Indeed, if I had not mentioned their dissent,
an Objection, not without some probability, might have been made against Me,
both in respect the Scots are much concerned in the Bill for the Militia, and
in several other Propositions; and My silence might, with some Justice, have
seemed to approve of it: But the Commissioners refusing to receive My Answer
sealed, I (upon the engagement of their and the Governors Honor, that no
other use should be made or notice taken of it than as if it had not been seen)
read and delivered it open unto them; whereupon what has since passed, either
by the Governor, in discharging most of My Servants, redoubling the Guards,
and restraining Me of My former Liberty, (and all this, as himself confessed,
merely out of his own dislike of My Answer, notwithstanding his beforesaid
Engagement) or afterward by the two Houses, (as the Governor affirms) in
confining Me within the circuit of this Castle, I appeal to God and the World,
whether My said Answer deserved the reply of such proceedings; besides the
unlawfulness for Subjects to imprison their King, That by the permission of
Almighty God I am reduced to this sad condition, as I no way repine; so I am
not without hope, but that the same God will in due time convert these
Afflictions into My advantage. In the mean time, I am confident to bear these
crosses with Patience, and a great Equality of Mind. But by what means or
occasion I am come to this Relapse in My Affairs, I am utterly to seek;
especially when I consider, that I have sacrificed to My two Houses of
Parliament, for the Peace of the Kingdom, all but what is much more dear to Me
than My Life, My Conscience and Honor; desiring nothing more than to perform
it in the most proper and natural way, a Personal Treaty. But that which makes
Me most at a loss is, the remembering My signal compliance with the Army and
their Interests: and of what importance My compliance was to them, and their
often-repeated Professions and Engagements for my just Rights in general, at
Newmarket and S. Albans, and their particular explanation of those generals by
their voted and re-voted Proposals, which I had reason to understand should be
the utmost extremity would be expected from Me, and that in some things therein
I should be eased; (herein appealing to the Consciences of some of the chiefest
Officers in the Army, if what I have said be not punctually true) and how I
have failed of their expectations, or My professions to them, I challenge them
and the whole World to produce the least color of Reason. And now I would know
what it is that is desired. Is it Peace? I have showed the way, (being both
willing and desirous to perform my part in it) which is, a just compliance with
all chief Interests. Is it Plenty and Happiness? They are the inseparable
effects of Peace. Is it Security? I, who wish that all men would forgive and
forget like Me, have offered the Militia for My time. Is it Liberty of
Conscience? He who wants it is most ready to give it. Is it the right
administration of Justice? Officers of trust are committed to the choice of My
two Houses of Parliament. Is it frequent Parliaments? I have legally, fully
concurred therewith. Is it the Arrears of the Army? Upon a settlement they will
certainly be paid with much ease, but before there will be found much
difficulty, if not impossibility, in it.

Thus all the World cannot but see My real and unwearied endeavors for Peace,
the which (by the grace of God) I shall neither repent Me of nor ever be
slackned in, notwithstanding My past, present, or future sufferings: But if I
may not be heard, let every one judge who it is that obstructs the good I would
or might do. What is it that men are afraid to hear from Me? It cannot be
Reason, (at least, none will declare themselves so unreasonable as to confess
it:) and it can less be impertinent or unreasonable Discourses; for thereby,
peradventure, I might more justify this My Restraint than the causers
themselves can do: so that of all wonders yet this is the greatest to Me. But
it may be easily gathered how those men intend to govern who have used Me thus.
And if it be My hard Fate to fall together with the Liberty of this Kingdom, I
shall not blush for My self, but much lament the future Miseries of My People,
the which I shall still pray to God to avert, whatever becomes of Me.

CHARLES R.

Meditations upon DEATH, after the Votes of Non-Addresses, and His MAJESTY'S
closer Imprisonment in Carisbrook Castle.
AS I have leisure enough, so I have cause more than enough to meditate upon,
and prepare for my Death; for I know there are but few steps between the
Prisons and Graves of Princes.

It is God's indulgence which gives Me the space, but Man's Cruelty that gives
Me the sad occasions for these thoughts.

For, besides the common burden of Mortality, which lies upon Me as a Man, I
now bear the heavy load of other men's Ambitions, Fears, Jealousies, and cruel
Passions, whose Envy or Enmity against Me makes their own lives seem deadly to
them, while I enjoy any part of Mine.

I thank God, my Prosperity made Me not wholly a stranger to the contemplations
of Mortality: Those are never unseasonabble, since this is always uncertain:
Death being an Eclipse which often happens as well in clear as cloudy days.

But my now long and sharp Adversity has so reconciled in Me those natural
Antipathies between Life and Death which are in all men, that, I thank God, the
common terrors of it are dispelled, and the special horror of it as to My
particular much allayed: for although my Death at present may justly be
represented to Me with all those terrible aggravations which the policy of
Cruel and Implacable enemies can put upon it (affairs being drawn to the very
dregs of Malice;) yet, I bless God, I can look upon all those stings as
unpoisonous, though sharp, since my Redeemer has either pulled them out, or
given Me the Antidote of his Death against them; which as to the Immaturity,
Unjustice, Shame, Scorn and Cruelty of it, exceeded whatever I can fear.

Indeed, I never did find so much the Life of Religion, the Feast of a good
Conscience, and the brazen wall of a judicious Integrity and Constancy, as
since I came to these closer conflicts with the thoughts of Death.

I am not so old as to be weary of Life; nor (I hope) so bad as to be either
afraid to dye, or ashamed to live: true, I am so afflicted, as might make Me
sometime even desire to dye; if I did not consider, that it is the greatest
glory of a Christians life to dye daily, in conquering, by a lively Faith and
patient Hopes of a better life, those partial and quotidian deaths which kill
us (as it were) by piece-meals, and make us overlive our own fates; while we
are deprived of Health, Honor, Liberty, Power, Credit, Safety or Estate, and
those other Comforts of dearest Relations, which are as the Life of our lives.

Though, as a KING, I think My self to live in nothing temporal so much as in
the Love and good will of my People; for which as I have suffered many deaths,
so I hope I am not in that point as yet wholly dead: notwithstanding my Enemies
have used all the poison of Falsity and violence of Hostility to destroy, first
the Love and Loyalty which is in my Subjects, and then all that content of Life
in Me which from these I chiefly enjoyed.

Indeed, they have left Me but little of Life, and only the husk and shell (as
it were) which their further Malice and Cruelty can take from Me; having
bereaved Me of all those worldly Comforts for which Life it self seems
desirable to men.

But, O my Soul, think not that Life too long or tedious wherein God gives Thee
any opportunities, if not to do, yet to suffer with such Christian Patience and
Magnanimity in a good Cause, as are the greatest Honor of our Lives, and the
best improvement of our Deaths.

I know that in point of true Christian Valor it argues Pusillanimity to
desire to dye out of weariness of life, and a want of that heroic greatness of
spirit which becomes a Christian, in the patient and generous sustaining those
Afflictions which as shadows necessarily attend us while we are in this Body,
and which are lessened or enlarged as the Sun of our Prosperity moves higher or
lower; whose total absence is best recompensed with the dew of Heaven.

The assaults of Affliction may be terrible, like Sampson's Lion, but they
yield much sweetness to those that dare to encounter and overcome them; who
know how to overlive the witherings of their Gourds without discontent or
peevishness, while they may yet converse with God.

That I must dye as a Man is certain: that I may dye a King by the hands of my
own Subjects, a violent, sudden and barbarous death, in the strength of my
years, in the midst of my Kingdoms, my Friends and loving Subjects being
helpless Spectators, my Enemies insolent Revilers and Triumphers over Me,
living, dying, and dead, is so probable in humane reason, that God has taught
Me not to hope otherwise as to man's Cruelty; however I despair not of God's
infinite Mercy.

I know my Life is the object of the Devils and Wicked men's Malice; but yet
under God's sole custody and disposal: whom I do not think to flatter for
longer Life, by seeming prepared to die; but I humbly desire to depend upon
him, and to submit to his will both in life and death, in what order soever he
is pleased to lay them out to Me.

I confess it is not easy for Me to contend with those many horrors of Death
wherewith God suffers Me to be tempted; which are equally horrid either in the
suddenness of a barbarous Assassination, or in those greater formalities
whereby my Enemies (being more solemnly cruel) will, it may be, seek to add (as
those did who crucified Christ) the Mockery of Justice to the Cruelty of
Malice. That I may be destroyed, as with greater Pomp and Artifice, so with
less Pity, it will be but a necessary policy, to make my Death appear as an act
of Justice done by Subjects upon their Sovereign; who know that no Law of God
or Man invests them with any power of Judicature without Me, much less against
Me; and who, being sworn and bound by all that is Sacred before God and Man to
endeavor my Preservation, must pretend Justice to cover their Perjury.

It is, indeed, a sad fate for any man to have his Enemies to be his Accusers,
Parties and Judges; but most desperate, when this is acted by the insolence of
Subjects against their Sovereign; wherein those who have had the chiefest hand,
and are most guilty of contriving the public Troubles, must by shedding My
Blood seem to wash their own hands of that innocent blood whereof they are now
most evidently guilty before God and Man, and, I believe, in their own
Consciences too; while they carried on unreasonable demands, first by Tumults,
after by Armies. Nothing makes mean spirits more cowardly-cruel in managing
their usurped Power against their lawful Superious than this, the Guilt of
their unjust Usurpation; notwithstanding those specious and popular pretensions
of Justice against Delinquents, applied only to disguise at first the
monstrousness of their designs, who despaired, indeed, of possessing the power
and profits of the Vineyard, till the Heir, whose right it is, be cast out and
slain.

With them my greatest Fault must be, that I would not either destroy My self,
with the Church and State, by my Word, or not suffer them to do it unresisted
by the Sword; whose covetous Ambition no Concessions of Mine could ever yet
either satisfy or abate.

Nor is it likely they will ever think that Kingdom of Brambles, which some men
seek to erect (at once, weak, sharp, and fruitless either to God or Man) is
like to thrive, till watered with the Royal Blood of those whose right the
Kingdom is.

Well, God's will be done; I doubt not bu^ my Innocence will find him both my
Protector and my Advocate, who is my only Judge, whom I own as King of Kings;
not only for the eminency of His Power and Majesty above them, but also for
that singular Care and Protection which he has over them; who knows them to be
exposed to as many Dangers (being the greatest Patrons of Law, Justice, Order,
and Religion on Earth) as there be either Men or Devils which love Confusion.

Nor will he suffer those men long to prosper in their Babel, who build it with
the Bones, and cement it with the Blood of their KINGS.

I am confident they will find Avengers of my Death among themselves: the
Injuries I have sustained from them, shall be first punished by them, who
agreed in nothing so much as in opposing Me.

Their impatience to bear the loud cry of my Blood, shall make them think no
way better to expiate (...) than by shedding theirs who with them most thirsted
after Mine.

The sad Confusions following my Destruction are already presaged and confirmed
to Me by those I have lived to see since my Troubles, in which God alone (who
only could) has many ways pleaded my Cause; not sustering them to go
unpunished whose Confederacy in Sin was their only Security; who have cause to
fear that God will both further divide, and by murual Vengeance afterward
destroy them.

My greatest conquest of Death is from the Power and Love of Christ, who has
swallowed up Death in the Victory of his Resurrection and the glory of his
Ascension.

My next Comfort is, that he gives Me not only the honor to imitate his
Example in suffering for Righteousness sake, (though obscured by the foulest
charges of Tyranny and Injustice) but also that Charity, which is the noblest
Revenge upon and Victory over my Destroyers; by which, I thank God, I can both
forgive them, and pray for them, that God would not impute my Blood to them,
further than to convince them what need they have of Christ's Blood to wash
their Souls from the guilt of shedding Mine.

At present, the Will of my Enemies seems to be their only rule, their Power
the measure, and their Success the exactor of what they please to call Justice;
while they flatter themselves with the fancy of their own Safety by My Danger,
and the security of their Lives and Designs by My Death: forgetting, that as
the greatest temptations to Sin are wrapped up in seeming Prosperities, so the
severest Vengeances of God are then most accomplished when men are suffered to
complete their wicked purposer.

I bless God, I pray not so much that this bitter cup of a Violent Death may
pass from Me, as that of his Wrath may pass from all those whose hands by
deserting me are sprinkled, or by acting and consenting to my Death are embrued
with my Blood.

The Will of God has confined and concluded Mine; I shall have the pleasure of
dying, without any pleasure of desired Vengeance.

This I think becomes a Christian toward his Enemies, and a King toward his
Subjects.

They cannot deprive Me of more than I am content to lose, when God sees fit by
their hands to take it from Me; whose Mercy, I believe, will more than
infinitely recompense whatever by Man's Injustice he is pleased to deprive me of.

The Glory attending my Death will far surpass all I could enjoy or conceive in
Life.

I shall not want the heavy and envied Crowns of this world, when my God has
mercifully crowned and consummated his Graces with Glory, and exchanged the
shadows of my Earthly Kingdoms among men, for the substance of that Heavenly
Kingdom with Himself.

For the censures of the world, I know the sharp and necessary Tyranny of my
Destroyers will sufficiently confute the Calumnies of Tyranny against Me: I am
persuaded I am happy in the judicious Love of the ablest and best of my
Subjects, who do not only pity and pray for Me, but would be content even to
die with Me or for Me.

These know how to excuse my Failings as a Man, and yet to retain and pay their
Duty to Me as their KING; there being no Religious necessity binding any
Subjects, by pretending to punish, infinitely to exceed the faults and errors
of their Princes, especially there where more than sufficient Satisfaction has
been made to the public; the enjoyment of which private Ambitions have
hitherto frustrated.

Others, I believe, of softer tempers, and less advantaged by my Ruin, do
already feel sharp Convictions, and some remorse in their Consciences; where
they cannot but see the proportions of their evil dealings against Me in the
measure of God's retaliations upon them, who cannot hope long to enjoy their
own thumbs and toes, having under pretense of paring others nails been so cruel
as to cut off their chiefest strength.

The punishment of the more insolent and obstinate may be like that of Korah
and his Accomplices (at once mutining against both Prince and Priest) in such a
method of Divine Justice as is not ordinary; the Earth of the lowest and
meanest People opening upon them, and swallowing them up in a just disdain of
their ill-gotten and worse-used Authority, upon whose support and strength they
chiefly depended for their building and establishing their Designs against Me,
the Church, and State.

My chiefest comfort in Death consists in my Peace which, I trust, is made with
God; before whose exact Tribunal I shall not fear to appear as to the Cause so
long disputed by the Sword between Me and my causless Enemies: where I doubt
not but his Righteous Judgment will confute their Fallacy, who from worldly
Success (rather like Sophisters than sound Christians) draw those popular
Conclusions for God's Approbation of their actions; whose wise Providence (we
know) often permits many events which his revealed Word (the only clear, safe and
fixed Rule of good Actions and good Consciences) in no sort approves.

I am confident, the Justice of my Cause and Clearness of my Conscience before
God and toward my People will carry Me as much above them in God's decision, as
their Successes have lifted them above Me in the Vulgar Opinion: who consider
not that many times those undertakings of men are lifted up to Heaven in the
prosperity and applause of the world, whose rise is from Hell as to the
Injuriousness and Oppression of the Design. The prosperous winds which often fill
the sails of Pirates, do not justify their Piracy and Rapine.

I look upon it with infinite more content and quiet of Soul, to have been
worsted in my enforced Contestation for and Vindication of the Laws of the
Land, the Freedom and Honor of Parliaments, the Rights of my Crown, the just
Liberty of my Subjects, and the true Christian Religion in its Doctrine,
Government and due Encouragements, than if I had with the greatest advantages
of Success overborn them all; as some men have now evidently done, whatever
Designs they at first pretended.

The Prayers and Patience of my Friends and loving Subjects will contribute
much to the sweetning of this bitter Cup, which I doubt not but I shall more
cheerfully take, and drink as from God's hand, (if it must be so) than they can
give it to Me whose hands are unjustly and barbarously lifted up against Me.

And as to the last event, I may seem to owe more to my Enemies than my
Friends; while those will put a period to the Sins and Sorrows attending this
miserable Life, wherewith these desire I might still contend.

I shall be more than Conqueror through Christ enabling Me, for whom I have
hitherto suffered, as he is the Author of Truth, Order and Peace; for all which
I have been forced to contend against Error, Faction and Confusion.

If I must suffer a Violent Death, with my Savior, it is but Mortality crowned
with Martyrdom: where the debt of Death which I owe for Sin to Nature, shall be
raised as a gift of Faith and Patience offered to God.

Which I humbly beseech him mercifully to accept: and although Death be the
wages of My own Sin as from God, and the effect of others Sins as men, both
against God and Me; yet as I hope My own Sins are so remitted that they shall
be no ingredients to imbitter the cup of my Death, so I desire God to pardon
their Sins who are most guilty of my Destruction.

The Trophies of my Charity will be more glorious and durable over them, than
their illmanaged Victories over Me.

Though their Sin be prosperous, yet they had need to be penitent, that they
may be pardoned. Both which I pray God they may obtain; that my Temporal Death
unjustly inflicted by them may not be revenged by God's just inflicting Eternal
Death upon them: for I look upon the Temporal Destruction of the greatest King
as far less deprecable than the Eternal Damnation of the meanest Subject.

Nor do I wish other than the safe bringing of the Ship to shore, when they
have cast Me overboard: though it be very strange, that Mariners can sind no
other means to appease the Storm themselves have raised, but by drowning their
Pilot.

I thank God, my Enemies Cruelty cannot prevent my Preparation; whose Malice in
this I shall defeat, that they shall not have the satisfaction to have
destroyed my Soul with my Body: of whose Salvation while some of them have
themselves seemed and taught others to despair, they have only discovered this,
that they do not much desire it.

Whose uncharitable and cruel Restraints, denying Me even the assistance of any
of my Chaplains, has rather enlarged than any way obstructed my access to the
Throne of Heaven.

Where Thou dwell, O King of Kings, who fillest Heaven and Earth, who art
the fountain of Eternal Life, in whom is no shadow of Death.

Thou, O God, art both the just Inflicter of Death upon us, and the merciful
Savior of us in it and from it.

Yea it is better for us to be dead to our selves, and live in Thee, than by
living in our selves to be deprived of Thee.

O make the many bitter aggravations of my Death, as a Man and a King, the
opportunities and advantages of thy special Graces and Comforts in my Soul, as
a Christian.

If Thou, Lord, wilt be with Me, I shall neither fear nor feel any evil, though
I walk through the valley of the shadow of Death.

To contend with Death, is the work of a weak and mortal man; to overcome it,
is the Grace of Thee alone, who art the Almighty and Immortal God.

O my Savior, who know what it is to die with Me as a man, make Me to know
what it is to pass through Death to Life with Thee my God.

Though I die, yet I know that Thou my Redeemer live for ever: though Thou
slayest Me, yet Thou have encouraged Me to trust in Thee for Eternal Life.

O withdraw not thy Favor from Me, which is better than Life.

O be not far from Me, for I know not how near a violent and Cruel Death is to
Me.

As thy Omniscience, O God, discovers, so thy Omnipotence can defeat the
Designs of those who have, or shall conspire my Destruction.

O show Me the goodness of thy Will, through the wickedness of theirs.

Thou give Me leave, as a man, to pray that this Cup may pass from Me; but
Thou have taught Me, as a Christian, by the example of Christ, to add, Not My
will, but Thine be done.

Yea, Lord, let our wills be one, by wholly resolving Mine into Thine: let not
the desire of Life in Me be so great, as that of doing or suffering thy Will in
either Life or Death.

As I believe Thou have forgiven all the Errors of my Life, so I hope Thou will save Me from the Terrors of my Death.

Make Me content to leave the Worlds Nothing, that I may come really to enjoy
All in Thee, who have made Christ unto Me in Life Gain, and in Death Advantage.

Though my Destroyers forget their Duty to Thee and Me; yet do not Thou, O
Lord, forget to be merciful to them.

For what profit is there in my Blood, or in their gaining my Kingdoms, if they
lose their own Souls?

Such as have not only resisted my just Power, but wholly usurped and turned it
against My self, though they may deserve, yet let them not receive to
themselves Damnation.

Thou made thy Son a Savior to many that crucified Him, while at once He
suffered violently by them, and yet willingly for them.

O let the voice of his Blood be heard for My Murderers, louder than the Cry
of Mine against them.

Prepare them for thy Mercy by due Convictions of their Sin, and let them not
at once deceive and damn their own Souls, by fallacious pretensions of Justice
in destroying Me; while the conscience of their unjust Usurpation of power
against Me chiefly tempts them to use all extremities against Me.

O Lord, Thou know I have found their Mercies to Me, as very false, so very
cruel; who pretending to preserve Me, have meditated nothing but my Ruin.

O deal not with them as blood-thirsty and deceitful men; but overcome their
Cruelty with Thy Compassion and My Charity.

And when Thou make inquisition for my Blood, O sprinkle their polluted, yet
penitent, Souls with the Blood of thy Son, that thy destroying Angel may pass
over them.

Though they think my Kingdoms on Earth too little to entertain at once both
them and Me; yet let the capacious Kingdom of thy infinite Mercy at last
receive both Me and my Enemies.

When being reconciled to Thee in the Blood of the same Redeemer, we shall live
far above these Ambitious desires, which beget such mortal Enmities.

When their hands shall be heaviest and cruelest upon Me, O let Me fall into
the arms of thy tender and eternal Mercies.

That what is cut off of my Life in this miserable moment, may be repayed in
thy ever-blessed Eternity.

Lord, let thy Servant depart in Peace, for my eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Vota dabunt quae bella negarunt.

M. S.

Sanctissimi Regis and Martyris, CAROLI Primi.

Siste, Viator;

Luge, Obmutesce, Mirare:

Memento CAROLI ILLIUS

Nominis pariter and insignissimae Pietatis PRIMI,

MAGNAE BRIT ANNIAE ILLIUS,

Qui Rebellium Perfidia primo deceptus,

Dein Perfidorum Rabie percussus,

Inconcussus tamen LEGUM and FIDEI DEFENSOR,

Schismaticorum Tyrannidi succubuit,

Anno

Salutis Humanae MDCXLVIII,

Servitutis Britannicae, Primo,

Felicitatis Suae, Primo,

Corona Terrestri spoliatus, Coelesti donatus.

Sed, Sileant periturae Tabellae:

Perlege RELIQUIAS vere Sacras CAROLINAS,

In Queis,

Ipsa Sui Iconem, Aere perenniorem,

vivacius exprimit

(...)

CAROLI Primi (...) Epitaphium (...).
SIstas sacrilegum Pedem, Viator,
Ne forsan temeres sacros sepulchri
Augusti Cineres. Repostus hic est
In Terrae Gremio Decor Stuporque
Humani Generis; Senex, and Infans;
Prudens scilicet Innocen sque Princeps:
Regni praesidium, Ruina Regni;
Vita Praesidium, Ruina Morte.
Quem Regem potius, Patrem ve dicam?
O Patrem prius, and deinde Regem!
Regem quippe Sui, Patremque Regni.
Hic Donumque Dei, Deique Cura,
(Quem Vitaque refert, refertque Morte,)
Ringente Satana, Canente Coelo,
Diro in Pegmate [Gloriae Theatro]
Et Christi Cruce, Victor, and Securi
Baptistae emicuit. Ruina Felix!
Qua Divum Carolus secutus Agnum,
Et postliminio domum vocatus
Primaevae Patriae fit Inquilinus.
Sic Lucis prius Hesperus Cadentis
Resplendet modo Phosphorus Reversae.
Hic Vindex Fidei sacer Vetustae,
Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundum,
Naturae Typus absolutioris,
Fortunae Domitor ferendo suae;
Qui quantum Calicis bibit tremendi,
Tantundem sibi Gloriae reportat;
Regum Maximus, unicusque Regum,
In quo Res minima est, fuisse Regem.
Solus, qui supera locatus Arce
Vel Vita poterit frui priore.
Quum sint Relliquiae, Cadaver, Umbra
Tam sacri Capitis vel ipsa sacra,
Ipsis Eulogiis coinquinata,
Quaeque ipsum (...) prophanat;
Sistas sacrilegum Pedem, Viator.
Tho. Pierce D. D. Coll. Magd. apud Oxon. Praeses.
An EPITAPH upon KING CHARLES.
SO falls that stately Cedar; while it stood
That was the only glory of the Wood;
Great CHARLES, thou earthly God, celestial Man,
Whose life, like others, though it were a span;
Yet in that span was comprehended more
Than Earth has waters, or the Ocean shore:
Thy heavenly virtues Angels should rehearse,
It is a the am too high for humane Verse:
He that would know thee right, then let him look
Upon thy rare incomparable Book,
And read it over and over: which if he do,
He Will find thee King, and Priest, and Prophet too;
And sadly see our loss, and, though in vain,
With fruitless wishes call thee back again:
Nor shall oblivion sit upon thy Hearse,
Though there were neither Monument, nor Verse.
Thy Sufferings and thy Death let no man name,
It was thy Glory, but the Kingdoms Shame.
J. H.
(...).

THE CONTENTS.
Anno MDC. KIng CHARLES His Lineage and Birth. Page 1. MDCII. A presage of His
Succession to the Crown. p. 3. MDCIV. He is Created Duke of York. His
proficiency in his Studies. p. 4. MDCXII. His Succession in the Dukedom of
Cornwall. His Juvenile Exercises. p. 5. MDCXVI. He is Created Prince of Wales.
p. 6. MDCXVIII. The Death of Queen Anne. His great improvement in Theological
Controversies. p. 9. MDCXXII. His Journey into Spain, and the success of it. p.
10. MDCXXIII. His Return. The Proposal of a Match with France. p. 14. MDCXXV.
King James his death. His Succession in the Kingdom. The State of it at his
first coming to it. His Coronation. p. 15. MDCXXVII. The Expedition to the Isle
of Rhee. Assistance afforded to Rochel. p. 23. MDCXXX. The Birth of Prince
CHARLES. p. 29. MDCXXXII. Tumults in Ireland. Lord Strafford sent Deputy
thither. p. 32. MDCXXXIII. His Journey into Scotland, and Coronation there. p.
33. MDCXXXIV. The business of Shipmoney. p. 36. MDCXXXVII. Troubles began in
Scotland, and upon what pretense. p. 40. MDCXXXIX. An agreement made with the
Scots. p. 44. MDCXL. An Army raised against the Scots. A Parliament called. p.
45. MDCXLI. The Arraignment and Execution of the Earl of Strafford. The
Factious Designs of the Zealots in the Parliament. p. 50. The Rebellion in
Ireland. p. 64. The Queens departure out of England. p. 80. The Kings
withdrawment from London. p. 83. His repulse at Hull by Hotham. p. 88.
Armiesraised on both sides. p. 97. The Battle at Edgehill. p. 102.
MDCXLIII. The Queens return into England. The Kings Successes. p. 105.
MDCXLIV. The Kings Victories over the Rebels. p. 113. The Trial and Execution
of the Archbishop of Canterbury. p. 118. His Character. p. 120.
MDCXLV. The Battle at Naseby, and its ill influence upon the Kings Party. p.
128. MDCXLVI. The Kings withdrawment to the Scottish Army. p. 133. MDCXLVII.
The King removed from Holmby to Hampton Court. His flight into the Isle of
Wight. p. 139. MDCXLVIII. The Treaty in the Isle of Wight. p. 164. A Court
Erected for the Trial of the King. p. 179. His Trial, and Carriage there. p.
192. His Martyrdom, and Burial. p. 201. His Incomparable Book. p. 208. His
Character. His Religion. p. 212. His Justice. p. 223. His Clemency. p. 225. His
Fortitude. p. 229. His Patience. p. 232. His Humility. p. 237. His choice of
Ministers of State. p. 239. His Affection to his People. p. 240. His obliging
Converse. p. 243. His Fidelity. p. 244. His Chastity. p. 246. His Temperance.
p. 247. His Frugality. p. 248. His Intellectual abilities. p. 250. His skill in
all Arts. p. 252. His Eloquence. p. 254. His Political Prudence. p. 255. The
censure of his Fortune. p. 257. A presage of His Fall, and the future State of
the Royal Family. p. 259. His Recreations. p. 260. The features of His Body. p.
262. His Children. p. 263. An Appendix. p. 267. His Select Meditations upon the
denial of the Attendance of His Chaplains. p. 268. Penitential Meditations and
Vows in His Solitude at Holmby. p. 281. His Declaration after the Votes of no
further Address. p. 287. Meditations upon Death, after the Votes of
Non-Address, and His Majesty's closer Imprisonment in Carisbrook Castle. p.
293. His Epitaph. 312. His Epitaph by Doctor Pierce. p. 313. Another Epitaph by
J.H. p. 315.

THE END.
Lately Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Amen-Corner,
THE Estate of the EMPIRE: or, an Abridgement of the Laws and Government of
GERMANY; farther showing what Condition the EMPIRE was in, when the Peace was
Concluded at Munster: Also the several Fights, Battles, and Desolation of
Cities during the War in that EMPIRE: And also of the GOLDEN BVLL. In 8o

The Sicilian Tyrant: Or, The Life and Death of AGATHOCLES: With some
Reflections on our Modern Usurpers. 8o

The ROYAL MARTYR, and the Dutiful Subject, in two SERMONS. By Guilbert Burnet.
4o


