A WORD TO THE WORLD Answering the darkness thereof, concerning the perfect
work of God to Salvation.
Concerning the natural Man.
THE natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. And all men by nature are the children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. into which state man is fallen through transgression, and so deeply is
entered into the pollution, that there is a ground and root of enmity, which is
the degenerated part from God in mankind, which has darkened the understanding,
whereby it comes to pass that the hearts of the people are blinded, and the
sons of men clouded in a night of ignorance, whereby they cannot see, discern,
or understand the things of God, nor the Scriptures, which declares of the
Kingdom in parables, and holds forth godliness in a mystery.

And therefore the whole world, with the strength of all their Wisdom, or
height and depth of their understanding or reason, are not able to measure the
state, condition, and life of the Saints aright; they cannot see the life of
the holy men of God to judge of it otherwise, but to say that it is a life of
sin, as is their own life, in the nature of unrighteousness; and therefore
whilst they go about to measure another man's state by that which is their own
life, and not the measure of God, do wrest the Scriptures, and pervert the
truth, and in that miserable darkness do call their imaginations, The Writing
of the Scriptures, even such as is contrary to Truth, and the Scriptures, and
the Spirit of the Lord.

They say, The just man, or the most righteous man that is, sins seven times
a day; and this they call Scripture, whilst the Scripture only says, That
the just man falls seven times, and rises up again, but the wicked [mark the
wicked's falling] shall fall into mischief, Prove. 24.16. Now the wicked do say
here, That the just man falls seven times a day into sin; whilst the
Scriptures does not at all say that the just man sins, but says, he falls
seven times; as Paul, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.13.
David shows Many are the affliction of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
him out of all, Psalm. 34 19.

Again, they wrest that Scripture, 1 John 1.8. who writing of sundry conditions
to instruct the weak, and to bring the wicked World to a sight of their ways,
who were in the state of the Pharisees apt to justify self, says, If we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; for they
being not in the life of the measure of God, which measures all things
equally, cannot see the depth of John's words, to measure all (as John did) with
the spirit, all conditions; who says, If we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin. But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, ver.
7.9. as Paul says, Such were some of you, but ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6.11.
mark, they were washed, and sanctified, and just fled in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, by the spirit of God: which was a thing done, and not to be done.

Concerning the fallings of some mentioned in the Scriptures.
DAVID he fell into transgression, unto whom God sent Nathan to show him his
sin by a parable, and David repented with all his heart; and he turned to the
Lord with all his heart after that he had felt the heavy judgments of God upon
him because of his transgression; and then David stood in that which was
according to Gods own heart, so that God said by his Seed, The work of the Lord
should be accomplished in them days.

Paul he was a persecutor, and one that consented to the murder of Stephen; yet
Paul was called, and God in the fullness of time made him a chosen vessel to his
glory: And Paul whilst he was in the work of the Lord, and in the sense and
feeling of the operation and working of the power of the Lord in him, after he
came to see the Work, he declared the Work; for being once in bondage he could
speak of bondage; and coming unto liberty, he could as well speak of liberty.
He once cried out in a query, saying, Who shall a liver me from this Body of
death? and he also gives the answer in plainness, and with a heart lift up to
the Lord, says, I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, (and confirms the
answer to his query with other sound words, saying,) The Law of the spirit of
life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8.2.

Peter he denied his Master, and when Peter remembered, he went out, and wept
bitterly, and repented, and owned his Master again; and who can say that ever
Peter denied his Master after repentance? And others fell, and repented so as
was not to be repented of again. And others were utterly lost, who fell from,
and lost their first Love, and place of Repentance.

Concerning Perfection.
I Am the way, the truth, (says Christ) and the life; and all that deny
perfection in this life, do deny (in the substance) the coming of the Son, who
is the life, who by the virtue and power of the resurrection, restored many
unto life; and therefore Paul to the Colossians writes, Your life is hid with
Christ in God, Col. 3.3. which is the perfect life, which all the World cannot
rightly judge of, forasmuch as they are not in Christ, they cannot rightly
judge of that perfect life which is hid [mark, is hid from all the World who
are in sin, who cannot see] with Christ in God; Christ hides no imperfect
thing with him in God; the pure Fountain of life, cannot receive the
corruptible things of death; but that which is of the pure nature of God who is
perfect, is hid with Christ in God; and the life of the Saints is of that
nature which dwells with God who is perfect, with whom no imperfect or
incorruptible thing can dwell.

Gods Justice shows his perfection in righteousness, who never required that
in the equality of his Ways, but what could be performed by man, as man in the
obedience stood in the counsel of God, who commanded in righteousness.

And God said unto Abraham, Walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1, 2.
there the Scripture shows the command; and Abraham hearkened unto the voice of
the Lord, and God blessed Abraham because he obeyed his voice, Genesis 22.18.
there the Scritures shows Abraham's faithfulness and perfect walking before
the Lord: And such as accuse Abraham with transgression, let them examine
whether they in so saying are not transgressors, Genesis 12.

Again, no imperfect man or sinner standing in the nature of sin and
transgression, can walk with God, who is infinitely perfect; but Enoch walked
with God, and was not, for God took him, Genesis 5.24. which the Scripture also
shows concerning Noah, who was a just man, and perfect in his generation, who
walked with God; but the blind World whose understandings are darkened through
sin and iniquity, they cannot discern his generation as he was born of God,
which was the ground of his perfect walking before the Lord, Genesis 6.9. And as
the Scriptures says, He that is born of God (which is the generation of the
just and perfect) sins not, 1 John 3.9. he cannot commit sin because he is
born of God; And except ye be born again, ye cannot see the Kingdom of God,
Joh. 3.3. Neither does the World see Noah's Vinyard, nor his nakedness, nor the
covering which was cast thereon, and therefore they do but imagine his
trangression.

Again, God said that Job was a perfect man, and upright before the Lord, one
that feared God, and eschewed evil, Job 1.8. and although the Walkers in
iniquity and in sin, who are blind and dark in their understandings, do accuse
Job with evil in his saying, Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the
night in which it was said, There is a man-child conceived, etc. Job 3.3, to
14. and notwithstanding also that, Job says, Who is he that hides counsel
without knowledge? therefore have I uttered that I understood not, things too
wonderful for me, which I know not, etc. I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self and repent in
dust and ashes.

Yet God said unto Eliphas the Temanite, and his two Friends, Ye have not
spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has, Job 42.3, 4, 5,
6, 7. And let all the World go learn this, Adam was naked, and he knew not
that he was naked, Genesis 3.7, 10, 11.

Hezekiah the Captain of the people of the Lord, after the Word of the Lord by
the mouth of Isaiah the Prophet, came unto him concerning his death, he prayed
unto the Lord, saying, I beseech thee O Lord, remember now how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. And Isaiah was turned again
with the Word of the Lord to Hezekiah, to say unto him, I have heard thy
prayer, I have seen thy tears, behold I will heal thee, 2 Kings 20.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. and Hezekiah's integrity did stand to the end, read ver. 16, 17, 18, 19.

Furthermore all that deny the coming unto perfection in this life, they deny
the coming unto Christ in this life, who is perfection, who says, I am the
resurrection and the life; and all that do witness the resurrection, and that
are risen with Christ, as says Paul, Col. 3.1. they are risen in, and unto the
life which is perfect, which is not of themselves, as self-justification, or by
themselves, as self-righteous; but in, by, and through Christ the light of the
World, which is the perfect life, which is the light of men, Joh. 1.4.

And such also as do deny perfection in this life, they do deny in the
substance, the end of Christ's prayer, who prayed, I in them, (who was perfect)
and they in me, (who was without sin) that they might be made perfect in one,
who is the light of the World, the perfect life of men, Joh. 17.23.

Again, such also as deny perfection in this life, they deny the end of the
Scriptures, as Paul writes to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.16.17. All Scripture is given
by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, may be thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

Again, such also as deny perfection in this life, they deny the end of the
Ministry of Christ, which the Scriptures bears testimony of in the Writings
thereof, as it says, he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work
of the Ministry: Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

And again also, all such as deny perfection in this life, they deny in the
substance the promise, that is, He shall save his people from their sins,
Matthew. 1.21. and the Work of Christ, for which cause he is God manifest in the
flesh, the mystery of godliness, to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John
3.8. and from the spirit which gives testimony and assurance of the promises,
and therefore from that which sanctifies the heart, and cleanses the mind from
all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and which leads unto the perfecting
holiness in the fear of the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.1.

Christ in his Doctrine taught his Disciples what to do, and what ought to be
left undone, Matthew. 5.6, 7. and in one Word he sums up all, saying, Be ye
perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, Matthew. 5.48. And
Christ was faithful in his Word, and not deceitful in his Declaration, which
the blind World would seemingly make him to be, who deny perfection; he spoke
even as he meant, in truth, who is the Truth, who is the Way, and is equal in
his commandments for his servants to walk in the Way. And he did not command
impossibilities, but all that stood steadfast, and now do stand in his power, by
it they were preserved from unrighteousness, who in it walked unto the end in
uprightness, and therein finished their testimony for the Lord.

Paul also wrote to the Corinthians, saying, We speak wisdom among them that
are perfect, 1 Cor. 2.16. And in that Wisdom Paul and his Brethren preached
Christ, warning every man, and reaching every man, that they might present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.28. And Paul, and Silvanus, and
Timotheus, concerning the Church of the Thessalonians, did pray night and day
exceedingly that they might see their face, and might perfect that which was
lacking in their Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3 10. And for this also the Apostle concerning
the Hebrews prays, Now the God of Peace, and through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good word and work, Heb. 13.20,
21. by which says James, (make) by works faith comes to be made perfect, Jam.
2.22. Furthermore the Apostle writing to the Hebrews, says, Therefore leaving
the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, Heb.
6.1. This also Paul desired concerning the Church of the Corinthians, even
their perfection. And the Apostle writing unto a people which were more grown
in the Faith, says in this wise, Ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the
City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn which are
written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of all, and to the spi^its of just men
made perfect: Heb. 12.22, 23. And this is that which they were come unto then,
who were then a people upon the face of the earth, who walked in the way of
Abel, and in the path of Enoch, in which also the generation of the just walked
in all ages, and is the same now in this age, in which the despised people
called Quakers do walk, which is the only, perfect, true way of God.

And forasmuch as the Saints of old did walk in that only true way as they
stood in the counsel of God, I do therefore enquire of all the World who are
livers in sin, and can hold forth none other way but that which the deceitful
and erroneous people may walk in, Where does the Scripture in particular say
Abel was a sinner? and what was his sin? and in like manner Enoch, Abraham,
Elijah, Elisha, Samuel, Job, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Amos, Ezekiel, Daniel, Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednigo; Hosea, Habakkuk, Joel, Obadiah, Zephaniah, Haggai,
Zachariah, Malachi, and Nehemiah the Governor of Jerusalem, and Hezekiah the
Captain of the Lords people, and Ezra the priest, and John the Baptist, and
Nathaniel the true Israelite, in whom Christ said there was no guile; and John
the Evangelist, and Mark, and Luke, and Timothy, and Titus, and Epaphras, who
labored much, and prayed that many might stand perfect and complete in the
will of God; and many more mentioned in the Scriptures, whom after their
conversions, and once being rooted and grounded in the Faith, particularly I
here insert not, but by these the World may see they are out of the true Way,
unto whom the holy men were not an example of unrighteousness, neither did
Daniel, or Isaiah, or Ezra plead the infirmities of David for the Way of
sinners, to be the way of God; and herein the World in their way in pleading
the Saints infirmities for sin whilst they are upon Earth, is out of the order
of Truth, the example and practice of the holy men of God; and finally, if they
live in sin unto death assuredly as the Lord God is righteous, they will
receive the wages of sin, which is death.

And now let the World search, and see if their Way be not the old and rotten
way, wherein they walk and worship.

But the remnant of the Lord gathered to his praise, do walk and worship in the
new and living way, Heb. 10 20. and let the World search to find out that Way.

Written by a friend of the truth, who is made in measure a witness of the Work
of God, J. P.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, near Aldersgate,
1658


