SERMONS AND DEVOTIONS OLD and NEW.

Revived and published as an Oblation of gratitude to all such of the Nobility,
Gentry and Clergy as retain the noble conscience of having ministered to the
weak Condition of the Author, now aged 73.

The SERMONS at Court were before the War brake forth betwixt King and
Parliament.

Also a Discourse of DUELS, being a Collection and Transtation of other men's
Opinions, with some Addition of his own.

And this in special dedicated for their Use, To the Right Honorable THOMAS
LORD VISCOUNT BEAVMONT of Coleorton, and Mr. ROBERT SVTTON. Heir to Mr. Rich.
Sutton of Tongue in Leicestershire.

By THOMAS PESTEL, the meanest amongst his late Majesty's Chaplains in ordinary.

-- Nonumque premantur in annum, Hor. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ekins, at
the Gun in Paul's Charch-yard, 1659.

DEVOTIONS ON Certain Anniversary FEASTS, and other Occasions.
First on Ascension Day. -- 1625.
TO day white Saints and holy Angels sing
To that pure Lamb some new triumphant thing
Whereat the whole frame of the world ascends,
Each Bird on wings across his Journeys bends
Upright, and from the most exalted twist
His voioe proclaims, his Joys above consist.
Earth swells to rise, and heaves her Issue fair,
In swift perfumes to latch the mounting Air.
Rise then my soul, and every power awake!
Can walls of Dust so strong Resistance make?
Lo! Thy Redeemer, that brave Eagle flies
With Cage and all, breaking the marble skies.
His way to climb, was fitst to be deprest,
Lay then his bloody Cross upon thy breast.
Which will be such a load as birds wings are
To bear thee where his pleading wounds prepare
A Crown of Glory made by conquest thine,
Was his by Nature, where he will refine
Thee and thy case of clay bright as his own,
When joined in Glory, both ascend one Throne.
The Relief on EASTER EVE.
LIke an Heart, the live-long day
That in thorns and thickets lay,
Rouse thee soul, thy flesh forsake,
Got to relief from thy brake;
Shuddring I would have thee part,
And at every motion start.
Look behind thee still to see,
If thy frailties follow thee.
Deep in silence of the night,
Take a sweet and stolen delight.
Graze on Clover by this calm,
Precious spring of bleeding Balm.
Thou remembrest how it ran
From his side, that's God and man.
Taste the pleasures of this stream,
Thou will think thy f^^sh a dream.
Nightly this Repast go take,
Got to Relief from thy brake.
On WHITSUNDAY, or God is Light.
GOD is all Light; All eye; who first gave sight
To the dark Caos, yielding no delight.
To him the double Parent, whiles it lay
So deep in night, that nothing yet was day.
Wherein naught pleased his eye that blindly stood,
But when it saw, He saw that all was good.
He whose eternal Essence, House and Robe,
Are all one Light; one boundless Crystal Globe:
Fathers of Lights; whose Son is from on high,
The dayspring; and whose spirit an inward eye;
Which through this worlds wide Engine moves and rouls,
But dwells in us, illumining our souls,
To search and find that whole and only Bliss,
Which of all three in one the Vision is.
Expostulation on the loss of a noble Gentleman's eye, Mr. H. Ha. 1634.
THou dreadful Potter, may thy humble clay
Ask if Deformities, or Darkness may
Be pleasing in thy sight; or why we find
So many born, so many stricken blind?
Troops of diseases! Change of chance to mar
Thy work; and leave a cloud where was a star.
If sin still made thy wrath thus heavy fall,
Alas! thou might rain Darkness on us all.
If sins excess; their pride that have their eyes
Would all exceed, for they would all despise.
But what on sins slaves as a plague is thrown,
Like manna falls and mercy to thine own.
The Sodomites were blind; so Tobie was;
It fell on Paul as well as Elymas.
And to thy book, thy glass when we repair,
Where as all scruples, all solutions are.
That blind-born man, so posed and quarreled there,
His parents too, by thine own doom are clear.
And opening his, thou giv'st us eyes to see
That Natures Blemish, may thy Glory be.
So can thou blend these things; and make us wealth
Of Poverty; and of a sickness health.
Want teaches Plenties use; were night away
We should grow wanton-weary of the day.
Blows, Bruises, Blindness, ere thy work be done,
May into Medcine, Balm, and Eye Salve run.
God that through Darkness se'st down through my Rains
And know how close this grief my heart constrains.
How this blow striks my eyes still, that to weep
I find them apter then to look or sleep:
Thou know the Muse was no fantastic fit,
Brought forth this verse, I am not sick of wit.
But these disordered lines, like Amraes deep
Fetched srom my soul, in lowly murmur creep
Up to thy Throne of Grace -- The rest is lost.
On New Years Day, a New Years Gift; Out of Gal. 4.4. God sent his Son, made of
a woman, made under the Law.
First, God sent his Sone
GOD sent his Son; to make man's joy begun
From first to last, in endless circle run.
Without Beginning God who never ends
From boundless Being, man's Beginning sends.
Man's double guard of Sun and stars we see.
Angels unseen, all of his sending be.
A foodfull Garden; after food came rest.
Then woman came, of Visibles the best:
Her seed in Promise then, in Gods intent
Before all worlds into the world was sent.
But till all other sendings fail and fade,
The Blood that sealed this mission was unmade.
Man first was sent to Reasons goodly Lamp,
Which dul'd he found, and dimmed in sinful damp.
Then Sacrifice and Prayer; which heard, he saw
New Light down sent him in a flaming Law;
Wild sinners scourge; But School and Guide to those
That tired by sin, by Faith on him repose.
To make whose joys in endless circle run,
From first to last; Behold God sent his Son.
-- Made of a Woman --
MAde of a woman; Hark you Race
Of men; no more this Sex disgrace:
The Lord of Glory leaves his place
To Bour with Mary full of Grace.
God above all that's great or good,
Is made of woman's flesh and blood.
How rare a Vivary was this,
Our Lord within our Lady is.
O look! Amazed Angels look,
But cannot read this my stick Book;
Till that Babes blood unclose the seal,
And so himself, himself reveal.
The woman first that wrought our woe
Remember first, from man did grow.
Here all by Virgins blood was done,
Gods only Partner in his Son
Made of a woman; Hark you Race
Of men; no more this Sex disgrace.
-- Made under the Law. --
UNder the Law; He that the Groundwork laid
Of Earth, and gave the seas a Law, was made.
Who gives the charge to this Eternal Word;
Supream-and-sole-law-giving mighty Lord.
Proud slime and worms, God bows our yoke to bear,
Put on in love, to put us out of fear.
To service, homage, vassalage descends
Jan. 1.
To day, and first fruit of his blood he spends.
What Feind Eccentrick then shall force our souls
From motions regular about his Poles?
Shall even deadly sins in disaray,
Keep off our minds from his Diurnal sway?
Under the Law made he his resting place,
And chose the cutse, to leave us under Grace.
But still to morals tied our hearts and hands,
Scorn not his easy yoke, nor break his bands.
Without those Grates, all fire of virtue cools;
None lawless thus, but Devils, Popes and Fools.
An Hymn on Trinity Sunday, 1625.
Tuned according to S. Bernards, Cur mundus militat? etc.
SIDesideria cordium satias
Aeternas volumus agere gratias.
O pater Luminum, and pater illius,
Qui pater noster est, and tibi filius;
Per quem Coelestia singula feceris,
Quicum fundamina terrae conjeceris;
Quorum men's agitat molem mirabilis,
Atque operarius est ineffabilis;
OTRINE, rejici quanquam sim meritus,
Me tamen refici dignare spiritus.
Re visas obsecro, sol semper oriens,
In Lutum recidens, Cor meum moriens.
Vt quae refulserit exinde Puritas
Sit illi salus and sancta securitas.
Heu sines animam hac in putredine
Mundani pulveris, omni dulcedine
Supernae Gratiae privatam degere
Quam nutu facili possis protegere.
Si Desideria cordium satias,
Aeternas volumus reddere gratias.
Ad Iesum Redemptorem.
Tu qui Serpentis caput contuderis,
Qui Preces, Lachrymas, sanguinem fuderis,
Orcum post tumulum qui penetraveris,
Et mortis Dominum morte prostraveris,
Et super nubium tractus ascenderis
Ac modis milites mill defenderis.
Labimur, labimur, Heu dicto citius
Jesu suavissime, ni sis propitius,
Menteis irradians faveris lumine
Ac labes diluens cruoris flumine,
Et sancti spiritus accendens flamine.
Nos incredibili leves solamine.
Si Desideria cordium satias,
Aeternas volumus habere gratias.
On the Holy SACRAMENT.
LOrd to thy flesh and blood when I repair,
Where dreadful joys and pleasing tremblings are.
Then most I relish, most it does me good,
When my soul faints, and pines, and dies for food.
Did my sins murder thee? To make that plain,
Thy pierc'd-dead-living body bleeds again.
Flow sad sweet drops, what diffring things you do,
Reveal my sins, and seal my pardon too.
A Psalm for Christmas day morning.
1 FAirest of morning Lights appear,
Thou blessed and gaudy day,
On whom was born our Savior dear,
Make haste and csme away.
2 See, See, our pensive breasts do pant,
Like gasping Land we lie,
Thy holy Dews our souls do want.
We faint, we pine, we die.
3 Let from the skies a joyful Rain
Like Mel or Manna fall.
Whose searching drops our sins may drain,
And quench our sorrows all.
4 This day prevents his day of Doom,
His mercy now is nigh.
The mighty God of love is come;
The dayspring from on high.
5. Behold the great Creator makes
Himself an house of clay.
A Robe of Virgin flesh he takes
Which he will wear for ay.
6 Hark, hark, the wise Eternal Word,
Like a weak Infant cries.
In form of servant is the Lord;
And God in Cradle lies.
7 This wonder struck the world amazed;
It shook the stary frame.
Squadrons of spirits stood and gazed.
Then down in Troops they came.
8 Glad Shepherds ran to view this sight,
A quire of Angels sings,
And Eastern Sages with delight
Adore this King of Kings.
9 Bis. Join then all hearts that are not stone,
And all our voices prove
To celebrate this holy One,
The God of Peace and Love.
PRAYER and PRAISE.
TO work strong lines, and wreath a Crown of Baies
For Jesus Brows; Take servent Prayer and Praise.
1. That runs and flows, and bears a deeper sense
Then winding Verse, or rattling Eloquence.
It rises first, and breaks through hearts of stone;
(But not till Aarons rod be struck thereon.)
Cleft with Remorse; then climbs through weeping eyes
With silver feet, transcending far the skies
To wash his feet; whose purple drops divine
Will turn this water into Angels wine.
2. This made of words, which are but vapor pent
In forge of flesh, by panting bellows sent
To mix with mother Air; yet this to me
Shall both a blessing and an honor be
(Says God,) who calls those things, as if they were
Which are not so; or do not so appear
To us: And look how sweet it strikes the sense,
When vernal winds inspire their Influence
On flowery Meads; so thanks like Incense rise,
And Heavan takes praise, as perfumed sacrifice.
A Psalm for Sunday Nights.
1 COme Ravished souls with high Delight;
In sweet immortal Verse,
To crown the day, and welcome night;
Jehovahs praise Rehearse.
2 O sing the Glories of our Lord,
His Grace and Truth resound.
And his stupendous acts Record,
Whose mercies have no bound.
3 He made the All informing Light
And hosts of Angles fair:
It Is he with shadows clothes the night,
He clouds or clears the Air.
4 Those restless skies with stars enchaste
He on firm hindges set:
The wave embraced earth he placed
His hanging Cabinet.
5 Wherein for us all things comply
Which he has so decreed.
That each in order faithfully
Shall evermore proceed.
6 We in his Summer sunshine stand,
And by his favor grow,
We gather what his bounteous hand
Is pleased to bestow.
7 When he contracts his brow we mourn,
And all our strength is vain,
To former dust in death we turn,
Till he inspire again.
8. Then to this mighty Lord give praise
And all our voices prove.
The Glory of his name to raise,
The God of Peace and Love.
The Christians Reply to Christ's Venite.
POssum, good Lord by thee inclinal:
Volo sometimes with ease I find.
Nolo yet runs so in mind,
Male still makes me lag behind.
PRIDE will fall, -- but Grace to the Humble.
1. THis fall Fell Lucifer first tries,
Who endlong fell, never to rise.
Woman the next; then man, and all;
Proud flesh from them have caught the fall.
2. From this foul falling sickness shall
The fall of one, recover all
Mankind, that medcin'd by his Spirit
His best of Graces shall inherit.
Whereby he still in it does fall
Upon his humble servants all.
His conjugal Prayer Domestic.
GOD infinitely Great and Good!
Purge all our sins by Jesus blood.
From serpentine three deadly foes,
The Gardens of our souls enclose.
That Spirit which Grace and Truth affords,
Rule all our actions, thoughts and words.
Our hearts into his Temples raise;
Our tongues loud Organs of his praise.
Lord make our selves and Race throughout,
Pure, humble, sober, chaste, devout,
Loyal and grateful, wise and just,
On thee, and industry to trust;
Blessed with a low, but glad estate,
In food and Raiment moderate.
Nor rich of poor to be en ied,
Nor poor to be by rich supplied.
Give freedom, Order, Health and Peace,
Then in thy favor to decease
When Nature here by Grace prepared,
May look for Glory afterward.
Upon a Bible presented to a young Lady, the Lady Kath. C. 1624.
THE world is Gods large Book, wherein we learn
Him in his glass of wonders to discern.
But since the print was dark, and we sin-blind;
His Word became the mirror of his mind.
And as the Eternal Father on the Son
His form engraved before all worlds begun,
So what he is, what God in him to us,
The spirit of both does in this Book discuss.
Clear spring of wisdom; Truths eternal mine!
The whole a Temple; and each leaf a shrine.
And as on clouds, on mountains, and on streams,
The Sun lets beauties fall in golden beams.
But with his own pure Light the stars inspires,
And through their bodies thrusts his living fires.
So other holy books can but reflect
Those Rays, which here are native and direct,
Which apt to dazzle and confound the wise,
Are yet a gentle light to Childrens eyes.
And you (bright Maid,) (whose name if I rehearse,
I shall a Rubrique make, and not a Verse.
And were such gold found in Italian Mines,
They would have twenty new St. Katharines.)
As little ones in Gardens take delight;
Here gather fruits for taste, and flowrs for sight.
The flower of Jesse, that fresh and lasting Rose:
The fruit of knowledge and of life here grows.
On babes, as tender Virgins love to look,
Behold that blessed babe within this book;
Pure, fair, adorned with perfect white and red,
A Crown of Radiant stars about his head.
If you be sick, if head or heart do ache,
On Jesus name call, and the pain will slake:
Read it when first you rise, and go to bed,
Under your Pillow let it bear your head.
All books in one, all Learning lies in this;
This your first A B C, and best Primer is.
Whence having thoroughly learnt the Christ-cross Row,
You may with comfort to our Father go;
Who will you to that highest lesson bring,
Which Seraphims instruct his Saints to sing.
A SERMON, Preached to the KING AT OATLANDS. 1638.
JOHN 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
WE Country Ministers preaching at Court, are first confined to matter
finishable in one hour; (being like the Virgins in the Court of Ahasuerus: She
that came once, must come no more, except she pleased the King, and were called
for by name) For which, I shall choose to insist on few particulars. And then we
are fearful to displease. Such are the winds of Information. One breaths that
good wise Caveat of King James, of ever blessed memory, Not to soar aloft, or
muster up our own readings; Another whispers, Touch not State, nor Discipline,
nor Controversies. At length I threw down all fear of displeasing, by choice of
this Text, which plainly preaches Christ Jesus; but Christ in Excellency;
excellent things are here spoken of him and of his powerful Grace, and
excellent things said to be done to us by him, and his gracious Power. And if
wondrous things will take, it is a Text replete with wonders, and yet no wonder
containing him who wears that title among and above all those in Isaiah of a
Prince peaceable and wonderful. No wonder if an earthly King be, and by his
own neglected, when the King of Kings that came down from Heaven in triple
light and evidence of his own stupendous Miracles, his Fathers acknowledgment,
and the fiends own confessing (to see how hardly the beams of Truth are let in
on envy-poisond souls) came thus furnished among his own, and yet his own
received him not. No longer wonder that a gracious King retains a sweet and
merciful disposition, even to disaffected Subjects, taught by this King here,
the Messiah who as anointed with Grace above all, so sheds Grace and Mercy over
all; offers it to all, even to those that would none: These Builders here that
threw him by, he would have built them upon himself, as on a stone elect and
precious, and so have raised them up into a new Jerusalem: Miracle of Mercy! To
urge and press the gift of his Grace, yea of his blood on those that despised
it, counted it an unholy thing; and to remember them for his Cross, in his
prayer, and for his death in that Commission after, Go preach the Gospel to
them; Let them have glad tidings of Peace and Salvation. Go take in them that
would not take in me; Receive them to Mercy that received me not. And go first
to them: first to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; and beginning at
Jerusalem. Nor cease these wonders here; for now not the Jewish Church alone,
not she his only beloved, (though even in this sense, nor Rome, nor Antioch,
but Jerusalem is the mother Church; the mother of us all) But (...), (says the
Apostle) The diminution of the Jew is become the riches of the Gentiles: and in
the place where it was said. They are no people of mine, (...), there they
shall be called the Sons of God. And that there is Here: The Church of England,
a Church of Gentiles; and this place, the Represent and Lantskep of that. If we
will receive Christ, What then? I cannot tell you what: Some mighty thing it is
certain. It Is bundled up in (...) here; which is a Right and Interest, or
Privilege and Prerogative, and a Dignity and Power no less then to become the
Sons of God. As many as received him, etc.

Three parts I shall make of the Text; First, Vitis, The Vine, therein
discoveting the root on which this fruit grows that is so copious; clearing to
us the Prime and other branching causes of (...). Secondly, (...), id est,
Racemus; The bunch of Grapes that hangs upon this vine; which who so pulls and
presses by a lively faith, shall extract an Honor, and Pre-eminence, and Power,
and quodcuunque velis. -- A large trail of blessing unexpressable: Our last
part is Torcular; The Wine Press whereby I shall first attempt to draw from
Vitis and Raecemus a cup of Consolation, as Calpar and Inferius: but being so
the too lushious issues of the Grape must a while be set by till we have tasted
of a second cup of consideration for a cooler: and then a third of Conformity
and Concordance with Christ. And then is that first to be resumed and brewed
with some ingredients that may make it relish upon the Palate of the meekest
Christians. That done, it will remain to urge the health of all three so
mingled both for convenience, and necessity absolute and respective. Last of
all to make trial by your patience of our receiving Christ in receiving his
Receivers. Those that are deputed to receive our homage, and take our regard in
his stead. I shall name but three, and reckon them upwards. The Poor, the
Priest, the Prince of his People. Of these plainly and honestly. And first of
Vitis, that is, Christ Jesus; to him we would, but none can find that way till
drawn; and no way to be drawn up, but our laying hold on the chain of Grace let
down^ and nothing will do that but Prayer: Let us then lift up our hearts
together with our hands to Go^ in the Heavens.

1. OUR first part is Vitis, and that is Christ; we way take his own word: John
15.
1. I am the true Vine. Poor hedge and harth wine you may wring from natural
knowledge, and from moral Books, and dull muddy stuff the world affords,
mingled with Mandragoras, whose effect is betwixt sleep and poison. But would
you that above the spirit of Cecub or Falernian wine? The Vine which breeds a
liquor potent and mighty in operation -- Quod cum spe divite manet in Venas. A
cup of (...), that fills with holy Raptures and Ecstasies, and lifts your Spirit
up to become Partaker of the divine Nature. Then come to me, says he; He all
alone at this. He and none but He can give this Grace. Search the Vineyards the
Scriptures. They testify of him. Those Cherubins, the Old and New Testament,
clap all their wings together for the enclosing him, who is A. and O. the same
Rock and Mannae, Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. The
Book of God is Paradise; everywhere Trees of knowledge bowing their eminent
tops: But Christ Jesus, the Tree of Life in the midst of the Garden: The Fruit,
and Kernel of which Fruit, is here in Vitis.

Objection 1.
2. But in 1 Pet. 1.3. we find this made the Act of God the Father. Blessed be
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us again, etc.
and ascribable to him as an Act of Power and Wonder; first above that of (...).
-- And secondly, As an Act of Love: of which he is the Fountain. While not as a
Father alone, but as a Mother too he conceives in the womb of Predestion;
brings forth in Vocation, tenders and bears in arms, and on his wings of
Providence, and has Viscera misericordiarum in the plural. And again this is
made the work of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3.8. By the washing of the new birth, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, etc. And so much seems implied in that Commission,
Receive you the holy Ghost: and then, Whose sins you remit, etc.

For answer hereto briefly, we learn from the school that though in the sacred
Trinity be order, yet no Degree: and in their Acts ad extra, they all blessedly
conspire; as in this particular the Apostle informs us. 1 Cor. 6. By the Grace
of God the Father, through the blood of his Son, are we raised as so many
Temples of the holy Ghost. And as the Son is in at Creation: by him were all
things made, he being the power and wisdom of the Father: so the Spirit is
called his Gift too; whom I will send you from the Father: and in the Galatians
it is stild the Spirit of Christ. All build then this holy frame. But he lies
down as the Foundation, as that precious cornerstone, on whom his Saints rely
by virtue of their precious Faith, and partake all these precious Promises in
him, Yea and Amen. He that Olive of whose fatness, and Vine from whose root
live all the Branches; which he performs in special too by a double
distillation of his Grace and blood; while the blood of that Vine is made ours,
and we through it and him made Sons of God: and most properly in this Filiation
here mentioned his Act, who is in nature Filius. He by generation to make us so
by Regeneration. Thus have we endeavored to dig and discover this to the root
indeed: that root ineffable of three in one. God the Father as Author and
Fountain; the Son as means and merit: the Spirit forming, cherishing and
preserving the new Creature. A Grace flowing from the Father by the Son in the
Power and Operation of the holy Ghost.

Objection 2.
3. But where is the Text then? How do we receive it by Faith? Our Savior
Answers it in the fifteenth of St. John. This is done by insition, as we by it
receive him; that is, abide in him and that cannot be without assenting and
obeying both. By both which we begin to live and draw sap, and conrinuating
strength of spiritual Life. The life I now live, I live by the power of the Son
of God. It Is his Act and Gift in the first Light and Influence, and first
Attraction and bowing our will to receive him, and in obediential performaces
too asubsequent and concurrent Grace; yet a Nostrality too so far as a non
fugere (says St. Austin) nay as a Sequi too, and an Agere: a co-working with
the work of him that works all in all, and all our works in us. And the
manifest of this Insition, by believing and so receiving him, is a plain and
easy Decision of that dry and tedious Jangle, which infects the mystery of
Godliness. For nor Faith, nor works alone; Nor they without their root; Nor it
without his fruits. -- Poscit opem and conjurat amice; Faith working by Love.

Objection 3.
4. But which way? How can these things be? Which way is the Light parted
(says Job)? etc. Where comes our divine Light of Reason to clasp, and Grace it
self under that noble and ampler Lamp of Faith? The Answer is prepared by St.
Peter, who tells us where it grows: the immortal seed of his his Word, called
therefore the Word of Life, and the Word of his Grace; and this very Grace, the
Word of Faith: to which is ever annexed the use and blessing of those
Sacraments, of the one whereof our Savior tells us, Except a man be born
again; and of the other, Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, no life is in you, no kingdom of Heaven for you.

PARTICVLAR 2.
5. THus far of Vitis. Our second Particular is Racemus: The bunch of Grapes.
It Is rendered here by Power, but is understood in an Excellency, Power cum
Priviledgio. This indeed intended as Caput Votorum. For as he says, Quid
voveat dulci alumno; So what is it that thy soul desires? Is it Beauty? Belive
there are no such Roses and Lilies in their Midsummer, as Gods Sons in their
early Spring. That being true of every member which is spoken of the body in
general, Thou art all fair. No deformity; not that of sickness, nor that of
age, nor spot nor wrinckle. Free from all defilement of sin, (a brave and high,
victorious and insolent Beauty, that) pure, fair, white and red in his
innocence, and in the blood of the Lamb. Is it riches? How faint, and cold, and
poor a word to this that makes a man rich in God! And rich in faith is
equivalent to that. For by that is a poor wretch under all made Heir to God,
who is rich over all; and enjoyes (not these shadows of the world, but) those
unsearchable riches of Christ: not filthy lucre defiling in the acquist, but
fine Gold. So that thy adoring Mammon, is but a mockery to thy soul. It cannot
make thee: it may mar, it may undo thee; nor can it redeem or preserve thee,
or thou it. For Fool thy soul may be suddenly snatched away, And then whose
shall those things be? But if made a man indeed, made for ever, thou must be
melted and refined, and new made the Son of God in Christ. Thirdly, If long
life be a blessing desirable: Think all thy possessing here of all those
dreams of the-shapes of pleasures, shaddows can endure but for a vapory moment
(says St Janes:) but he that believes in the Son of God has everlasling Life
(says St. John.) haves it in full and quiet possession by the power of his
faith: and having named everlasting life, there need no addition of pleasure,
Food, Raiment; yet all these in (...), even in this life, fullness of joy, as
full as humane nature can hold, yea overflowing exceedingly, abounding with all
joy and peace in believing: which Graces and replenishing of his Saints
bosoms, are therefore in the old resembled by saturity, marrow, fatness, and
in the new by manna hid, and living fountains of water, which mixed and cuited
by the bleeding balm which drops from those holes of the Rock, the peirced side
of our Savior, becomes a cordial and sovereign Receipt against venom of sin,
and poison of the Serpent. And lastly, If felicity consist in knowledge, or as
he puts it -- Sapere and fari, with sapience, like believing with the heart:
What Eloquence so puissant and clear, like confessing with the mouth to
salvation? What learning to that Cross which makes Philosophy a fool, suspends
and pales the sages and Disputers of this word? Angels desire to pry into it;
and he that was full of Revelations desired to know nothing else.

6. But take another view of (...) in the two usual notions of the word. Honor
and Power: Honor first, It is so thin and aerie a thing as who can tell you
what it is? Something derivable from the prince the fountain of Honor, yet he
only alike to direct us where to lay and place the Title, and the Ornaments. He
can bow no man's heart to any performance: for it is a thing wholly in
honorante, in him that will do us honor if he lift, and when he lift. And what
are the materials and the dress? Reckond they are Esd. 13. Thirdly, Clothed in
Purple and fine linen, eat in gold, sleep on gold, a Chariot with bridles of
Gold. (Now usurpt by vulgars) and then to sit next the King, and to be called
his Cousin; Glories well worth the wearing when purchased by a long descent of
noble blood and virtue mingled, or by that virtue singular. Yet how uncertain
is the Possession? In times of Peace how often has Glory vanished! all honor
been laid in the dust: and still attended on (beside the shade of envy) with
those two certain Ravishers, extreme old age and death; and in times of war or
danger, how subject to the pillage and affront of every Ruffin! But here is an
honorable addition with a perpetuity, enough (if our hearts were filled with
ambitious fires) to give satisfaction and acquiescence. Sons of the most high!
which style though some on earth may wear, yet God their Father wears it with a
difference. Some most high among men, in their morning and meridian Glory, may
be full low before the evening. But thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom; Thou
O Lord art most high for evermore. With cordial water it is that the Church
sprinckles all our hearts when she teaches us to pray, O Lord whose Kingdom is
everlasting and Power infinite. To be Son then to him is a Title which anoints
us in Grace, as Christ in nature above all our fellows of mankind, and in a
sort above Angels. For to which of the Angels said God at any time, Thou art my
Son: A Title wherein all Titles imperial are appaled, impoverisht, lost or far
exceeded. For I can ask as great, or I can think beyond all honor ever worn by
mortal; But this Gods tells me is above Demand and Cogitation: above all that
we are able to ask or think.

Secondly, In the notion of Power as it is here rendered; What a formidable army
does the people present and oppose to the militant Christian? Ephesians. 6.14.
Principalities and Powers: and then the vantage ground in high places; enough
to daunt the courage of the stoutest flesh and blood to encounter Legions of
such spirits; yet mark his oration to the soldiour, verse 11. My Brethren, Be
strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his might. There is a complete armor
beaten out in Heaven, and we fight under him who has blood and spirit ready to
run into and fill our veins; to make us stand, and standing fight, and fighting
conquer; more then Conquerors; for we are made to triumph in Christ, who
triumphed over all those powers for us. And if there be more Troopers in the way
of our Salvation, as there is a world of enemies, yet this is your victory
whereby you overcome the world, even your faith: and against all the treasons
and rebellions of the flesh, the servant of God has no other rescue granted
him upon his instant petition, but my Grace shall be sufficient for thee, and
my power shall be made ^erfect in Weakness.

PARTICVLAR 3.
7. I Have done with (...), and am come to Torcular; the Wine Press of
Application: By which I promised first to draw a cup of consolation, which is
soon done by contemplating the Grace and Mercy of God in Christ Jesus. His
abundant manifold Grace, and the multitude of his Mercies; his sweet and tender
mercies, differenced from men's, first in being sure, then in their eternity.
The Lord is gracious and his mercy is everlasting. And lastly mercy mingled of
pardoning and rewarding, both together, which no man uses to a riotous Son, or
refractory servant; yet our case was more desperate; and behold God sets forth
his love to us being enemies and in defiance. Then he sent again his only Son,
that whosoever believes might not perish. Is not that enough? No: But, might
have everlasting life. The solemnity of this fullness of delight in the enjoying
of Gods mercy thus in Christ, makes it up a wedding, Hos. 2. and in the Gospel.
And the Saints said to rejoice in their beds. The spouse in Thalamo. And all
that Psalm of David, Ps. 45. and all Solomon's Song are nothing but
Epithalamions at these nuptials: wherein the Bride though bare and poor, and
naked, and miserable before, is now by the rich Dowry and Jointure of her Grace
in Christ, stated and possessed, and enobled, and arrayed, and adorned above her
wish, and to her everlasting consolation: but for we are too apt too easily to
let such Comforts issue from such Texts as this; therefore I told you, this cup
must awhile be set by, till we have tasted first a Cup of sober consideration
for a cooler. Be sober and suspicious, was the Heathens; and Christians rule
alike is, Be sober and watch. And another, Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling. Presumption in all our addresses to the Almighty ever to be
avoided, lest it taint our sacrifices. And however in the celestial bodies,
sure we are in all heavenly souls, there is duly observed a motus
trepidationis, even when they lay hold on Vitis and press Racemus here: for
there be several Acts of our Savior considerable. Three several Advents, and
for three several creations. To the first he came with faciamus: Let us make
man in our Image and likeness, soul and body. To the third and last. He will
come with perficiamus, to make it up a full Redemption by his restoring all
things, which act is also called a Regeneration, and respecting man, a renewing
or change of our vile body like his glorious. But there is a secoud Advent
here mentioned: When he came in a body for the Recreation of our souls. A work
which is no longer (...) but (...), Ephesians. 2.10. His Poem. this Piece showing him
a workman to the proof, and therefore well rendered in our translation the
work-manship of God created in Christ Jesus. On this act in medio done by the
Mediator; which Janus like afflects on the last, and reflects on the first: On
this are we to fix and pitch our consideration, which was done by him to the
end that all ruined since the first, and hopeful of the last, may claim by
virtue of this Act. If at that dreadful day of Judgment we would see him
without amaze, or wishing for overwhelming rocks and mountains over us. O learn
betimes to view him, and run after him, and lay hold upon him in this advent.
It Is this creation puts down thy first; and better never made, never born, if
not renewed, if not reborn. For how much more horrible then ten thousand
thunderclaps will the burst of that voice be, Depart, I know you not! no not
the work of thy own hands? No: for though my Plasma, I formed you, yet you
deformed your selves, and hated to be reformed by being made conformable to me
in life, in death, in resurrection.

THE third Cup is of Conformity or Corcordance: you may have heard of Saint
Francis conformities, how like in every thing to our blessed Savior they
ridiculously and blasphemonsly paint him. But such morsels are for the vast
jaws and ravenening hollow womb of a Papist; for their Bell and Dragon faith
that devour what ever book or Balade, or Bull or Breve, without one grain of
salt, one jot of Reason obtrudes upon them. Blessed be God they will not down
with us; but this must: This Cup of conformity I intend, which is the eager and
earnest desire of resembling our Love and Mercy: for else what pretense have we
to (...) What fellowship has Christ with Belial? yoak-less, unenduring to be
ruled by his example. If a child of light walk so, and his disciple follow him:
first, Do this by observing his setting forth, which was Oriens; a dayspring
from on high; and thence he flows and descends in his prime Radii of Peace and
Righteousness; comes as a light to be the Glory of his people. A prime lesson
for all those that are highly descended, and those too that are highly ascended
to wealth and honor, so to frame their aspects and influences, in visiting,
relieving, chearing of Inferiors, dilighting to be Children of light: followers
of God as dear children, avoiding as all other iniquity (for none must tarry
in his sight) so specially those sins which most do thwart i^ a cross line the
Zodiac wherein this Sun of Righteousness was pleased to move; such are
oppression, Blood, Cruelty, Violence. Mark how God beats them from his Altar, (
Isa. 1) in Indignation; Care I for such sacrifice? Wash you, Put away the evil
of your works, or 'Ile not vouchsafe you a word. Secondly, Conform and follow
him from his entrance on the work of our Redemption, at those first purple
drops, the Primitiae, the first fruits in the Temple of his circumcision: and
there we begin to work out our salvation at the circumcision of the heart,
pareing away the superfluity of maliciousness, and cut to the quick by remorse
for sin. Our rockie bosoms cleft and falling blood in anguish, forced to cry
out, like those hearers, What shall we do to be saved? and this circumcision
spreading and going round to our eyes and ears, and lips, chastening and
subduing, and sanctifying all natures power in us by the power of Racemus here.
If this in any good measure past, then on still to thy Saviors gracious life,
growing in grace and favor with God and man: on to this temper of meekness,
humbleness in life, in death, and such a death, a crucifixion. Know you not,
That they which be Christ's have crucified the flesh with affections and lusts!
and like his resurrection arising to new life, and an ascension too: so high
the Apostle mounts the Metaphor, and follows him into heaven: if risen with
Christ; up then and set your affections on heavenly things, Col. 3.1. But stay
a little: Is this the way to heaven? A cup of Conformity call you this? ere
this be done, our Comfort will be cold and dead: if we must so learn Christ, we
are like all to go without Vitis and Racemus too; durus Sermo; The harshest
piece of your Sermon; This: and I confess it so: but we must drink it; we must
strive with it. I; but take heed of urging too far. You may kill men's hearts,
and startle many weaker souls from a course in Christianity, by being too
rigid. For when all is said and done, and all our Receipts considered, when we
have once received the Grace of Baptism, and often been confirmed in faith by
receiving the other Sacrament, and receiving so many, so sweet and precious
Promises in Christ by his word preached: after all these Powers, we find our
selves still under the power of our Corruptions. Well! All this may well enough
be answered: but there is a double fear that surther assaults us. First, Our
Ignorance of the faith; For you yourselves, you Preachers keep such a stir wtih
your definitions and distinctions, and disputings about the thing it self. The
Act and the habit, and then the lodging it in the Will or in the Understanding,
or both. The consisting in Assent, or Assurance or Obedience; Some or all of
these: So that in such a distraction, how shall a weak believer understand you?
Then secondly, our infirmities are so many and so great, that they are ready to
sink our faith down to the brink of Desperation in Gods mercies, and sorce us
(wretches) to cry out, who shall deliver us! Why, Remember yet what was set by.
I promised to resume that Cup, and now it is the season: now in the bitterness
of soul you are fittest to taste the sweet, and sure, and everlasting mercies
of God in Christ Jesus: and for that purpose am I here to minister a word in
due season to such souls as are weary. And first to clear up that misty
Objection of ignorance; Know for a certain that salvation's no matter of wit:
but as St. Austin in that known speech of his; The faithful soul is safe in the
sim plicity of his believing, and not in the vivacity of understanding: and as
Naz^anzene has it, (...), etc. Nothing could be more unequal then that our
faith, (and so the way to salvation) should be a thing only incident to learned
bra ns: Remember thy belief is like thy love; he that comman^'s both, gives
both: and having given a first spark blows it to a flame; and if small and weak,
yet if right and hearty, good enough. The best scholar of them all has no
better a Receipt then thou; and God will firm thy Reed to support thee all the
way to Heaven: and as for dejection and aptness to despair, I will take again
that Cup of consolation in hand, and strive to brew it so as it may relish on
the palate of the weakest Christian, and afford him a complacency, at least an
allay to all thought of impossibity or difficulty, wont to prevail with such as
taste themselves, and consider not the pu^ssance of Vitis and Racemus, the
power of God: For our error proceeds both ways, not knowing the Scriptures,
or not observing the power of God. My Ingredients shall be but two, and taken
from two Comparisons.

1. First compare this act of Regeneration with the worlds Creation: there for
the consolation, of the darker and weaker spirit, we find it vain to enquire
what was before the frame: so it is not clear what shall be after the
dissolution: so in Recreation what goes before of the destinating, is a Depth:
and what the state of glory shall be is not clear: it appears not yet what we
shall be, 1 John 3. But this appears, the Grace of God appears, and his free act
is evident in both. The creature can contribute nothing at first: and then
though a double cover on the earth of darkness and the deep, yet that released
by his power infinite, and then having removed the waters also by virtue of his
Producat, he made the land appear, and suddenly disappear invested in a robe of
numerous plants and flowers. Just so in this work of thy new birth, Darkness is
first all over thee, and it is Gods method, first darkness, and then light. Our
imaginations dark, and our foolish heart full of darkness, and all that men can
do in that state of nature, deeds and works of darkness; But then comes oriens
ex alto with his mavelous Light, till the day dawn and Day Star rise in our
hearts. Those hearts that were all dark before, all was a Chaos till light
pined to the Sun, streamed to remotest angles: And so it was with that Apostle
St. Thomas, deepsy covered in infidelity, till the powerful light let in
through his sense upon his soul. Then see how soon he sees and startles up, and
fervently rises in that cry of Domine Deus, my Lord and my God! and the spirit
speaks the same comfort evidently to all. Arise thou that sleep, and stand
up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee Light: for he has it, and he is
it: He is the true Light; in both those main properties of Light. First, Light
makes things discernable: in night great stones and blocks. So to blind nature
gross sins lie undiscovered, till Light of Grace infuse a tenderness and
scrupulosity, and a discretion, and ability, both to observe the surprises of,
and ask pardon for the least offenses. Then secondly, The other Property of
Light, Irradiation; it not shows alone, but beautifies and gnilds, and enamels
where it lights; so does that Grace of Gratum faciens. His embracing Grace upon
thy soul, rendering it gracious and precious in the eyes of thy heavenly Father.
Lastly, I forget not that second Cover of the deep: That inland Gulf of
Corruption, inborn and bred up with us: respecting which we all must cry with
David de profundis, Out of the deeps. But then remember, one deep calls upon
another: There is a deep of Mercy answers the depth of all our misery, and to
top this Consolation, if the waves of ungodliness make us afraid and roar
horribly, or after a sense of Mercy and Forgiveness, we fear the reflux and
revalescency of our prevailing sins upon us: Remember his bow is in the clouds:
his gracious promise in his holy Word to make his Power perfect in weakness;
and he has given to the Sea a Law, and said to wickedness, Hitherto shall thou
come, and no further; and here stay thy proud waves:

2. Our secondingredient is from Resemblance of our Saviors incarnation.
First, In Virgo; his birth of a pure Virgin Mary: so is thine of a pure
heavenly Grace, distilled from God without man's contribution or assistance.
When the Angel came to salute her; when Christ came to Nicodemus; one with
tidings of her conceiving the Son of God; the other with strange news, of a man
being born again, and so become the Son of God: both wondered alike, both ask in
effect the self same question; How can these things be? How can a man be born
again and take notice? the answer is the same to both; for there is no other.
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee: the Power of the most High shall do this
in an act of as great freed om as the blowing of the wind: so is every one that
is born of the Spirit. A second considerable comfort is that of infinite
distance. God the simplest essence to stoop and marry with man's body, of all
other the most compounded substance; This hindered not the dayspring from on
high to visit us; why then dismayed to look down upon our own spirit, wherein is
summamalitia, when we know in his sacred spirit there is summa bonitas? and for
all the distance, and for all the deadness of our souls womb to conceive a
thought that is holy of our selves; yet he descends: that Spirit which is the
Comforter, and applies unto us in an union so high and heavenly, as all words
forsake us in the expression. Thirdly, Another Consolation, yet in plene
administravit, when God descended to us, but staid at her Full of Grace, not
abhorring to be there enclosed, who yet fills, and even then filled Heaven and
earth, wherein then and before, and since, he fully has the administrations;
so it must be no dismay to thy own soul that God descends and shines into many
others, having abundance of spirit, and of such a diffusive Power as the Sun,
which though received whole in the light and graces here, yet shines elsewhere;
and think if a word spoken by us can pass to a whole audience; and if our
discursive Spirit can so suddenly shoot, and subtly pass to things distant
and manifold; What Energie is in (...) and Power in his Spirit differenced from
ours both in essence and properties! And as lending thus his light to others,
averts no beam from us by reason of his full administration; so nor the
opacity, nor incapacity of our Spirit can uneffectuate his power, but that as
our knowledge from a mere vacuity and brutish ignorance he brings up and raises
to angel-like perfection: so he can increase and multiply that grain of
precious faith to such a tree as shall lift up its Crown and reach the stars,
and apprehend and receive him there who is both the Author and Finisher of our
Faith and Salvation. Lastly, Fix on what the school calls Convenientius, for a
surplusage to make this Cup o^ Consolation brim-full and run over; God was tied
to no necessity absolute of sending his Son. He could have saved us some other
way; yet this was so convenient, that they dare think, that if a man had not
fallen, yet Christ had been incarnate for the demonstration of two things. Gods
infinite Power and Bounty. His Power was not manisest so fully in Creation,
because no infinite Act; and his bounteous and boundless love, in it self apt
for Communion, had not yet come near enough to his beloved Creature, in that
our first Offspring and universal Derive of being his generation. Then a
Christ Convenientius for man too, more steadily to ^asten and anchor on Christ
by faith and hope; more to enlarge his knowledge in the proclaim of (...) here,
the Dignity to which sinful flesh is exalted, and thereby more inflame his
love, saltem redamare, to relove him that so loved us in Christ. Now observe in
this second Edition of Grace and Mercy, in this great work of the holy Ghost,
all these are reprinted and sealed in good assurance by the evidence and
earnest, and testimony which it gives to the bargain of thy salvation. And to
conclude this point, As Christ was not sent till the fullness of time, not
presently after the fall; a sense and discovery of sins power must precede, ere
we find our need of his powerful blood; and man first sent to reason, and to
the Law under Schoolmasters to bring us to Christ: so the Spirit of Grace
falls down in infinite Power, and in strictest Union; and yet performs the work
in measure and by degrees; which it could do by one Ransack and Destruction of
all sin and infirmity at once. But for convenience and fit appliance to the
Receiver, it proceeds leisurely to fill our narrow vessels, and stays that very
season till the water be troubled; man's heart made ready by remorse; when he
perceives himself sinking, and is at it with Save Lord, we perish; and all this
that the excellency of the power might be, and might be felt and acknowledged
to be of God, and not of us.

By this time if you be content to taste this Cup so brewed; I yet have no
Power so to minister it, not alone: It must be mingled with both the former;
and if so it please you; I shall be bold upon your Patience to urge and press
the health of all three together.
AND first, For convenience in relation to our common Lord, whose Cup it is.
The world has her Cup of pleasure, and she of Babylon hers of Fornication: and
what swilling in of these! Even Kings of the earth drunk; And shall we startle
or scruple at this Cup of Christ? What! Sit at my right hand in Glory, and
shame to taste a little shame and bitterness of a Cross and Cup which I have
born and drunk off before you! Remember (...) is in the bottom: what if it
should make you sweat and pant in getting off this health! Do but think how often
you have enforced your selves to take down those healths falsely so called! and
suffer then the word of exhortation which presses you down upon your knees, to
beg this pledge at the hand of your Sovereign Lord and Maker; as his servant
did, Pota me Domine torrente voluptatis, says Austin; -- for so you shall find
it in the end; though you should be compelled for Christ's sake and the Gospels
to drink it blood warm, and in a fiery trial. So much the sweeter by his Grace
and Power seasoning it, who by his own example has so begun it to us.
Secondly, A Convenience in reference to our selves. This Cup must down or else
another that is worse; and there is but another, and that is in the hand of the
Lord too; wherein the wine is red and it is full mixed, and the wicked of the
earth must drink and wring out the dregs of Gods wrath. If we would escape that
drench and bane of soul and body, which but begins the torment of those damned
Spirits, who must for ever drink it burning hot in a lake of fire and
brimstone: Resolve, and speedily to taste and consider how gracious and sweet
his offered Mercies are in Christ: and if we would shun that Cup of his
vengeance which runs out for the seirceness, take then to day while it is
called to day, and while we are called to day, this Cup of his Mercy which runs
over for the sulness.

2. As thus for Convenience; so is this Recipe to be pressed on all for
necessity, absolute; Woe to me if I do not preach, or preach it dully or lazily;
and woe unto you if you receive it not as the unum necessarium. For shall we
need any more Receipts? What would be given for a (...), an Elixar, a Cath^^con
to cure all diseases of the body, and beside renew and preserve health, youth,
beauty, and restore them still fairer and fresher then before! Such a Merchant
might have all the Lords and Ladies, and all the Kings of the earth his Clients
and Patients. Alas! Is our soul and inward beauty less precious; Why? Here it
is that will cure all sinful distempers: Restore thy soul her native Candor,
and sweetness, and ingenuity, making thee young and lusty as an Eagle. Make
all their eyes that be of a right aerie; able by a lively faith to look up and
contemplate that sun: where the body of that light is, there will the Eagles be
gathered together, and that body is here. It Is the very Vitis and Vitals, and
the Corpse of my Text. Let me not lose you then: Be gathered still in the
continuance of your gracious and patient Attentions.

For now the last way I am to urge this health for necessity respective: on
those first that deny the Lord that bought them, either directly (as the Arrian
and Socinian do) or indirectly, yet desperately would undermine our faith and
sap out of the corner stone, on which all relies, by ruining some other parts
of the building. These boast themselves the rational discoursers of the age;
such as Saint Paul means in that question, Where is the Disputer of this world?
For these dare dispute openly against the Creation related by Moses, and
justified by Christ, and quarrel the souls immortality, and the bodies
resurrection, which are all heads upon the same string, fastened with our faith
in Vitis here for our principal Jewel; which if any of these fall loose, is
lost for ever, and then all our preaching and ministering, and your hearing and
receiving, vain; and we be stripped of our whole Creed; even from God the Father
Almighty, maker of Heaven and earth, along to Christ crucified, and on to life
everlasting. But we have not so weakly learned Christ, to be shaken from our
botome with such wind and waves of wicked Disputants; Let us take heed of
infection from a second sort, such as in deeds deny him, having a show but no
power of godliness; such as may be tract like the snail by their unclean and
slimy passages; and yet dare resolve it in the Imparative, Let us leave some
Tokens of our wantoness, so of our profaneness, blasphemy, drunkenness in every
place: This is a large field and a common place: but for I am upon an health,
suffer me to single him out, and say a coolword or two this morning next his
heart unto the drunkard; such especially as in a more then barbarous custom,
(for in Est. 1. no man might compel) by forcing healths, make it yet a more
sickly and disorderly drunkenness. First, I commend to their consideration St.
Paul's Epiphany, where the Grace of God comes; it appears says he, and how?
teaching us to deny ungodliness, etc. and to live soberly. So then where
sobrieey is not learnt, the Grace of Christ has appeared in vain; Then that
Caveat of our Savior which he gave even to his own Apostles, Take heed lest
your hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness: Why? What Is the danger?
and so that day come upon you unwares. My next is that Redoubt and Barricado
rather of St. Peter, wherewith he makes out the enemy, the Lion: At one end he
plants the great Ordinance of Faith; Whom resist steadfast in the faith. At the
other, he makes it sure, and sets good guard, Be sober and watch; as if all our
faith without sobriety would not keep out the devil, that roaring Adversary;
who can out-roar these roars, and devour these Devourers of drink. My close
shall be that terrible sentence of the great Judge of heaven and earth gone out
against them! That they shall never inherit the Kingdom of heaven.

It now remains I should press for faith in the foundation, and furnishing a
Believer with reasons of his faith against the A^heist, Jew and Mahumetan; and
then for the super structure of Good works. But these are fitter for large
Treatises in books, then short notes in a Sermon. Let us come then to the last
trial, how we receive Christ by receiving his Receivers; Persons deputed to
take our homage, and receive our reward in his stead.
1. AND first, The Poor. With him I shall deal as usually men do: dispatch him
briefly. Yet such are near and dear unto the Vine, and sent as
Leiger-Embassadours, and a Latere too, cut like another Eve out of his own
bleeding side. Members of that mistical Body, whereof he is supreme Head; and
whoever wrongs, oppresses, grinds or pares them to the blood, He cries in
Heaven, -- Non cruor hic de stipite manat? -- I am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou
persecutest. It will come all to one in the end. In as much as you have done it
to them, you have done it to me. On the other side, Do them good, relieve them,
and he will reward it, and make them able to requite it in proportion. Receive
them to harbor, and those friends shall stand at heaven-gate, to receive you
into everlasting habitations.

2. The Priest would be received too: For, Is not he in Vitis? He that receives
you, receives me: And is not our Ministry Vitis laetificans? chearing God and
man! Did not the first Preachers receive largely for themselves and you, when
they received the holy Ghost: and received power from on high at Christ's
ascension, and gifts for men! and were not the Apostles an odor of a sweet
smelling savor to God, and to men that received it, even the savor of life
unto life! And is there not a Botrus of Blessing still received in receiving
our Ministry? If it be says which is receiving Christ, it is the word of God
which we preach: Nay, May we not in a sober sense ask, What have you that you
have not received if it concern your spiritual state? Christendom,
matriculation, ablution from sin at one Receipt in baptism. The body and blood
and spirit of your Savior by frequent receivings of the Eucharist, which (by
the way, now let me tell you in a word in verbo Sacerdotis) if you should
change for the mass it would lessen your receipts: for whereas no lay-person
has a drop of the chalice allowed; yet they have a Missale case, that if any
of the Consecrate-wine fall on the floor or pavement: in that case a lay body
may be permitted to lick it up left the dog should. A fair reward it will be
for such as decline to that Religion: that Religion which hides away and denies
the use of the word it self which is the power and wisdom of God to man's
salvation. But to fall back to our reckoning and Receipts: is there nothing
else? Remember at night when you go to bed, what is she, (if any be) that
sleeps in your bosom, if you have not received her at the hand of some ordered
and lawful Minister? And when you shall go to your latest bed, the Grave, what
difference from brute animals, if we assist not to make it an honest and
honorable Sepulture! strange that mankind cannot well come in, nor well stay,
nor well go out of this world without us, and yet the world hates us! Does not
this deserve a Torcular! And I need not here press the cup of Comfort; all apt
enough to receive that benefits of Light and Salt; and few so senseless, but
perceive it would be a very dark and a flash, unsavory dwelling here without
the Gospel: even stony ground will take in the Seed, and gladly. But where is
the Consideration of what is due to us? And here I spare you: I will not press
that in the old Testament, of Honoring God with your substance, and first
fruits and tithe of all that you possess. I know the evasion; you would turn
over a new leaf, and turn me to the new Priesthood in the New Testament: yet
take heed what you do: for what is the news there? How soon in that primitive
Church do you meet with fellers of Possessions, and laying all at the Apostles
feet? that is a Torcular indeed, and puts me in mind of a pretty passage in
Tannerns a Jesuit, who wishes withal his heart, that all the Kings in
Christendom would come and bring in all that ever they have, and put it in
their Churches treasury, and henceforth be ruled by her; but his Conclusion I
like best; Hoc in aeternum nunqua^fiet; this will never be while the world
stands, says he; and I say it were unfit and monstrous it should be. It may
pass for a Chymera. No, I do not press the very precept of the Apossle, Gal.
6.6. Let him that is instructed in the faith, make his Instructor Partaker of
all his goods, or good things, which you please. Much less will I fright you
with that of our Savior; worse then for Sodom and Gomorrah at the day of
Judgment, then for such as receive us not. Nor urge to be received as in some
places St. Paul was; where people were ready to pull out their own eyes to do
him good, and received him as an Angel of God; as Jesus Christ himself: and his
scholar Titus received with fear and trembling. I will go less with you then
your receiving men of other pro^essions: such as look to the state of your
land, or state of your bodies. What a mighty Covenant seems to be driven with
some of these, almost in terms of Matrimony? for better or worse, in Sickness
and in Health: what? and keep you only to them too; and are the Jurisconsults
of Gods Law, and Physicians of the soul persons of no value? Lastly, Is it not
a world of wonder to consider how all Regard runs down and streams in bounteous
manner on both sides of us, and leaves us dry in the middle between those two
extremes? The Stately Jesuit how is he received, even to the adoration of his
Fatherhoods venerable slipper; and what is his errand? to seduce you from the
bosom of a Grave and Modest Matron your Mother, who has bred and fed you with
the Milk of the Word, and Blood of your Redeemer; and cause you to embrace that
painted Gentlewoman on the seven hills, who if she be not she, is yet as like
the whore of Babylon as she can look: on the other side the factious creeping
Sectary is admired and applauded by too many; as if he were a vessel of some
burden, when indeed he is but an empty frigate, and not able to endure a
grapling. Mean space the plain down right Protestant that keeps the higher
road, the King of Heavens high way to truth, and maintains that only Doctrine
and Discipline which for 1600 years by just devolution is descended lineally
from the Apostles and Apostolic men, and is able to demonstrate and make it
good in the face of both those adversaries, is not received, but misconceived,
and abased, and abused by vulgar spirits. But I hope, yea I know better things
by you, and such as accompany Salvation, of whom I know also I shall obtain a
gracious pardon for this long Invective: for alas! the time is fully come for
us to take up that prayer and complaint of the Princely Prophet: Have mercy
upon us O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are utterly despised. Our soul is
filled with the scornful Rebuke, and with the despightfulness both of the proud
and ignorant.

3. I dare not leave out the King, who is a main Receiver of Christ: Rex is in
Vitis; per me; nay in me Reges too; and Christ our Supreme Monarch conveighs
both our piety and our peace through earthly Kings: Prayer for them first of
all: for in that prayer all others are included, that we under them may lead a
godly and a quiet life. And as Rex is in the vine; so he is a fruitful vine
too, and a main spreading tree, like that Pliny mentions in Tacape, within
whose wide embrace a number of other trees were imbosom'd, and received their
fostering and education. So under the Labels and Infules of the Crown (as under
a Canopy) sits every man arbourd and sheltered enjoying his own vine and
branches round about him, with a spacious trail and bunch of blessings, for
which I must refer you to two places of Scripture; 2 Samuel 23. and Esai. 32.2.
What might be added here of blessings by Land in our peaceable protection
hitherto by means of Judex and Vindex, twixt plea and plea, twixt blood and
blood, without which what would become of the Possessions and Privilege, the
Right and Property of the Subject? and blessings by water in those winged
Mercuries, and well armed Martial Counselors, should the enemy foreign speak
in defyance, our best and ablest Agents to break off the Treaty. And does not
all this deserve a Torcular to press this Racemus, yielding such a fat full of
blessings! Indeed for the cup of Consolation, the happiness enjoyed under
Monarchical Government, every man can open his mouth wide, and swallow the
profits and the pleasures of and under it. But where is our cup of Conformity to
the Rulers Justice, and Temperance, and Goodness, and Chaste beams, and sweet
indulgent gracious and merciful Disposition? But I forgot the cup of
Consideration, and so we are apt all to do the Consideration of our Duty. We
mark well that part of the prayer -- that the King knowing whose Minister he
is, etc. but quite forget the other part, That we duly considering whose
authority he has, may faithfully serve, honor and humbly obey him. Has not
God joined those Duties, Fear God, Honor the King, so close, there is no pause
nor breath betwixt them? And what God has so joined, will any vain man blow
asunder? Nor think this a dry and dull piece of Divinity, because every bird
in the painted cloth has this in his mouth, and every sign of the Bell can say
as much: for I could wish we had more birds taught to sing this note of Ave
Caesar; and that all our Bells, specially all Aarons bells would leave their
janglings, and agree to ring this Peal in all men's ears: for wheresoever those
words are written, they are written for our Instruction, and ought to be
written (as the Law of God) upon all our foreheads, and in the Palms of all
Subjects hands, for the admonition and tempering of their hearts, both when
they lie down, and when they rise up: I will end in Vote and Prayer for Royal
Charilaus (...) and (...) -- The Grace of Kings, and Joy of all good hearts,
beseeching God to bless us all with faithful souls to our God and his Christ in
heaven, and so to his Deputy here on earth, that by approving our faithfulness
and obedience to both, our days may be long in the Land which the Lord our God
has given us.

S. D. G.

PSALM. 89. ult. Remember O Lord, the Rebuke of thy Servant, and how I hear in
my besome the Rebukes of many People; wherewith thy enemies have blasphemed
thee and slandered the footsteps of thy Anointed. Blessed be the Lord for
evermore, Amen, Amen.
A Very Passionate piece! and the last of a long-lasting Lamentation; of David
shall I say? in the Name of David I am sure, in a weak and woeful condition,
beside the Contents that is the Dis^^ntents expressed in this Text all along if
we sur^^igh the Pile, the ruin rather of his misery, and ^^mself under the
heap, covered with dishonor, ^^r. 44.

2. A wonderful thing! so good a man, a man ^^er Gods own heart: so gracious a
King, that (...) his people with a faithful and true heart, and ruled them
prudently with all his power, anointed by God with his holy oil, and appointed
by him to be Head over all the Tribes, assured from God, that his holy hand,
arm and all, should hold him fa^^ and strengthen him against the violence of
his enemies: and yet to see this Head over the people, (...) surrounded with
evil members: such a roar about him of populorum and multorum, and maximorum
for so Tremellius reads it, and so we translate i^ -- Of all the mighty: and
the word will bear bot^ multitude and magnitude: from all these, in ste^^ of
Magnificat and Benedictus which were due, ou^ fly Reproaches, blasphemies,
slanders thick a hail, at every step he takes: Vestigia it is here^ That may be
all the prints and tracts of his word^ and actions defaced and blur'd. They
found Erra^^ in them all, in all he said or did, they daily mista^^^ my words,
is gone before Ps. 56.5. And here the^^ slander my actions, the footsteps of
thy Anointed Is this all? No; the Kings enemies here are Go^^ enemies too.
Slandering David the Lords servant blaspheming Jehova David's Lord. No wonde^
then at Recordare Domine in the top here; more wonder at Benedictus in the
bottom. Notwithstanding^ this Rebuke and slander and blasphemy, nay (...) all
this, for all these, Praised be the Lord for eve^ more, Amen.

3. Less then two Parts we cannot make. David Supplication and his Consolation;
or let the f^^^ Part be his Malady, and the second his Reme^^ First the Malady
we shall see will draw to it all (...) matter of the Supplication, and take in
all the p^^sons, as well those affected to it, as those infe^^^ by it: and then
the Remedy will heal up and make a fair hand of all, when we have discovered it
throughout the Text from Recordare down to Benedictus.

4. This Malady then for the name we may call it here Opprobrium, Reproachful
or disgraceful language. It has other names here, of Rebuke, Slander,
Blasphemy, three Channels all drained into one sink of Opprobrium. That is the
Monster: the Bawling Cerberus, foaming with Aconitum, a strong poison working
and drenching through all; and if it light upon a King, you see it obstructs
his Pectoral parts; sits near his very heart; gestare in sinu does not signify
nothing.

5. But what causes this Malady? whence comes fit? not desuper, not from the
Father of Light; from him none but good and perfect Gifts: nor from his Son;
whose wisdom is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated; who
when he was reviled, reviled not again: nor comes it from that Spirit which
proceeds from them both; which came down in shape of a Dove: it comes the other
way then: de subter, from the fowl unclean spirit; from the Prince of Darkness.
A dire and dreadful vapor it is from Hell, that blasts the day and all the
children of light. But yet so welcome is this spirit to the spirit of a mere
natural man (while it lusts after envy and lies soakt in flesh and blood)
that the carnal man loves it as his own flesh and blood, nourishes and
cherishes it, till wonted once and grown familiar, it goes from man to man, and
from house to house: -- and crescit eundo, grows a foggy, ugly, unweldly and
monstrous thing; and that it fall among a crew of Populorum, and gathers still
upon multorum and maximorum; then it soon poisons and putrifies, it condenses
and putrifies the very air, hurls rotten and killing slanders round about the
earth, and shoots up blasphemies as high as heaven.

6. We may go another way to work, and seek these blatant beasts, Infamy and
Blasphemy, Slander and Reproach, and find them all concentred in St. James his
world of wickedness; and a fitter Center can never be; for as in this great
world we have infinite atoms, feathers and dust flying aloft, but massy and
drossie things sink downward to the center of the earth. So in this (...), we
have store of (...), light and vain and foolish words upon the wing; but still
the most filthy, the mineral, and visceral, and intestine, the basest and
heaviest dregs, and lees, and tartar, the drossiest and lowest stuff, even as
low as the bottomless pit, that which shows man likest and draws him nearest
to the Devil, is this Devilish part and price of opprobrium.

7. Thus having fixed upon this Center, see if the Text will furnish out a
Circumference; and here are choice materials; for of whom speaks the Prophet
this? of himself, or of some other? of himself and very many other. We are told
this Psalm and the former were made by two Brothers, Ethan and Heman; and by
them cast as two Molds of Prayer both in private difficulties, (for which the
former) and in public affliction, or subversion of the Republike, in which
this Psalm is the pattern: both prepared to warn and arm Gods people of and
against dangers; and both applicatory to Christ and his Church in all ages. I
told you Opprobrium would draw to it all the matter, and take in all the
persons in the Text: and more (it seems) then I conceived to be therein
contained at first; for now we may include all the Lords servants at large; and
then all his Chiefs. David, and every anointed of the Lord: and then the Lord
Christ Jesus himself, and God in his unspeakable name of Jehovah too. this
Circumference will embelish our skeme; and yet as high, and holy, and heavenly
as these persons are, they may be vexed and endangered by this malady; all
infested or offended from this Center.

8. Not possible! Is this in the power of Populorum? What Sling, What Engine,
What Ordinance have they to shoot as high as Heaven? The Sun can dart a raie
down through the bowels of the earth; The Dog Star fling pernicious defluxions;
But these Caniculars that grin like a Dog, and run through the City, can they
from a throat, like an open Sepulcher, vent such a steam, such a ravenous and
destructive vapor as will kill at that distance? Should Earth swell out into
10000 Tenariffs, they could not bore the moon; Earths shadows run into nothing
before they reach the Sun. What earth born people then so malignant to produce
a plague so powerful? You have heard of a people sown in the dust, and which
grew up from a Dragons teeth; it is thus far true. The race of Populorum
maximorum, and all came from the Dust; which is the Serpents food; and we are
all the worse to this day for the Serpents tooth in the forbidden fruit; and
worst of all for the Serpents tongue in the first tentation: for there and
thence this spreading poison was instilled; As he was a Murderer, so a Lier and
Slanderer from the beginning; even Inimicus tuus Domine. Satan, The Archenimy
that blasted, and disordered, and defiled both (...) and (...) soon after they
were made; There Is opprobrium ab origin: Thence all slanderers may count their
Pedigree. For the devil infusing this venom into those Giants, enflamed them to
the scaling of Joves Throne: or if not that, we will believe the Scripture,
that if Nimrod the mighty light upon a rout of Populorum, such babbling and
bawling sots as he found in Shinar, all of one lip, Genesis 11.1. they in their
wicked conspiracy, (so it is called) Wisd. 10.5. would soon be at it for a City
and Tower unperishable. Make it of Brick incombustible; and for drowning they will
take order with the Almighty, for the top shall reach to Heaven.

9. So deduce Opprobrium from the old Dragon to a Serpentine, Cadmean,
Nimrodian race of Giants, mixed of Populorum and Maximorum too: And what
shameful work will they make! a mad work indeed, even a world of wickedness!
time to look to the Circumference! For if these have all one language, concur
in voting for a new frame, and have a mind to be towering aloft, nothing will
stay them, but Sidera feriam, and ero sicut Altissimus then; that is reaching
Heaven right, but the wrong way: for they are not at Heaven yet. Such a piece
of work in hand: and they bragged of a mountain-birth, But Quid exit? You know
who blasted the business by a consusion first, and a diffusion and dispersion
afterward; and observe the just recompense, the Sentence ex ore tuo, Nequam!
Their babbling to mar their building; their own tongues to make them to fall;
fall out, and fall off; no longer able to stand to their great work, because
unable to understand one another.

10. But for all that sundring at Babel, soderd again we find them in the Text.
This Generation of Nimrod, Belus let him be, and these right sons of Belial;
for no yoke will hold them: for observe this confluence of Omnium Populorum and
Maximorum; and find Jusque datum sceleri, and ex plebiscitis and Senatus
consultis seelera exercentur; all exceeded. When men's hands are once at
liberty, (no King in Jsrael) why then every man does what seems good in his own
eyes; and so here, when their tongue's once loose, the Lords anointed shall be
reproacht. The Lord himself blasphemed, And what Lord shall control them? so
floats the ship without an Helm; so flings the horse without a Bridle, and so
their tongues run madding through the world far worse; so that the Apostle St.
James cries it thrice, Fire, Fire, Fire! How great a mischief comes of this
Fire! setting on fire the the course of nature, and is set on fire of Hell:
thirher still it brings us you see, this untuly evil, full of deadly and
divelish poison, all contract in this Malady, all concentered in opprobrium.

11. But be this poison of Populorum never so noxious, and those that ejaculate
never so mighty; What are these all to the Almighty, these Maximi to him?
Christ is opt. max. Shall Jehovab suffer by such a Typhoeus? or (...) be liable
to such aspersion? No, Inimici tui Domine shall not be able to do this violence
to thy anointed David, nor move a tongue to infest the meanest of thy servants.
This is indeed the point under trial; for all this seems asserted in holy
Scripture.

1. First, Servi are servati: They should indeed be sure to be pelted, and
dusted, and stoned from this Center, painted with infamous spots and tokens of
this plague in their bosom, but for Jehovah here, a good Domine that has
chosen, and though not quite taken them out of this present evil world, yet as
good, for they use it as if they used it not; their Conversation is in Heaven,
and themselves within three steps. In Ephesians. 2. He has quickened us together with
Christ, and has raised us together, and made us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus: And is not that high and aloof, far and free from
Opprobrium?

2. Next is David the Lords anointed; his body secured in the Sepulcher; and
this Monster is no Hyena, -- Pascitur in vivis. His immortal part is mounted
not on Doves, but Angels wings, and past the clouds and storms of Populorum
here; has met those acclamations on mount Zion, and made one of that
innumerable company, the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, among
the Spirits of just men made perfect, and in a Kingdom that cannot be moved;
all this in Heb. 12.22, 23. So David himself is free body and soul from the
strife of tongues, and left above this world of wickedness.

3. Much more is David's Lord advanced: set on the right hand of his Father, all
his enemies made his footstool, far above all Principalities and Powers, and
at his coronation all knees have bowed, and all tongues confessed that Jesus is
the Lord to the glory of God the Father.

4. And for God the Father, What can Opprobrium do to him? The Lord is King, be
the people never so impatient, the earth never so unquiet. God that is very
high exalted, higher then the highest, far above all Gods, above all men sure,
out of their reach; it is he too that can still the raging of the waves, and the
madness of the people. If the Fremuerunt be never so loud against the Lord, and
against his anointed, He that sits in Heaven shall laugh, The Lord shall have
them in derision.

And now where is David's Petition? What is become of our Circumserence? Servi,
and Christus Domini, and Jehovah, all free from Opprobrium? nay never a one of
all these for all this; begin with the highest first, and if this Monster set
on Jehovah, fly in his face, he will sure spare none of the rest.

1. And we need not go far for proof; they corrupt others, and speak of wicked
Blasphemy; their talking is against the most high; they blasphem thee daily,
says David, even weeping ripe that God would not redress and repress those
Blasphemies. We need go but to this very Text, Remember it O Lord, thy enemies
have blasphemed thee; we need not so much. Alas! We cannot stop our ears
against words clothed in death, and jeasts flumine dignos, and those execrable
Oaths and Perjuries for which the land mourns, spent in despite of God and of
his Prophets flying roll, full of plagues against such Swearers who yet roll
on, and roll out their hours in hellish Blasphemies, as if they practiced here
against their coming thither. No wonder then if earthly Gods put up, and bosom
many and mighty reproaches and abuses, when it is here upon Record, and
evidence too much every where, of this Crimen laesae Majestatis as high as
Heaven.

2. Next for Christ Jesus; Pursue his story but from his Baptism; for all the
opening of Heaven, and the Doves descent, and his Fathers attestation coming
among his own, How did they receive him? Not as the Lord Messiah, but as a
Messiah in mockery; so they anointed him with spittle made him a Crown of
Thorns, and a Scepter of a Reed; but these were rude and rough Soldiers. What
was Vox populi? a Deceiver, a Madman, a Glutton and a Wine bibber, a friend to
Publicans and sinners. What said Maximi? why the more good he does, the more
evil they speak of him. Does he heal on the Sabbath day? they vote it illegal:
He is a licencious person, a Breaker of the Sabbath straight; yea his very
Virtues were convitiate, his great and stupendous Miracles blasphemed. He
casts ous Devils by the Prince of Devils; and these were his passive Diurnals
and his Annals, his Chronicles, and his Panegyricks; with these Dice did they
devour, till altogether resounded that bloody Epiphonema of Crucifige; nay upon
the very cross was that verified, a scorn of men, and outcast of the people.
All that see me, laugh me to scorn: They shoot out their lips, and shake their
heads, saying, He trusted in God that he would deliver him; Let him deliver him
if he will have him: But Christ is now in Heaven, and Opprobrium cannot hunt,
or hurt, or hurl Aspersions thither: yes certainly; For as Calvin and
Tremellius both will have the Text understood of those Scoffers which while the
Church of God expected a Messiah, derided then that expectation: so a new brood
in St Peter's time we read of that cried, Where is the Promise of his second
coming? and Teachers he soretels, (and we have heard of such Teachers in our
time) damnable Teachers, denying the Lord that bought them, and too many
following their pernicious way; by reason of whom the way of Truth, and in
that, he who is the Way and the Truth, are blasphemed. And St. Paul says, lewd
and debosht Christians crucify again the Lord of Glory, make a mock of him,
and put him to an open shame. See now if any David can look to rise or set to
finish his course without opprobrium, when this Giant adventurous pursues, and
would vomere in sinum (as far as his Hel-hound tongue can stretch poison) the
Glory of Christ Jesus himself at his Fathers right hand in Heaven.

3. David shall consess it for himself; My enemies revile me all the day long;
are mad upon me, sworn together against me, with tongues like Serpents, poison
of Asps and Adders under their lips; these of the Populorum. The basest dregs
of the Rabble; Abjects, Drunkards, Dogs, and a dead Dog; and some of the mighty
too, too mighty for him. To these add Shebaes Clamorque virum, Clangorque
Tubarum; and for bosom injuries (besides those of his kindred) his own bowels,
his own issue, and his own flesh, his own wife gave him his hand full, and his
bosom full of opprobrium. It Is true, David's soul is now in Power and Glory: but
yet he stands here for all his fellows, all that are made so much more
excellent then their Brethren of mankind, as they have obtained a more
excellent name then they, and that name is here, The anointed, and all such may
glass themselves in David's sufferings, and find that a true Maxim among his
Maxims, Benefacere and male audire Regium est; Reproacht and abused oftentimes
by those, to whom they have been most gracious and greatest Benefactors. This
raises a shallow brook of Disobedience to a soul deep sea of Rebellion: for
Judas made really rich by his Masters bag to run over to a company of wicked
Elders with his Quid dabitis? for the Viper which came out of Paul's bundle of
sticks, and now grown warm, to hang upon his hand: indeed no harm was done, he
flung the Viper into the fire. But so could not David be rid of the Serpent in
his bosom: here that stung him to the heart. Thou of my counsel; we took sweet
counsel together; of the same Profession: we walked in the house of God as
friends; Thou my familiar friend: -- Hie niger est: bunc tu Britanne caveto.

4. Thus far its carried against Jehovah, Christ Jesus, the Lords anointed: and
then be sure it will take in Christians too. It is the lot of all Gods
servants, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer this scourge of
tongues. For the lofty Poplars will shead their venomous fel-dews on Robur and
Cedar, and Palms planted in the house of the Lord. The lying lips will cruelly,
dispitefully and disdainfully speak against the Righteous. Our souls and
Bosoms must be filled with the scornful Rebukes of the wealthy and mighty, and
with the despitefulness both of the proud and ignorant. Thus this Monster
tramples on God and all good men, and drags them at the heels, presses upon
Vestigia, their footsteps: so this first in David, and then in Christ himself.

1. David first, Though a man worth thousands of them, whose heart was not
haughty, nor his eyes lofty, but walked uprightly before them, and led them as a
faithful Shepherd, and walked not (for so the word is) in things too great, or
too high for him; but so behaved, so quieted his soul as a child that is weaned
of his Mother, ruling justly over men in the fear of God, like a light of the
morning, of a morning without clouds, and yet had many clouds and dusty
slanders raised upon his Vestigi^, his footsteps, upon his flittings and
removes, Ps. 56. though in danger of his life as we know he was very often. All
that helped him in his escapes from Saul, that get him away, even Jonathan
reproached with perverse Rebels, and scarce free from the stroke of a Javelin,
and all that relieve him by the way, as Abimelech the Priest, that do but give
him bread when ready to starve, (if Doeg the Edomite may be the executioner of
Saul's ordinance) shall be slain with the sword, What path, What step of David's
can be free, when even his humble Devotions to his God, his fasting and putting
on Sackcloth, and then his wearing the linen Ephod, and dancing before the
Ark, are made a mockery.

2. But what say we to Vestigia Christi? Were not his feet deadly pursued, not
only at the last pass when they came after him with swords and staves, but even
the cost bestowed upon those blessed feet counted but waste? We find in his
story he could not step abroad for their lying in wait: the word is (...),
taken from Hunters, eager on their game: so they sought to entrap or to catch
some thing from him: he could not go to take an entertainment at the Table, not
walk in the Cornfieldsd, not go out to heal, or preach, or do Miracles, but
still they cavilled; and some desire him even to be gone, and to depart out of
their Coasts. If he come from Nazareth, no good comes from thence; if he remove
to Cana or Capernaum, they ask, Why thither? Why Cures and other great Works,
in other places, and none in his own Country? and all the while the fault their
own. Who thought they were astonished at his Understanding and Answers, and none
able to answer him a word, yet were they still offended at him, and even in
that offended, because he was unanswerable: nay the luster of his Grace and
Goodness, his temper, and sweetness, and clearness, dis-illustring the highest
of their Priests, and Princes, and Rulers of the people, being dazzled and
madded with the splendour of his Vestigia, the prints and proofs, the tracts and
evidences of his meekness and innocence, all along in his active and passive
obedience, when there was nothing else for the tooth and tongue of envy, they
took indignation at his very virtues; and Pilate knew that for envy they had
delivered him to his Judgment.

12. And now methinks we have been all this while in America among Negroes,
black slaves, not so much as an Albus dextris, but all black toothed, and
black-mouthed, and black-tongued, and black-sould people. A generation
viperous, and rising strangly from the earth with spears and swords not in
their hands, but in their mouths. And yet Negroes can but poison arrows to take
away men's lives; but these opprobrious people corrode the very honor of Gods
best servants, far more precious then life it self. O foul presumption, How
came thou into the world to cover and blast both carth and sky, and all the
Children of the Light, and him that is the Father of Light, overrunning all
with this new Chaos, this foul Reconfusion?

13. Indeed some read for all the people here, all the Mighty; and if so, that
will make Infamy yet more infamous; and this world of wickedness worse then it
was. It Is best to hold us to our old belief; for if with Copernicus we turn the
skeme, and so let Servi and Rex David, and Christus Domini himself, that is,
the whole Church militant on earth (which is his Spouse, his Dove, his dearly
Beloved, one body, and one Spirit with Christ, and dear as his eyes or heart)
be under a power of such Populorum with the sway and addition of Maximorum,
that is, if Might be added to multitude, then will the Church of God be but a
miserable Center, when those other wheel aloft and thwart their underlinings
like the Zodiaque. All the bosoms then of all the servants of Jehovah, and
Christus Domin? would soon be filled with Reproaches and with deadly arrows,
like the poor Anatomy in the Almanac. Cancer would not only go against the
stomach, while others lie heavy on the head and heart, but every pelting petty
Sagittary would be dribbling at the legs, and very Aquarius pour out the venom
and dregs, and bottom of his Tankard upon Vestigia, here the Footsteps of Gods
people.

PART 2.

ANd then what Remedy against Opprobrium populorum? truly if we intend it of
Faex populi, the skum, it is like Babylon, they cannot, because they will not
be cured; born and bred like a wild Asses colt (says Job) worse says Isaiah,
then Ox or Ass, know not their own Owner, not God that made them Subjects, nor
Gods anointed set over them for their good, Romans 13. Such stuborn stomachs as
are irreducible by moral swasion, or any power of Eloquence; not Orpheus, nor
any from hell tune them to a temperate obedience, either of that Command in the
beginning of the old Testament, which God gave Laban concerning Jacob, Nequid
durius, speak no harsh language; nor to a fear of that Commination in the end
of the New Testament against such as despise Dominions, and speak evil of
Dignities, and of things they know not, raging waves, foaming out their own
shame, and concludes the Lord is coming with 10000 of his Saints, to execute
Judgment upon such impious sinners for all their ungodly deeds, and for all
their hard speeches. Will these regard a Prophet or a Preacher (against whom
their usual fence is to strike him with the tongue) when with such the Lords
anointed shall be no longer so, if they list to bring their Expurgatory? for
they can do it as fast as Jesuits or Anababtists. That brace of Sects whose
Dignity proceeds of themselves, like those Chaldeans in the Prophet, and who
scoff at Kings, and Princes are a scorn unto them, Hab. 1.10. Nay, What Cure
for such mad men as think themselves all Kings, or as the Devil boasts, that
all the Kingdoms of the earth are their Doles and Donatives, as mad as he that
fate in the haven, and counted all the ships arriving there his own proper
goods? Such sots as these may have at times some Lucida, but never continue in
one mind. David for a fit shall be the breath of their Nostrils: they will sing
his Glory, and challenge ten parts in the King; But the Son of Bichri, a man of
Belial may turn all this with one blast, and every one of them gone with
Opprobrium, We have no part in the Son of Jesse, 2 Samuel 20. So one while the
barbarous people call St. Paul a Murderer, and presently a God. Gods are come
down to us in the shapes of men: O run and fetch Garlands, and let us
sacrifice. All on a sudden the wind changes, and then this fine speaker
Mercury must be stoned. But what speak we of Servi? Christus Domini, was not
our Lord himself so tossed from (...) to cruc^fige? He! They Will none of him; give
them Barabbas; What was he? A thief he was, a Robber, made Insurrection in the
City, and committed Murder. Did they not make a rare choice? Yet such wise men
as these are those who to this day first elect themselves, and then clep and
call their friends and fellows by the names of Saints and Children of God. As
for Moses and Aaron, they are too proud and officious, but Core and his
complicies are called the people of the Lord; and when they saw them go down
quick to hell, yet next morning at it again, the people of the Lord still; But
is there no Balm, no Physician? Yes, enough, if Mountbanks not mistaken for
Doctors, and if they prescribed not poison instead of medicine. Such leaders
seduce, and cause a mad people to err. The divisions of Reuben were from great
thoughts of heart. But might not Simeon and Levi (these were their Writers and
Teachers) be the Raisers and Fomenters of such Divisions! Sure I am in Number. 16.
where the Rubenites conspite against Moses the meekest man on earth, and Aaron
the Saint of the Lord, it is Corah and his company of Levites, and that coar of
envy in their hearts for the high Priesthood that began the mischief. And how
often do we read forewarnings of false Prophets, and in Act. 20.20. among your
selves (says the Apostle) shall rise up men speaking perverse things to draw
Disciples after them. And I wish such Incendiaries only came from Rome with
their charm of the Church Catholic, and that we were free from Impostors and
Seducers in this sense for drawing Disciples after them, and infusing such
Doctrines, that with Satyr^k Sermons and incentive vociferations they have
filled the State and Church both with Division and Confusion. These are the
winds, Euroclydon and Boreas, and his brethren that lift up the waves of
popular Tumults: and none but Jehovah can still this Tempest.

14. Especially if Maximi mingle in the mass of Populorum, and run with them to
the same excess of riot in Opprobrium, which God forbid. True Nobles and great
ones, worthy the name of the Worthies of Israel, will consider the base alloy
to be ingloriously harded with vulgar spirits; and wise men will not easily be
blown up or hurried away with every wind of Doctrine, but be, and do like those
nobler Bereans, that is, search if those things men preach, be so or no. They
will read and believe the Scripture, which tells them, that the Lords anointed
who raised them to be Majores and Maximi, made them suscipere magis and maxim.
The fountain of all honor is ordained of God to be Caput, -- Head over all the
Tribes in the Old, and (...), supreme in the new Testament; ^ud so set on the
Throne, and in the place of God, that the Kings enemy is Gods enemy. Every
Opprobrium cast at him, reviles Jehovah here, ren^ers the Rebuker of David a
Blasphemer of the Lord. And therefore for the Lords sake (since ^o parting him
and Caesar) every Maximus will ^arn what every Minimus, every Christian that
has a soul (as Saint Paul says) most learn, that (...), to be as Jehovah made
them, subject, and that or conscience sake to God; conscience of sinning
against God; blaspheming God and the King go together, and the sin is done
against Heaven and that Father there, which is committed against Pa^^rem
patriae here. To cut a lap from the Kings to be, made honest David's heart smite
him; and those hearts are but dull and heavy stuff that can endure Detraction
to disrobe, or expose to disgrace the spiritual Fathers of the Church, and
especially that Father, whom in Oaths and Prayers we style next and immediately
under God over all persons.

15. Thus are we something onward to a remedy; if either Populus would be
reclaimed, or Maximi disclaim their associaton: but if neither: our next Remedy
is here explicit, -- Gest are in sinu, that is, Patience, Gods own remedy, he
is patient, and he is provoked every day: and Christus Domini bids us Learn of
him: and Christus Domini, David did so in the case of Shimei. Let him alone, it
may be the Lord will look on my affliction, and that the Lord will requite good
for his cursing this day; and so servi Domini enform us, St Paul and St. James,
You have need of Patience, and let patience have her perfect work. Take the
Prophets for examples of suffering affliction and of Patience: so this Medicine
is Catholicon, and has Gods Probatum affixt. The patient abiding of the week
shall not perish for ever.

16. The last Remedy is in Recordare and benedictum, which make a whole prayer:
and first.

1. Prayer in general, it is the invention of Gods people from the beginning.
Tents and Iron-works from Cain and His, but Invocation from Enos and his royal
Progeny; and God would have it so. Ever since he kept house on earth, it must
be called an House of Prayer for all Nations, all that would be of the household
of faith and fellowship of the Saints. If that honor, then this work which
pleases God above incense, and does him more honor then all burnt Sacrifice:
But what good to his servants? all the good our hearts can desire; for would we
do Wonders, dry up Seas, cleave Rocks, stop the Sun, or the Lions rage, quench
the violence of fire, subdue Armies, Kingdoms, or overpower created and
increated Nature, bind down the hands of God himself, Prayer has done this,
and more, with that Prayer of Bow the heavens and come down, the Church of God
brought down that Jesus, at whose name we bow, who bows the Spirit of God to
us, into us, and fills us full of Grace and Truth, of Faith, and Hope, and
Love, and Joy, and all those Graces which serve to bring us in Grace, and to
reconcile us (though sinners and enemies) to the Father through the Son, as he
proclaims the Peace himself In quo acquiesco.

2. Secondly, Here is Christus Domini at prayer; Iexhort, that first of all
Prayers and Supplications be made for Kings; that's well, but I show you amore
excellent way; Kings to make Prayers and Supplications for themselves an appeal
lies to; and here from and for Caesar too at this Throne of Grace before this
Mercy seat of God, who is the only Ruler of Princes. And in this David's zeal
exemplary; I was glad (says he) when they said unto me, Let us go up to the
house of God; Our feet shall stand in thy Gates, O Jerusalem. And in trouble,
and trouble of enemies, let others seek what remedy, take what course they
please, but I take my self, nay, I give my self unto Prayer.

3. Thirdly, Prayer in distress, the proper Remedy: because God erected the
Court of Requests in Heaven for the grievances of his Household. This the pool
with several Porches and Parishes, where if we wait, in right season we may be
cured, be the (...) never so noisome, what disease soever it be. Should the
enemies of Christus Domini conspire and continue to dry up that oil of
heavenly Power, which pours it self from the head for the preservation of the
members; or the state it self grow sick of a Tympany, or false conception, or
shake and totter with the palsy or we have just cause to complain in the
Church, and pray God to deliver u from (...), that is, (I think) such as regard
no Topics, fetch their Arguments from no common place of old Reason or
Religion, evil and absurd men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. O, yet here is our refuge. The
weapons of our Militia are our our Prayers to him that calls upon us to call
upon him in time of trouble, and he will deliver us.

4. Fourthly, Speciaily Prayer is prevalent in this particular textual disease
and malady of Opprobrium. Our Litany with Libora nos Domine, is the best Ditany
to throw off this arrow; to return and repay, and requite it into their bosom
that annoy, us is but Lutum luto purgare. No, though it be a case which nearly
concerns us, and an offense of an high nature, yet our best way is to remove it
to the highest court of audience in Heaven before the Judge of all the world,
where we have advocatum Regium, and the darling and favorite of that court to
plead our cause, which is his own, and who took this course himself; reviled
not again, but committed it to him that judges righteously. The Apostle indeed,
Ephesians. 6. arms and prepares the Soldier of Christ with an Helmet and a shield, a
sword too of the Spirit, and fits him with an whole Armoury beaten our in
Heaven for him: But how concludes he? praying always with all prayer and
supplication.

5. Lastly. This particular Prayer of David, Recordare Domine, a word including
all Law of God, all Duty of man, all Sermons, and all Prayers. For as the
Decalogue has a tree of Life in the midst, a branching RECORDARE, stretching
over both Tables: So both again comprised in two Memento's of Vivere and Mori,
and both these contracted to been vivere; two Memoraries: The one for
Praeterita; -- the Pit whence hewn, the Mass wherein corrupt; that for
Erubescere: and then Novissims, least the infernal Pit shut her mouths upon
us, and this for Contremiscere: and so the Spirit and Quintessence of all
Sermons is here. For we are but Gods Remembrancers (so is the Holy Ghost too)
in preaching and in Prayer. Though you know these things, says Saint Peter,
yet my Duty is to put you in mind, in Remembrance; If any man be fallen,
remember, and do thy first works: if gone back, Remember Lots wife. To a single
person, Recordare tui; to an Husband, to a Father, to a Ruler, Tui, -- and
Tuorum, -- and Tu^rum then; such have need of firm and large Memories. And
preaching to a King, of a King, from the Book wherein this holy King and sweet
Singer of Israel lies embalmed, and being dead, yet speaks, and stricking still
his Harp, a strain of David's Recordare will not be disdained; Recordare me
Domine, says he to God; and I to his anointed, Remember David and all his
troubles. And how they stand here yet fresh and fair to be read to his renown
in GODS Chronology. However State or Church Monuments may fail a gracious
Sovereign (but envies self cannot do so, -- Post Fata quieseit; and -- Querimur
then turns to Quaerimus Davidi) yet God preserves him ever in his book of
Remembrance, mentioned in Mal. 3. Are not these things noted in thy Book? by
that heavenly Recorder, The righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance.

16. And so the Sermon might go round to all the Subjects; a whithering poor
Minister to a dilatory Prelate or forgetful Patron, Recordare Domine, and a
good Patron to an idle Pastor, pointing to the Pulpit, Recordare Domine too. To
the Voluptuary at his fourth health, least he hear it too late in hell when he
cannot get a drop, Fili recordare! Finally it will fit us for Imprere, a Motto
to all our Coats or Coatarmours, our Courts or Coaches, over all our Houses,
upon all our Pictures, and for Posies to all our Rings; to the Bridegroom
Domine, to the Bride (left she forget the Covenant of her God) Recordare
Domina. Thus is it if we speak ^o men all Sermons; so is it if to God all
Prayers. A form of Prayer for David, and all Gods servants in all Cases but
one, Remember not Lord our sins and our offenses: and yet even therein, Lord
remember us in Mercy; Remember thy old loving kindness, and forget not thou to
be gracious. But in all our troubles, if Kings oppress their people, --
Clamabunt ad Dominum, is allowed for the lawful Remedy, 1 Samuel 8.18. That is
but right, and as good reason then for David, when from his soul he breaths
that vote of God, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that this people were wise! That they
understood! That they would consider! And yet finds them to mistake, and cannot
undeceive them, but still they beat him with Rebukes in his Bosom, and slanders
in all his paths; then to return and appeal to his God with Recordare Domine,
Lord clear up the Mist, and cause a Right Understanding, and a fair Proceeding,
that I by just Rule, and they by due obedience, may glorify thee our only Lord
and Savior. Even so rejoicing in the Testimony of a good Conscience, and the
discharge of his Duty, Nehemiah is bold with this form, Remember me O my God,
and wipe not out my Kindnesses, etc. And to name no more, It was the last
prayer that took with the Lord of life before his death, Lord remember me when
thou come into thy Kingdom. And yet even after death it may serve us for
Epitaph to call upon God for the Consummation; Nay after still in that
Consummation, it will be of use to mingle with Te Deum, and Magnificat in the
quire of Saints and Angels. No Independency even in that Church Triumphant, but
Recordare Domine; as from the Lord our Beginning: so on thee for ever depends
the Perpetuity, and perpetuating of our Endless Felicity.

17. Blessed be the Lord! We are come to our An^heme. After Prayers and Sermon
to a Benedictus. A close refused by some Interpreters, as unsuitable to the
Context: But Calvin says not so; Why not as well in the end, as in the
Beginning of this Psalm? My Song ever shall be of the loving Kindness of the
Lord, that is his Prologue: and doubtless to ease his grifes, and raise his
hopes, He purposely makes choice of this Epilogue. Ulysses way to pass the
waves of this troublesome world, and all Encounters, was Resolution and
Patience. But Orpheus and David singing the Praises of the immortal God, shall
escape not only Sirens, but Scilla too, with all her dogs, and all the
Blasphemies and slander in the gulf of Opprobrium here. Therefore the King
shall rejoice in thee O Lord: Thy praise shall be ever in his mouth. So may thy
blessings ever be upon him, and his seed after him, and let all the people that
fear God and honor the King, say Amen, and seal it again with Amen.

And so the Priest shall do his Duty, even bless all Gods people in his name,
and to his name ascribe as is most due, a Benedictus in Aeternum. Blessing, and
Honor, and Glory, and Praise be unto our God, Now, Henceforth, and for
Evermore. Amen, Amen.

A SERMON, CALLED THE Zodiac: at Court.
1 CHRONICLES. 23. ver. ult. And that they should keep the charge of the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, and the charge of the holy Place, and the charge of the
Sons of Aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of the Lord.
IN the service of the house of the Lord; The first Text that I find mentioning
the service of the Lord in his house, and serves as a Glass, wherein we see
first Domus abstracted, then Domus Domini in conjunction. Thirdly, Cultus,
Worship or Service due to Dominus in this Domus; and reasonable service; 1. Qua
Dominus, as he is our Lord, and then qua servus too, as he vouchsafes to do us
service in many other of his houses, and all the service in this house.

For Domus single; In a word, It is a main blessing if God afford man an house;
else worse then Birds or Foxes; and therefore as Cains curse, unhoused a
Vagabond, and Abraham's trial, Get thee from thy Fathers house, so enrowled
among Gods works of Power and Mercy mingled, he makes men dwell together in an
house, and makes them households like a flock of sheep. An house and a meinie,
and him many houses: Multiply the blessing and increase the Joy. The Summer
house and the winter house, Solomon's house in Jerusalem, and that in the Green,
and that in the forest of Libanon, 1 King. 7. And if many houses for a man, for
a King, What for the King o^ Kings? Why, the Scripture besides this in the
Text, mentions very many houses of the Lord, a multiplicity, a Zodiac of
houses for the Sun of Righteousness, for our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, both
to receive our service, and to do us service in them all, -- etc.

1. First, Mundi machina, the Universe, the whole round world with many fair
and goodly rooms: 2. then that named Habitaculum ejus sacrum: Heaven his
dwelling place, the new Jerusalem, of miraculous Structure, past Amphions or
Apollo's fingring: The work of thy fingers, says David; and yet he speaks it
only of this rough cast, and out-building stuck with stars; which though a
glorious sight, yet is but the cover or shell of this great hollow Egg, wherein
as in a perfect Vivary, full of Cages, and Parks, and ponds, he has ark't and
housed together us and all inferior Creatures. But of his higher Palace, His
Empyreal in most court, imperial for his Saints and Angels, the Apostle calls
it an House not made with hands: but as he is light, and his robe is so,
clothes himself with light, so is the house, Light inaccessible; Domine bonum
est; Let us dwell here. No more go down from this mount, but 3. we must descend
as he vouchsafed to do, to the womb of the Virgin. Sol in Virgin sometime, its
one of his houses in the Zodiac, and now the Son of Righteousness was there;
there was God hid and housed for a time: nay Gemini in virgin, not in a
Nestorian, but in a sober sense, and to cry up the Miracle, such as never was,
God and Man together, though in two natures, yet in one person, remaining what
he was, yet taking and made what he was not. There was a right vivary indeed
when the Lord of Glory, blessed for ever, took lise blood of the blessed
Virgin, our Lady. O what a Storehouse, Treasure house Jewel house was that,
that confined, that reserved such a Rarity! What a strange new earthly heaven
for God to dwell and dress himself in; and yet behold without breaking that
house, forth he comes and brings a fourth house on his back, another new house
of his own making still; though assisted in the nchoation, yet terminated in
his person; 4. he only of the blessed Trinity, wearing that garment they all
wrought upon, which creando assumpsit, and sumendo creavit, non extra sed in
persona sua, which raiment was a body real, not fantastic as Marcion (that
eldest child of Satan, so Polycarpus called him) and the Marichees imagined.
For then is all our faith imaginary too; if no true conception, then nor birth,
nor death, nor resurrection true, then is our preaching and your believing
vain. This destroys all, but we have not so learned Christ, if we have been
taught as the Truth is in Jesus. We have learned that our Lord here took our
very nature, and true flesh, woven with sinews, a clay-house moated round about
like one of ours, that is compast with all man's infirmities, (sin except) but
very man of the substance of his mother, -- No substance out of God, or new
caelestial, or sidereal, or Elementary matter, as Valentinus thought: A body
then like ours; yet in this unlike, that in ipso articulo, in the very moment
of Conception it was proved entire, and perfect in all the parts, and endued
with a rational soul at once, which is (...), sa^tb Damascen, the very extract
of all novelty: when that invisible and incommunicable verity, by the Spirit
took a soul, and by the soul a body, says both Damascen and St. Cyprian, when
not by any addition or aggregation of Parts by degrees and leisurely, sed uno
con^extu, the whole figure and frame of the body set (...) by the mighty work
of Gods holy Spirit, faith St. Austin and the School, into which, though a flow
of manifold Graces from the divine nature of Wisdom, Power, Glory; yet in the
two natures united, we preserve those adverbs all of (...), etc. that is,
without Mutation, Confusion, Division, Separation, as the Council of Chalcedon
against Eutyches. Corpus aptasti, it is in the Psalm; Never so fitted for an
house: For in this house dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, -- that is,
not by a simple Inhabitation, nor Assistance, or Habitude, or Dignity, or that
(...), willing consent, or what they call Equality of honor, or Nuncupation or
Beneplacitum only. None of all these will serve, but (...), an Union or Unition
rather hypostatical. In this house dwelt our Lord many years, submitting to
clouds and waves of Our Infirmities; and in this house new-raised from ruin,
and made glorious, this blessed Eagle flew, Cage and all; This holy Inhabiter
of Eternity ascended, house, and all to his Holy Habitation in Heaven, and is
there enthroned on the right hand of his heavenly Father. 5. But while he was
an infant Lord in the hand of his blessed Virgin Mother, here he dwelt a while
in his Cradle-house, the stable-cratch, then the Palace of a great King, at the
sign of the Star in Bethlehem, then the right house of Bread, Panis Angelorum;
The true Bread-house and true Headhouse (though low and little) of all his
greater Houses, his famous Churches after: at those great Cities of Jerusalem,
Caesarea, Antioch, and in good time their sister Rome her self, their little
Sister erst, that had no breasts, but since ovationed for Matter and Domina, as
if Domus, and Cultus, and Dominus himself had been born and upbrought there ab
Origin. 6. But stay a while! Let us observe Dominus and Domus yet better, and
we shall find him returned from Egypt, abiding at Nazareth, and Capernaum, and
Jerusalem, but commonly in the dwelling houses, and banqueting houses of his
Converts; 7. Let these then (if I stayed too long at the former) serve briefly
for two Removes of our Lord. And because the Sea of Tiberias is near at hand,
we may safely walk with him on the water, or see him take ship, or hear him
preach from thence; and then a Ship is more then Domus, it is Domus Domini, the
house of the Lord then indeed. 8. From the Press of people he was fain to hide
himself in that house: But no house must hide or hold him long. Over the brook
Cedron there was a Garden, and often he resorted thither, and thence betrayed,
was brought from house to house; to Annas house, and Caiphas, to Pilats's
Judgement-hall, to Heroa's, and back again to Pilate's; so to his Cross, and
never rested till the noble Joseph laid him in his Garden-house, in a new
Sepulcher, where never man lay; yet that the common house and lodging of
mankind, the Grave. 9. There Kings and Counselors of the earth build desolate
places for themselves; lie still and are at rest (says Job) but so did not he,
we know better then so what he did, I believe. The third day he rose again, and
ascended into Heaven; and at that house we have touched already, but yet from
none of these houses, not that eternal house of our Lord comes any comfort to
us, till that Spirit of the Lord the Comforter come from him to us, to dwell in
us: so putting us all into one household of Faith, the common faith, and making
us all the habitation of God by the Spirit. 10. And to make fit this house,
this Lord the blessed Carpenter was put to work it out of the rough, and
troubled to take, to break down a Partition Wall, whose more then Alpine
rockiness, no Hannibal but he could conquer, and no fire, no liquor but his
heart blood could penetrate. Nothing but his livingdead body, raise this dead
living frame of Saints, built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the building
fitly framed together, grows into an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
There Is right Dominicum every way; The house of the Lord, -- In the Lord, -- On
the Lord, -- By the Lord. This house then in no case to be left out, nor we
left out of it; you know who would allow us no room in their Inn at the Popes
head; and by that device exclude us out of the Church, which is called a great
house, 2 Timothy 2. and the foundation stands sure, but sure it stands not all
upon the cloudy Apennine. This is just like private Mass that is proper
Communion, a right Bull, to pin down Universal in a particular corner, as if to
thrust twenty royal Courts into one Room; like that people, wise in their own
conceit, that to make sure of Conquest, pinned and riveted the Goddess Victory
to their City walls. So these Reckoners go to it stilo novo; the Roman
Computation this: and it is a good confession their fat Bishop Spalat^ makes in
all their names, Ecclesians Catholicam nobiscum esse vel cogitamus, vel
cogimus. They would fain think so, and fain force us to think so, but we are
not much to trouble our selves at their Cogitamus. God knows the thoughts of
men to be but vain; and the divisions of Reuben were from great thoughs of
heart; but from their Cogimus, Libera nos Domine; He has, and does, and will
deliver us, if we embrace our Creed, and by virtue thereof belong to this house
of the Catholic Church. 11. Nay we our selves, our souls and bodies are his
Church and Temple, which house we are. 1 Cor. 6. wherein God remains under our
roof, gracing even the houses of his Saints bodies while they stand, and fallen
watches over their Atoms, (while the spirits return to him) and will recollect,
and raise them up in far greater State and Glory. So that Mors shall not be
ultima, not the last line strectht upon this building, but a linea yet more
ultimate, reaching from Earth to Heaven: And so with much ado, having so many
houses to call at by the way, (which very calling yet has done us some
service, and may do us more) we are come ( Christo auspice) to this very house
in the Text, and seen in a quarter of an hour, this Sun pass through all those
houses to this which is the last in our Zodiac: The Temple which David
prepared, and Solomon built for the service of the Lord; and in which house God
has a propriety, styled therefore by way of Excellency, The house of the Lord.
12. Where the first service we can do for Domus and Dominus both, is to wake
them meet with, and meet for one another: For is there not a mighty discrepance
betwixt them? the Temple a stately piece, the Joy of the whole earth, Par domus
haec coelo! But you know what follows will not serve his turn though: as God by
his Eternity transcendently and supereminently comprehends all time, so by his
immensity all places: And Dominus here (though true of Christ as we heard, and
may hear more anon) is Jehovah. and he dwell in Temples! Temples plural, if set
altogether, made with hands; Heaven of Heavens cannot, What house can contain
him then! What house will you build for me? no house (Lord) to comprehend thee,
who art God incomprehensible: but for thy name, and an house for thy worship
and service that may comprehend us. But what matter if no such houses at all?
neither on this Mount, nor yet at Jerusalem, but right service in Spirit and
Truth. So say some haunted (perchance) with a worldly and dangerous spirit: we
deny not our best sacrifice on the heartaltar, best worship in Spirit. Yet if
God were undelighted with a set local Worship, why would the Scripture mention
Hannahs motion? 1 Samuel 2. And another, Anna the Prophetess residing in the
Temple? why our Savior daily in the Temple and Synagogues? and his Apostles,
Peter the chief, and John the beloved of Jesus ascending at the hour of prayer?
Or would the Spirit of God have put it into the heart of David, a man after
Gods own heart to prepare him service in a Temple, or his Prophet in his name?
so cry out upon this deserting this house of God, and bring his double action
of Wast, vain Wast on our own ceiled houses, and laying wast this house of God,
My house lie wast, Hgg. 1. so the propriety held then: and if we follow it to
the springhead, we find indeed Cultus Domini before Domus. Abel sacrificed,
and in Enos time they invocated; Immolation and Invocation both in the
beginning of Genesis, but go on, and you come to a place framed before you go
out of Exodus; and even in Genesis we have Noah's and Abraham's Altars, and
Jacobs Bethel; But to clear this at once, only that in Deuteronomy. 12. The reason why
Cultus was not set in order, because no proper Domus for this Dominus; ver. 8.
Now you serve me as you l^^^, hievery man what is right in his own eyes; and
why no Reformation? v. 9. you are not yet come to the rest and inheritance
which the Lord your God gives you; but when you go over Jordan, (a better order
then) then there shall be a place which the Lord shall choose, to cause his name
to dwell there. So far is Dominus from dis-avowing Domus, that he ordains both
Domus and Cultus; and therefore let them remain all there as we find them here
in order, Cultus, Domus Domini. Do you not find too every precious stone and
string appointed to Moses by pattern in the Mount? and David had the Platform
of the Temple in writing, 1 Chronicles. 28.19. And Dominus then took possession of
Domus; his Glory appeared before the Tabernacle, and filled the Temple at
Solomon's dedication, yea he made his Residence in both, took up his seat in the
Tabernacle; his Mercy seat too, wherein he most delights to show and shine
forth in perfect beauty and majesty; and of the Temple he says, Mine eyes and
my heart shall be there continually; This is my rest for ever, Here I will
dwell; The place where his honor dwells, which he owns; My house, and gives it a
name, An house of Prayer, and our Savior confirms it in the New Testament too,
it shall be so, My Fathers house shall be so called; and therefore I pray you
in Gods name, let him have it so. The house of the Lord let it be, Let him rest
and dwell in this house for ever; but a thousand pities he should dwell alone,
no body to attend him. What! The Courts of the Lords house, and no Courtiers?
Are there no Places, no Pensions, no Offices in this Court? where are then the
servants of his Majesty? I hope they be even here; even all the true, and
loyal, and faithful servants of the earthly majesty will rejoice and be glad
by the benign Influence of a royal example, to become faithful and obedient
Worshippers of the Majesty in Heaven.

PART 3.

THis comes in right, and puts us on Cultus, our next particular Service; it is
no domineering word, an humble expression this, and must be co nomine therefore
exalted, for it is indeed the word in the Text most predominant, in a sense
above Dominus and all; for take out Dominus, and what becomes of Domus? Domus
and Rus may then be likewise used, that is, as Rustically, as Rudely as you
will. Well! Take out Cultus, and I am sure Dominus will never abide it. All
stays or goes with this Cultus, the main and mainly to be insisted on, and
Cultus absolute is due to Dominus; first, In Equiparence to his other houses
and service in them all; why this house far worse then all the rest! as many as
we called at in all Gods houses before, I told you they might do us more
service yet.

1. First, In the Maorocosm all things serve this their Lord, up at Matins of
Prayer, seeking their meat at God, at Vespers of Laws with the Anthem. 1. It is
He that has made us, and not We our selves. 2. In Heaven his Angels ministering
Spirits with Holy, Holy, Holy, and a great voice of much people, Rev. 19.
saying H^lelujahs, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord. 3.
And in the womb of the blessed Virgin the house is aired and consecrated for
his Conception by the holy Ghost. And when he first brings in his first
begotten Son into the world, and Let all the Angels of of God worship him; The
Baptist did him service then unborn, springing in the womb for joy; and his own
blessed mother Mary sings her service to to him while yet in her body, My soul
does magnify the Lord, my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. In one and
the same little house and Chapel royal of her great and mighty Lord, the first
St. Mary's that ever was, at once conceiving and containing him and her
Devotion. 4. And as for the house of flesh and Bethlems manger, (put them both
together) not all those clouds and swaddling clouts of obscurity could dim the
Light of the world, nor hide this glorious Lord from the attendance of an host
of Heavenly Courtiers and Soldiers running down the hill of Heaven to salute
him Imperator, with an Hymn of Gloria Deo in excelsis; nor conceal him from
those Kings, (some say) wise men we are sure, that came from the East to
worship this Oriens, who fell down before him, opened their Treasures, and
presented him. They could not hide him from old Simeons eyes after in the
Temple, for he then saw clearly the presence of the Lord in him that was there
presented to the Lord, even the Lords Christ whom he served with gladness, and
carolled out a blessing on him in his arms. 5. Nor was this worship wanting in
the very dwelling and banqueting houses of his servants. 6. Simeon entertains
him, Levi makes him a great Feast, and even there was Wisdom justified of her
children. One example above all in the house of that Simon the Pharisee, that
which went beyond his banquet, and all the service there, was, the poor sinners
service, from her box of precious ointment, and her more precious tears,
serving to wash his feet. 7. Next apply to him on shipboard, and behold him not
only heard with reverence by the shore-audience, but St. Peter down at his
knees, with his Depart from me, for I am a sinful man O Lord. 8. But in or at
his grave no service. That house so ill and low situate, that none obliged to
pay or tender service there. 9. That Is the desolate house even of Kings (says
Job,) the train forsakes them there. Yet behold even in that house as Joseph
and Nicodemus spare no coft of linen clothes and spices, with a mixture of
Myrrh and Aloes of an hundred weight; so the two Mary's faild not with their
ointment and early visitation at the Sepulcher. But as it was John's eager
spirit that out-ran Peter; so Magdalen, her loving spirit out-went them all in
a constant service and devotion: for when left alone she stood, she wept, she
stoopt, she looked into the Sepulcher, and there at length she lights on other
fellow servants of her Lord, even two Angels in white sitting at the head and
feet, that is, where those blessed head and feet of their Lord, where the body
of Jesus had layn, John 20.12. 10. As for service in his next house the
Catholic Church we know as in the Jewish, -- he was the only Lord of Israel;
and Moses and David wear that name of his servants: So in the Christian Church,
What style take Peter and Paul, but servants of Jesus Christ? and even the
weaker sex, behold the lowliness of his handmaid; an humbl^ Maidservant at
16. and a blessed woddow-servant Anna in her great Climackterick, Luke 2. That
departed not from the Temple, but served the Lord with fasting and prayer night
and day. 11. Lastly Our own souls and bodies, what are they if rightly used,
but Organs and living Oratories, and when here assembled, a Box or Nest of
little temples in His Temple? which houses all his Saints and servants are
careful to possess in honor, and keep them clean, not for Bacchus or Venus,
but the pure and sacred Spirit of the Lord, to keep out the Tempter, to escape
the pollutions of the world. For if God be well served in these inner Temples,
the service of this house of the Lord would be the better set in order, and
that's the last in our Zodiac. There we are now again at service in this very
place, proper to Divine service; this very place inclining as the cell to
study, the grove to Contemplation, a Church or Chapel to Devotion ever; this
the house of the Lord both by way of excellency and propriety: But remember I
am upon Cultus absolute, due to Dominus upon another double ground; first Qua
Dominus, and then qua Servus. 1. As Dominus. For we may ask Pharoahs question,
but not with Pharoahs mind, Whois the Lord? and nothing but Jehovah will answer
that in excellency, which takes in all the three persons of the glorious
Trinity: but yet as we are forbidden by the Christian verity to say there be
three, but one Lord; so observing both old and new Testament, the second person
by joint assent of both the other is made made both Lord and Christ. Lord every
way, Lord by Creation, (...) him were all things made; Lord by preservation,
The Government upon his shoulder, who is the mighty Lord, and all things upheld
by him who is the mighty word; Lord by Redemption too, The Lord our
Righteousness, made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.20. So to him all Power and Dominion is given in Heaven
and Earth, and at his exaltation his Coronation confirmed. The homage of knees
and tongues, That Jesus is the Lord; is, was, and is to come, yesterday, to
day, and the same for ever: so goes our hope, He shall come to judge; so begins
our Christian Creed, In Jesus Christ our Lord; so end our prayers, through
Jesus Christ our Lord: so every Christian with St. Thomas makes a glad
profession, My Lord and my God. If our eyes be not held that we shall not know
him, if once out of weakness we be made strong in the Lord, if once out of
darkness we be made light in the Lord, if anointed with the eye salve of the
Sanctuary, we then in him, in whom the eye of Judas, the worlds eye, the Jews
eye could see no beauty: in that Worm they trod and spit upon, that slave they
scourged, that Malefactor they crucified, shall clearly find to our everlasting
comfort, both a gracious man and a glorious God, breaking through all those
clouds, darting majestic rays, contracting all our sight, and uniting and
fixing all our eyes on that only lovely Object, who after all the Eclipses and
shadows of the earth, and hell gone over him, shines forth in perfect beauty,
crowned with the Sun, and under his feet a Moon with deaths pale head, and a
red Dragon; upon his thigh, his name inscribed, Dominus Dominorum; Men and,
Brethren, what shall we do? What manner of men ought we to be in holiness and
fear? What think you? Is not our obedience due in reason, a reasonable service
to this Lord above others? Other Lords have ruled over us, Satan and our vices
have been Lords of Misrule. But there goes virtue still out of this Dominus,
and virtue there is in Dominus, a magnetic intrinsique virtue to draw even
Ironhearts to his service. Stands not Dominus over Domus here, and so over
every Church and Chapel, like the herald star to beckon us, to invite all that
are wise to salvation? O come let us worship and fall down before the Lord.
Down, O down with every high thing, and bring into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ Jesus our Lord: This qua Dominus.

2. And then qua servus, still more reasonable service; if such a Dominus stoop
to Servus, strange if all those houses you heard of, prove our houses another
while, and he will do us service in them all; first in the great house of the
round world it is so; both in the Mechaniks and Oeconomicks. In the beginning
of his book we find him as a Carpenter at work by the week, making partitions,
measuring and figuring with his Elements in square, and skies in circle,
stricking up Lights and pinning them to the body of the Sun; then mixing other
mysteries of Gardener and Painter, limming to the life his pieces: this our
Lords doing all, Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation, -- the
work of thy hands, Heb. 1.10. And for whose sake so fair a frame! for Birds or
Beasts? the Heathen could tell you no, (...) -- Sanctius his -- Man made Lord
to name his vassals at his pleasure; and when God gives him possession, the
very word is Dominamini, all at his service So in Occonomy, as built, so all
upheld for us, Habendum -- and Tenendum by his Manu-tenency, kept in repair
from crumbling out to Atoms, and not an empty house that would do us no
service; but herein by 10000 hidden providential quils, distills and works out
food and raiment by whole loads, says David. Psalm. 68. and changes fresh every
morning, says Jeremie, Lam. 3.22. And therein descending past Offices of
State^eward, Treasurer, Chamberlane, to the meanest of Baker, Cook and Butler
with his bottles of Heaven, clouds droping fatness, finest wheat and liquor of
the Grape: so low in this great Domus is this greatest Dominus diminisht; doing
his servants all these Services.

2. Secondly, As Terram dedit, so Coelum dabit; His upper house shall be ours
after one life, that but a span long. It Is his by nature, ours by conquest; we
come in with the Conqueror; therefore we look at it still in hope, as
Travelers going home, that abiding City, whose Builder and Maker he is, and
where he is still at work for us, preparing a place, many Mansions, -- Crescit
sub principe Coelum, where he keeps possession for us in our name and in our
nature, and whence he sends to us continually his holy Angels to serve us. and
thence will come with all those Angels to fetch us up to his last supper, and
there again serve us himself, while we sit down with Abraham, Jsaac and Jacob
in the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Thirdly, In the womb of the blessed Virgin he was an humble servant, abased
himself in not abhorring that whereon we dare not stay our trembling thoughts
so many minutes as he endured it months; and this service only for us, for us
men, and for our salvation he was incarnate, to burn out our stains, and
corrosive the leprosy of our nature. For he by the holy Ghost (which at first
moving on the Chaos created a world of beauty) being there conceived, was
thereby filled with Grace in out Nature, which Grace in our measure was from
him to be spread and shed in our hearts by the same holy Ghost which is given
us, Romans 5. So was he our servant there, and Factor for us; and therefore
stripped of all that might unfit him for that Ministry.

4. In the fourth house of our flesh, he comes lowly with love, I come to do
service, -- in the form of a servant to minister -- to serve the curt of souls
and bodies too. See the great Arch-Prelate, Primate of Heaven and Earth, Lord
and Bishop of our souls, whose Sea is from sea to sea, and from the River to
the worlds end, to whom we may give all Bellarmines fifteen great names, and
all too little, is yet content, and that not in jest, but in Deed and in Truth
with servus servorum Domini; who though he served his foes for a mocking-stock,
and never was man so shamefully served, yet despising the shame, he served out
his time, and counted it his meat and drink to do service. And here again
Corpus aptasti, I am sure; we sure were ^^^er so fitted for a body, and for an
house: For were it not for this house, in woeful state were all the great houses
of the Land, all the Princely houses of all Christian lands, the famous houses
of York and Laneaster, Valois, Burbon, Medices and Austria: The right descent
and purest royal blood is from this house of flesh; but for this house, and his
wearing it, and bearing all ours sins on the top of it: (For into the house
they came not) What Title but from this Ancestour to Paradise, the Palace, the
Nonsuch above; not a Tarquin Priscus or Superbus but beholden to this Servius,
nay the best and purest votaties in this house of God, the place of his
service; not David, or Solomon, or good King Ezekiah, not Constantine, or
Theodosius, or Jacobus, or Carilaus; no gracious King of famous Memory, or
present Merit; no body, though never so embellisht or embraved, shall ever join
in that Quire of his Saints and holy Angels above, without the mediation of the
body of Jesus our Lord, and the service done in that body.

5. But what service in that Inn at Bethlem, where was no room for him? it was
yet made serviceable for us, for there we Inn to this day; all at that Star we
Gentiles claim by those that were Primitiae, first Guests to that house; of
Gold and Incense we find there he had, and we Partakers of his fine Gold, and
good service has his Incense done us I am sure: We pray, Lord increase our
faith, and he that could help our unbelief (Lord) might do us good service: if
so surely a hundred Sermons in this house not more available then the dumb
Cradle of our Lord in that cratch. The Scripture speaks evidently (says the
Apostle) the Scripture lies mute; the Cradle house yet therein is an herald to
proclaim the fulfilling of two great Prophecies; one was, Et tu Bethlem, there
Christ to be born: The other that of his poverty, -- A Worm. -- shame of men,
outcast of the people. Upon the very Pillars of this house (which are but the
staves of the Cratch) may we safely rely and build our Faith; this blinded and
madded the Jew; but thus it must be, thus must Christ be born if ever he do us
good: this obscureness to manifest him, this emptiness to be his fullness of a
Messiah to fulfill the Scripture, that so our joy might be full, full of joy
and Peace in believing: This the service he does our Faith, and no less service
in making us humble: I believe Lord; and may not every one say, I am humble
(Lord) too: but Lord help our unhumility, Help us off with the double lets of
outward Pomp and inward Pride. Behold this Royal Insant reaches out his hand to
serve us from his Cratch in our Bedchambers, and by his powerful, his high,
and mighty and stupendous Humility thrusts it to our hearts, and strips off
all from the souls and bodies of his faithful servants, all that may offend
the eye of his heavenly Father, and in that voice comes from him in this Cradle
(though yet inarticulate) we hear him in the evidence of his holy Word and
Spirit say, Learn of me, Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, who thus in this House
serves us, and helps his servants both in their Faith and their Humility.

6. and 7. In the sixth and seventh, the private houses and banqueting houses
of his servants, the Lord serves as a Builder and a Watchman, and a ^^aplain
to say Grace, and bless, and loves to do ^^vice there in the freedom of his
conversation, said in his dish by the proud Pharisee, and in daily working that
Miracle of warry juice, turned into Wine, concoct into fresh and cheerful
blood.

8. Next he serves us in those water-houses; Wilt not thou O Lord go forth with
our Armies? says the Psalmist; so we may say, The Lord has gone forth with
our Navies, -- as in 88. so Quadragesimus octavus, (too) Mirabilis Annus! And
then it is the Lord and the Power of his Might that has saved the Metaphorical
ships of Church and State, kept those Bottoms from foreign invasive storms,
and dangerous Schisms and Leaks at home. Skillful Mariners may do well, but he
the Pilote at the Helm; Christo Duce and auspice regno, is a Right Prophetic
and true Inscription by Land and Water. His bloody Cross, a braver Flag and
nobler Badge then Lucida sidera, Castor and Pollux. This Pollens Lux ipsa, the
true Light to guide the whole feet. He did us worthy service who first came by
ship to conveigh the Light of the Gospel hither (some years before a spark of
fire at Rome.) What does Lux, by whose blessing on our ships we may by the same
way derive the Light to other Nation yet in darkness, as importing so thus
exporting too the unsearchable Riches of Christ, to which all Treasures of East
and West are pale, and drowsy, and muddy things, as a little Gravel in
comparison? Thus venture I still on with my frail bark, and well enough if
still Cesarem veho, -- bear his well tried Patience and attention along, while
Dominum Caesarem vebo. That Lord, who now could find no further house-room on
earth or water, but ceased not yet to do us further service in his very
Sepulcher.

9. For till he came thither, thither we were come, dead and buried, bound hand
foot in the gravecloaths of our sins, sealed up and claspt down with a stony
weight of the wrath of God, which would have pressed us to the nethermost Hell.
But behold in that short time of his abode in this house, what Rare Redoubts
and Mines this mighty Engineer casts and contrives, works a descent through the
Iron jaws of death down to Hell, and like a Conqueror ascends, leading in
Triumph Captivity Captive, opening so, and seasoning, and sweetning so this
house before so dreadful, filled with ultimum terribilium, that his Disciples,
all that love and seek him in Life and Death, shall never find discomfort in a
Grave; Nothing but a Requiem and Dormitory with Angels sitting at the head and
feet, till he awake them in Tuba novissima, and raise them to a meeting in the
clouds, where all his servants shall enter into the joy of that their Lord.

10. As for the Catholic Church, to demand his service there, is to ask, What
good the Vine, the Head, the Bridegroom, the Cornerstone do to the Branches,
Members, Spouse and Building in those strict Unions, nay closer then all those
per eu^dem spiritum; Behold so am with you (never to offer to part from you,
never to suffer you to part from me) to the end of the world, in the end, and
world without end, which will be soon discovered by the Service done to each
particular Member in every ^f^nr Souls and Bodies in that house.

For is not our body his house wonderfully and fearfully built? that little
world of beauty shaken out of dust, and bals of living fire fi^xt in our
eye-brow? what work makes this heavenly Potter even with that clay in white and
red, and blew, and after all his polishing, forced to take it down, and like
China earth, hiding some for many 1000 years, will show his Power in their
raising far fairer then before? and yet able to dispatch the same effect on
others in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye; changed, and not die by a
sudden dissolution and a sudden reunion: But far rarer Workmanship is the
Recreation of our souls, washed brighter in his blood, and heightened by his
Spirit. We need but two things for our souls, Grace and Truth; and both came by
Jesus Christ; from his fullness we receive both: by whose service and Ministry
we are made New Creatures, invested in a Robe, and admitted to an Order past
the Fleece and Garter; the Right Order of the holy Ghost: Brag not vain man! O
run not up into some beastly figure, if guilding like a snail, or tracing the
way of thy preferment by thy blood or match, thou be mounted to a local state
of Wealth and Honor; for these can add no new substantial forms. But this
access of Spirit from this Lord is right enobling, and superinduces a new soul,
which like fire devours, and takes up all within thee, and winding in one
Celestial flame, and embracing Understanding, Will, Affections, wings, and
lifts up all to Heaven.

12. Lastly, In this very house where we assemble for the Worship and Service
of the Lord, it is the Lord himself that does the Service to the whole
Assembly. So that a non nobis Domine is fixable upon the porch of this and
every house of God. For first he invites us hither, Come I Call upon me, Seek
you my face. The sky of Scripture hung round with provocations, calling us to
service; and being entered, who executes the parts of our Divine Service in
this house of Prayer? And is it not he that prays for us, in us, with us,
before us, and teaches us to pray, and say after him Our Father; and as once by
himself in Prayers and strong cries; so here assists our dullness and deadness
of Spirit by his own quickening Spirit, inditing our Prayers, and raising our
Devotion with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed. It is secondly a house
of preaching, and we indeed preach Jesus, and our selves your servants for
Jesus sake; nay him a Servant, for your sakes: But if we speak him right, it is
he that speaks the word of the Lord; heavenly Treasure from our earthen
vessels, that the excellency might be of God, and not of us. It Is he that first
did write the word, which is his Power and Wisdom to our salvation; and it is he
that spells the Gospel, and reads and speaks to us in his Word; and he that
lays out and distributes sentences to several bosoms as every man has need,
and he alone that follows the Sermon home, and says it all over again to our
hearts. Finally his House is a House of Communion for the Saints and Churches
of God, for the due receiving of his holy Sacraments. And as in the Baptistery
it is he that receives the Infants in his arms, and washes their Souls in his
blood, and makes the water there a Laver of Regeneration: So in the Supper of
the Lord, it is the same Lord who first shed those primordial purple drops at
his Circumcision; the first fruits of his all powerful blood to begin the work
of our Salvation, and ever since at every holy Communion gives both body and
blood, the food of faithful and repentant Spirits, and makes those sad sweet
drops fall again, to the anguish first, and then the healing of our souls. For
such a different office has this blessed Sacrament, that it serves both to
discover our sins and to seal our Pardons. Wherein while faithfully we receive
him, he really receives us into him, and we him into us. So all of us become
one body and one Spirit, and all by the service of one and the same for ever
Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

S. D. G.

A SERMON Preached at YORK, 1640. AT The Council of King and Lords.
EPHE. 5.8. For you were once darkness; but are now Light in the Lord. Walk as
Children of Light.
IN the Sky of Scripture shines the Sun of Divinity; And all Divinity, all
that Sun is shed in these thee Radii: The Lapse, the Restoring, the Duty; These
are a perfect Catechism. And a sum of these is the Epistle to the Romans injust
Method, and this Text a methodical Br^^iat of that Epistle; indeed an Epitome
of all the Book of God: for here we have the Creation, the World struck out of
Chaos, or what is more mysterious. It could not choose but please the Angels
then to see the LIGHT rise out of darkness by a powerful FIAT; and the earth
anon to emulate heaven by virtue of a Producat. But this, This Rare Work the
Angels desire to pry into, 1 Pet. 1.12. And if we pace along, we shall find
here Enoch walking with God; Abraham called out of VR to another VR, a purer
Light: The deliverance from Egypt, the Red Sea, the Rock, the Mannae, the Ark,
the Mercy-seat. And here are all the Sacrifices, the Life and Substance of them
all, with the Fullness and Light of all the Promises and Prophesies; and here is
the new Testament. The Star appears, Behold we bring you glad tidings, Run
Shepherds, and see the great Shepherd of all our Souls, whiles yet an Infant.
Lo, He is wrapped here in the Swaddling bands of this Text. He is the Word, and
this his Comment, his Paraphrase and Explication. You were once, etc.

These words are a Tree laden with fruit most precious; the very shell, the
rind is precious: But if we open this Onyx, this Pearl Cabinet, it contains
rare Food, and Medicine, and Wine, and Balsam, a Quintessence, an Extraction
beyond the Spirits of Oil, and Wine, and Spices. For what Chemist can draw
Light? Is not that, that thing my sterious in Job 38. which way (says he) is
the Light parted? yet here is more, the Sun, the Spring of Light; here is that
Sun of Righteousness, and the Father of Light, and the Spirit of Illuminations,
All, All the holy blessed and glorious TRINITY unfolded; here we may with Moses
in a pious sense see him that is invisible; Behold that rare workman tasking
himself in his main project, busy in dispatch of all his Miracles at once; The
Leper is cleansed, the Lame walk, the Blind receive their sight, the dead are
raised; Nay Majus opus moveo -- The earth raised up to Heaven, Flesh wrought up
to Spirit, Nature changed to Grace, and dust advanced to he Partaker of Divine
Nature. For you were once Darkness, etc.

A Comprehensive Text it is; will take in all persons: Speak I to a King or
Lords? Will they not all be glad at heart to be enlightened by this Dominus in
the heart of my Text? and will they not fall down and worship before this Lords
of Lords, and King of Kings? For before him all Dominion, and all distinction
is lost, the grearest Monarch in his presence must drop his Lilly, and his Lion
be couchant. As for Bishops and Archbishops, St. Peter tells us of Dominus here
erecting an Arch over all their heads, (...), -- when that chief shepherd shall
appear, 1 Pet. 5.4. and calls him Bishop of all Souls for a difference; for
properly the cure of souls is his: Men can but order our clothes, and hahits,
and regulate, and article, and qualify our outward man. But here is a Visitor,
whose Courts and proceedings are purely spiritual surveighs the rational within
the breast, sees down into the reins, and views how close and clean the wedding
garment sits upon one souls, and what we are, not in the Church or Pulpit, or
Closet, but in the hid man of the heart, And for extent of Diocese, thit is the
grand Primate of all Christendom over both his Churches, Militant and
Triumphant; to whom all Patriarcks justling for Place and Title must submit,
whose Sea is from sea to sea, and from the river to the worlds end; and his
Chair advanced far above all heavens, all Gold and Purple, and Copes and
Crosiers, and Keys, and Miters, and Coronets and Crowns, and triple Diadems
thrown at his feet: to whom we may safely ascribe all Bellarmines fifteen great
names, De Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 31. and all too little; and if we may justly cry
for blessings to be dewed and multiplied on the heads of earthly gracious
Sovereigns, and all such Peers as really and cheerfully assist the deliverance
of our Christian Brethren from spoil, and rapine, and Turkish slavery, and
raising means for Redemption of the Renown of this once renowned Nation, then
blessed be this Lord of Israel, who has redeemed us all (a Mercy past into
Act) in his own person, and at the expense of his most precious blood, from all
our enemies, and the hands of them that hate us, from the wrath to come, and
has raised up a mighty salvation for us.

Salvation is of the Jews, and we are Gentiles; But my Text is St. Paul's
Manifest to them too. This Light revealed to the Gentiles, and may be styled
the Gentiles Jubiles; Rejoice ye poor Ephesians, the dayspring from on high
has visited you, Ephesians; but still what is that to us, if it extend no
further? Yes, Set these words upon their wings, and we shall see them soar as
high as heaven, and passing through the Spears, whisper to the Stars and Sun.
-- You were once in Darkness, and shall once more lose your LIGHT. And to the
Light (...) self, you went once darkness, and to those Elect Angels of Light,
There is a Prince and Legions of your fellows reserved to chains of darkness;
and that you stand here, is long of his preserving and perpetuating Grace, that
keeps you still to be Lux in Domino. Then down the Text stoops, and walks round
the Theater and Amphitheatre of Churches East and West. Tells the East that from
darkness it was once Lux in Domino, and leaves a Caveat for us in the West,
Take heed; (and never was this Caveat more needful) left as those Eastern
Churches, the Glory once of the Son of God, are now under the Moon of Mahomet,
so our sins, our divisions and disorders cause this Dominus to take away our
Light.

Lastly, Home it strikes at every bosom here, and speaks to us that are, or
ought to be Lights in the Church; you that are, or should be Lights in the
State, and to him who is the breath of our Nosthrils, and the Light of all our
eyes, and it cries to every man, Mement, -- Homo es, - and eras Tenebrae; thus
the Text would be useful, and serve our turns whole as it lies. And sure we
should never divide it, but that God has done it to our hands: He divided the
Light from the Darkness. For the first part of our Text in the shell and cover,
is Darkness; The Kernel, the meaning is the Lapse. The second is Glorious
without in the Metaphor, Light, and more glorious within, The work-man-ship of
God in Christ Jesus. The Restoration, The third and last part which makes up
the Allegory in the word, is Walking; in the sense, is Gratitude or man's duty,
the third part of the Catechism. The first is Darkness, and that is past; I
shall desire to pass it briefly. The second is Light, on that I would insist
for Explanation, Dilatation. The third is, Walking in Light; elsewhere called
walking honestly, as in the day. I shall endeavor to walk on respectively
through all these parts, briefly, plainly, honestly.

EXPLICATION.

OUR first part is Darkness; of which who can know the bounds, or understand
the paths of the house thereof, Job. 38.20? Only the meaning here is Ignorance;
these Ephesians, and all Gentiles else under a manifold Ignorance. First
Original, which lay on all mankind; man had a Light, but blew it out with
overblowing, and so all left in darkness: Mox ut Praeceptum transgress^ sunt,
intrinsecus gratia deserente nudati sunt, as St. Austin says De. Correp. and
Gra. c. 10. Secondly, Darkness of Restraint, wanting those Assistances which
the Jews had for Recovery. 1. Divine Revelation in lively Oracles, and renewing
the prime Promise, by Light whereof Euoch and Noah found Grace to walk with
God. 2. The Light enlarged in the Covenant with Abraham, a Seal for security,
and the Promise affixt and pitched upon his race, -- In semine tuo. 3. Then the
Law, a Sun of Light; yet had they Prophets too to cast the beam by
Interpretation. God dealt not so with any Nation. But there is a third, a
wilful and obstinate Ignorance, sitting down in darkness without Care or
Endeavor to rise up from that bondage, not improving the rational Light which
was left still as the Candle of the Soul. For though we find extracts of
admirable Light in the Gentiles Laws, Inventions, Moral Conversation too; yet
In conversione ad Deum, so they were Prodigals, and misspent their portion,
which St. Paul objects to the Athenians, Act. 17.26. and proves in Romans 1.28.
that by the links and connection of causes, and light of reason climbing up to
God, yet (...), they liked it not, they listed not to retain God in their
knowledge, but wantonly and proudly abused the Glory of an incorruptible God,
by turning it into an Image made like Beasts and creeping things; for which
sluttish dealing, God gave them up to uncleanness and vile affections, and
(...), a mind devoid of Judgment, utterly dark. And whereas wanting the Jewish
Law, they had yet the first draught and original wtitten in their hearts, they
smothered this light also, and withheld the truth of God in unrighteousness;
And by this darkning of themselves, were left (says the Apostle) without
excuse. So then here is no Light in this Darkness, but Abyssus super abyssum,
One degree, one veil of darkness upon another; yet from these three Regions of
Darkness, the Resultance may be a triple light to us; That God may be clear
when he is judged, and we may receive Admonition.

1. First, For the Jews: God did for his Vine all that he could: He says so:
-- many advantages, -- every way, Romans 3.2. chiefly the Oracles of God: and
then adds that of David another way with (...), that thou might^^ overcome when
thou art judged, and in Romans 9.4. He reckons up those Privileges, The
Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and
Divine Service, and the Promises, whose are the Fathers, and of whom as
concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God over All, blesed for evermore,
Amen. All which clears the condemnation of stubborn and unbelieving Jews; For
he came unto his own, and his own received him not: Therefore this is
condemnation, that is, for this shall be condemnation, That Light is come into
the world, and men love darkness more then Light.

2. Secondly, For the Gentiles; however in our Saviors line of flesh and
blood, and so in his spiritual line, men made of his blood by faith (registered
in that Sanctiloge and Martyrologe, Heb. 11.) we find some intervening of Jew
and Gentile, and find beside those sages from the East, whom by a Herald ftar
he beckoned to his Birthplace, some sprinkling in the Gospel of the woman of
Canaan, and stranger- Samaritans. Yet if a mass of them were left in darkness,
(by wilful ignorance) and cast into utter darkness, it can be no impeachment
to Divine Justice, because first we are not sure, but that the prime Promise of
the woman's seed to bruise the Serpents head, might have been preserved among
them, they being of Adams race also; and then we are assured, Romans 1. that they
misused that stock of natural abilities, in not only not glorifying God aright,
but embasing (what in them lay) the Majesty Divine, and defiling themselves
with all abominations.

3. Thirdly, our Admonition; and every admonition is, or should be
illustration. O the da^^^^ and desolacion of Ignorance! Darkness, one of
Aegrpts forest plagues, the chain of Darkness, says Syracides. As Tenebrae may
well bear a Tenendo: So inward Darkness chains men's minds, and holds them down,
that they forget the ends of actions, know not whether they go, Joh. 14. or
where they fall, Prove. 4. no mutual aids, both fall into the ditch, Mat. 15. A
fearful evil in a double contrary respect; one while presenting horror to the
soul, fearing even where no fear is: Another while madly presuming God as blind
as they, How can he see through the dark cloud? Such a Pandoras box is
Ignorance, that in Scripture the very cover of it here, Darkness is made to
resemble all that is evil, vanity of mind, hardness of heart, Folly, Disgrace,
Distress, Trouble, Sorrow, the Grave and Hell it self. And as if Good and Evil
were nothing else in nature, so Job speaks in Job 30.26. When I looked for
good, Evil came; I waited for Light, and there came Darkness. Let blood and
Darkness then be the brands of Babel. Let who dare teach Ignorance the mother
of Devotion, while we learn it hence to be rather the mother of Damnation. But
as these Ephesians are to their joy of heart no longer under Darkness, no more
seduced by their great Diana, in a moonshine, and lunatic Religion: So
reflectiag on Rome, and the madness of Latin service, and half Communion we
may safely say, Blessed be God that Darkness is past, and in those reforming,
the true Light has shined among us. So we were once darkness, but are now
light in the Lord. Light, that is our second part.

PART 2. We are upon a way of Light, in that our Lord who is the Way and the
Light. But to prepare the Way to that Way, and make a straight path to our
Lord, let us try to remove a scruple or two that may offend us in our way,

Scruple 1. FIrst to clear a little that Inquiry about the Gentiles Salvation,
Whether it remained a Mystery clasped up and undisclosed to the Church, both of
Angels and men, till the Apostles time, as may seem by many places, by none
more then the third Chapter of this Epistle from the third to the end of the
tenth verse, where it is called a Mystery, concealed from men; and to the
Powers of Heaven then made known by the Church. The Answer is obvious, viz.
that it was foretold and believed under the Law; -- witness those Promises and
Prophecies along from Abraham to David, witness David's Psalmody, who plays
Christ on his Harp, as evidently, as elegantly. And that Evengelical Prophet
Isaiah, chiefly in cap. 9.2. and ca. 49.6. And for the Angels, though some deny
it, yet St. Austin, and those great names of learning that adhere to him, say
certainly they knew it, for they were employed (as they conceive) to inspire it
to the Prophets. (as the Law is said to be given by Angels) and the first
Preachers of the Gospel in that term were Angels. Whereupon the Master of the
Sentence takes upon him to reconcile the Fathers and others and says the upper
Hierarchy and most familiar knew before, but the lower learn it after of the
Church. Once certain it is, that the plenary Cognition of the Messiah was not
till the fullness of time, and to our question, not till the Passion was
consummate, and by the Preaching Apostolical dilate among the Gentiles. Which
our Apostle seems to resolve in his (...), Ephesians. 3.5. -- was not made known
(says he) as it is now, now that it is fully discovered by the Gospel.

Scruple 2. A Second Scruple or Query is, that since our Savior being nailed
to his Cross among the Jews, did afterward remove himself, Cross and All to
other Nations; and giving out a Commission to that purpose, did confirm it
after to Peter by a vision from heaven: Why yet did he pronounce Salvation to
be of the Jews, and send hit Heralds first to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel? The answer is enfolded in the objection; First. It was sent to them,
and beginning to preach it at Jerusalem. For thus Aquinas resolves it into
reasons, 1. Christ and his Apostles were first to preach to the Jews, to prove
the fulfilling of the Promises to that people, Romans 15.8. Jesus Christ was a
Minister of the Circumcision, i. e. of the Jews for the truth of God, that he
might confirm the Promises of the Fathers. And 2. Our Savior to prove his
mission from God, the God of Order proceeded orderly, i. e. by them that were
nearest to him in Faith and Worship of the true God, he transmits the rays of
his heavenly Doctrine to the Gentiles, as Superior Angels give the Divine
illumination to their Inferiors (says the School.) 3. This prevented Cavil in
the Jew, and left such inexcusable as rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves. 4. Lastly, As it is employed that our Saviors victory on the Cross
was his purchase of the Gentiles, Rev. 2.26, 27. and Phil. 2. His stooping even
to the Cross precedes his exaltation, and then a Genuflexion, and universal
Acclamation, All tongues to confess him, etc. So the mission of his Apostles to
the Gentiles was after his passion; and a little before it we find in John
12.24. some Greeks desired to see him, and he answers in a Riddle; If the grain
of wheat die, it will bring forth much fruit, which was meant of himself, says
St. Austin; He was to die by the unbelief of the Jews, and then to be
multiplied in the faith of all Nations, as we see it come to pass. But that
faith says St. Paul, Romans 10. it grows not in nature, comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God.

And this has brought us a little on our way in the understanding of our
second part which we now pursue, Lux in Domino. Light; That Is the matter here,
and the manner is in Domino; or the other way; for the matter indeed is in
Domino, and the manner by way of Illumination. For what is meant? surely that
great work of God, Man's restoring is meant, included in a second great work,
Illumination of our minds; and that in a third great work. The light of the Sun
in our eyes. How rare and choice a fruit must that be which has such curious
Coverings? The very Metaphor, or rather Box and Nest of Metaphors is
observable. Is God a Metaphorical God? (says one D. D.) And he answers
himself, In a pious and humble meaning, respecting the Scriptures heights, and
Excellencies in Allegories; not only sinews in the Milk of Gods Word, and
things in his Words, but spreadings and strange Rhetorical passages, and
curtains of figures flowing into figures. Where are those Sophisters, and Grand
Seniors, and grave Rabbis with their old dissembled Ensigns of Ignorance, the
Beard, the Habit and the Title, that will allow men no use of humane Learning
in disclosing Divine Mysteries? Is the Grape therefore harsh, because such
Strainers cannot reach it? Theology shall remain the crowned Queen of Sciences,
but will admit her Handmaids to carry keys to her Cabinets. But ere we look in
here, be pleased to arrest your consideration on the covering of this Ark, that
is, the Light of Heaven. And as before in Darkness, so here again we are blind
with dazzling. How many are the opinions of those rolling Torches of Heaven, the
Sun and Moon? St. Austin, and in his old age too (for it is in his Euchir, ad
Lauren.) knew not whether he might account them to the Angels. And for the
Light, Who shall tell us what it is? When it comes to our doors, and beats upon
our eves, we know not whether it have a real Being in the Air, or an
Intentional. The first, the second, both, and neither of both are defended.
Look into the Microcosm, and Fiat Lux: else all invisible, no form, no
distinction, and all inglorious, nor use, nor beauty. It Is Plenitudo, the
filling of all the Creatures, and gives them Cognition, Life, Motion. View the
Microcosm, the Light of the Body is the eye, and not the Organ so much as the
visive Power, the light within, that sits behind those Glass-windows with a
balance and a file, and weighs and works upon the shapes of things that enter:
But both these Lights are Darkness, if the Medium be not illuminated, if the
Air be dark: and searching the Scripture, though we find not what it is, yet we
find a world of wonders in it: Five things imparted, yet remain entire;
Knowledge, Virtue, Happiness, Joy and Light, and this the Emblem of them all.
No good thing but Light takes it in by comparison; all good things, but never
any ill, Wisdom, Health, Beauty, Food, Joy, and Reputation: All the Graces of
God, Knowledge, Faith, Love, Hope, Joy, Consolation; yea the very Glory to
come; all our Joy and endless Bliss in that vision of Light. And if God should
ask us, What house we would make him, or to what compare him? Should we offend
in saying LIGHT? though nothing resemble God exactly, yet something better
shows how far he is beyond all resmblance; and by that Light his Creatures
afford, our admiration of his Incomprehensibleness may be raised higher and
higher, and with it so raised, our longing after him enlarged. And sure as in
the works of Grace, none liker God then LOVE. So in the works of Nature, Light,
as it is the eldest, so the amiablest, and the likest to the Father; and what
the Fathers affection is to it, we may see by his first giving Light to the
Chaos: It could yield him no delight (who was the double Parent) so long as it
lay in Night and Darkness, and so deep in too, that nothing yet was day; What
stood thus blindly, could not be pleasing in his eye who is all eye: But when
it saw, the Text says, God saw that all was good. Does he not dwell in Light,
and cover himself with Light, as with a Garment? May we not say, his House, and
Robe, and Eternal Essence are all one boundless crystal Globe of Light? Does
not he say so? God is Light, the Father, the Father of Lights, and the Son is
God of God, and Light of Light, and the Holy Spirit, as in this wide Engine of
the world it is an inward eye which moves and rowls, -- Spiritus in us alit. So
in our Souls it is the Spirit of Illuminations, directing us to that place,
where in his Light we shall see Light, even see God face to face, and know him,
even as we are known. I had not staid so long on this, this cover here, but
that I conceived it might be in our way to discover what remains, remembering my
Promise to pass this part in explanation; so demonstrating in an Orb, where
every part gives Light unto one another.

Here by the way might be inferred the usefulness of our sight, and how we are
bound to bless God that enjoy that Comfort. And secondly, How to compassionate
the blind that sit in darkness, considering there is no perfect joy on earth
without it, no nor in Heaven, it being one of the torments in hell, Darkness,
and contrary to the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And thirdly, Applying
to such times as these. Rejoice in this favor of Heaven, that earthly men
cannot restrain or excise the comforts of the Air and Light, etc.

But we pass to our fruit it self, the meaning of this Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ in our restoring, veiled here under this God-like Creature of Light:
That illumination which we receive from him by his Spirit, relieving us from
our state of corruption and bondage of darkness, and translating us into his
marvelous Light, and glorious liberty of the Sons of God, For you were, etc. --
In Domino.

In Domino; For he is Light in the abstract, others by participation; He the
true Light, the cause efficient, who by his beams currents it out, and delivers
it over to all others. It Is in him universally and totally, not now Light, and
now Darkness; and exemplarily; For all Light uniformly and causally prae-exists
in him, as in the simple and supernatural cause of all. Lastly, In him is
Light, in all the Powers of Light, Expansion, Renovation, Nutrition,
Conciliation, and in this power he vouchsafes it us; though thus to make it
ours, it cost him more then making Light at first; then he spoke the Word only;
but here he suffered, Multa tulit, -- Sudavit and alsit. But blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, he has raised a mighty Salvation for us in him. Two ways
as we are in Domino, by Justification, and then, as Dominus in nobis, by
Sanctifications. See already for our comfort, Darkness of the first Adam taken
off by a double Light in the Second; Plus addidit medicina Christi ad salutem,
quam infirmitas detraxit sanitati, says St. Ambrose on the 12. cap. of the
second of the Coriuthians. And St. Paul agrees the (...), the Gift of free
Grace far to exceed the loss, Romans 5. and calls this dealing of our Savior,
The exceeding Riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 2.5. Call it the Miracle, and the grand
Mystery; no words will reach it: Call it the Height, its above all; the Depth,
there is no founding it, nor Length, nor Breadth imaginable by our weak spirits
can span it: Call it the Incomprehensibleness, Numen, the Deity of his Mercy to
restore Light and Ability, -- that we might have Life, and have it more
abundantly.

1. A Sun and a Moon for day and night; it is so, Justification a Sun, a prime,
a Spring original, purity absolute in him, and we in it, and under the imputed
Rays thereof, our whole persons made bright, and g^^tious, and acceptable.
Adam was brave in his native Integrity, but this above humane perfection, the
Righteousness of God preserved too by him, that it may never be lost: (...)
now, that is, nor man, nor Devils able to take them out of his hands: those
that are thus made Lux in Domino, that is, justified by faith, working by love.
This is that white Robe, which as it has no spot, so it will admit no mixture
in the Act and Energie of justifying. Our merits wrought up with his, are like
Musk and Ambergreece in a Perfume, faith Gomesius, a Papist; and thinks he
makes a fine composition, but is it not rather an odious comparison? Yea, we
are to renounce all those devices of Congruity, Configuration, Conformity, etc.
if supposed to contain any virtue in themselves toward the Act of
Justification; only that true Hercules, sailing in the frail vessel of his
flesh, comes to unrivet us from the Caucasus of despair, to which mankind was
fastened by a knot inexplicable and inextricable. God is just, and man
unrighteous, a sinner, and must die, and for sin is in darkness, and shall not
see Light. Christ Jesus stoops to untie this knot, denies the Minor, makes the
sinner righteous, justifies the ungodly, makes Darkness Light in Domino, and
then there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

2. The second Light is Sanctification, and that is the striking the rays, not
upon us only, but into us; The first is in him only, and ours by imputation.
God in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, pleases himself in that; but
this second is inherent Righteousness in our hearts, called Holiness, without
which we shall never see nor please God. You will say, these are high and
glorious sounds, and these Graces with their distinct or united natures and
times have exercised the wits of men, but since they are Donatives in the hand
of our heavenly Father, How are these things made over to us? Clear that
passage, make this part of your discourse, this Point of Divinity lightsom to
our Capacities; Tell us, how shall these things be? So said the blessed Virgin
to the Angel when she was to conceive Christ in her body; and for this
Conception, this Perception of the Lord in thy soul, the same Answer must
serve, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee! The Power of the most high can do
this by his Spirit; and how often is that repeated Habitat? he dwells in us by
his Spirit: and if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his;
(that's the surest mark) and a man cannot say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Spirit, which is therefore called the finger and hand of God, the virtue and
Power of Christ, who tells us in Joh. 14. I will not leave you Orphans, I will
come to you; there is his visitation: and abide with you, there is his Residence
and erecting of a Court; and adds, I will be your Teacher, Comforter,
Remembrancer, and all these in his Spirit, who is all these to us, these are
his Offices and operations. And must not he needs have Heaven at hand, that
has the God of Heaven in his heart? John leaned upon his bosom, but Christ
rests in thy bosom by his Spirit, opening thy dim eyes, and opening them twice
(says St. Austin) giving a double Light in the Lord: First to see thy sin and
guiltiness, and blenching at the horror thereof, opens them again to see thy
Savior in his blood, and the Spirit of his Grace. But all this I have said,
you will say still is mere speculation. But tell us what heavenly Magic or
Mastick can combine, or which way shall these two spirits meet? How Gods Spirit
and man's comes thus to match and marry in Domino? Quae ferramenta, and qui
vectes, said the curious Enquirers into the Creation: And have not we some as
curions in this Reparation? States have their Arcana Imperii, their Ragioni di
stato, which is Jus Dominationis, and every Trade is called a Mystery. But God
must show us all the jointures and Inlay of his Work and Will. Take heed of
pressing into Light, lest we be oppressed with the Glory. Poor man! What
discernest thou in the workings of those Spirits that are but Creatures and
vassals to the Creator? yet have their methods, Ephesians. 6. Inventions,
Circumventions, and are exalted above thy reach in high places, -- have the
vantage ground of Pigmee mankind: Nay, What see thou of thy own spirit? Who
saw it come in or go forth? In the Air we all breath, in the wind that fans
that air (which are but a little kin to spirits) what do we understand? yet God
is so indulgent to our nature and weakness, as to take in for us auxiliary
Light of comparison, for the clearing of that which in the downright act is
indeprehensible. Here Is a stir indeed says the poor blind-born man in Joh. 9.
With what, and how, which way? Well! I cannot tell you all; but one thing I am
sure of: I was blind, born blind, and now I see. And our Savior, John 3. Thou
bear the sound of wind, and know it is wind by that; but know not
whence, nor whither: So is every one that is born of the Spirit. The cause and
course is secret, but the effect discernable. As in Creation our soul and body
meet by breathing, so here the mystic work is Inspiration, and infusion of
manifold graces but those graces have activities, and such whereby you shall
easily perceive that you were once darkness, but are now Light in the Lord.

These Graces then will give us further Light, whose excellencies are laid out
in those expressions of Water, Floods, Fountains, and Fire, and Milk, and
Manna, and Ointment, and their Efficacies in those names of Seal, and Evidence,
and Earnest, and Witness, and Joy, and Consolation: And are there not fruits of
the Spirit? Gal. 5. Fruits that grow not up from the bitter Root of corrupted
nature, but from another Principle; and which in their bloom and freshness,
render a man (not like those Ethnic Graces, only facile and sweet in
conversation, though they do that too) but gracious in Gods aspect, and
glorious too, shining as a Light in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Generation. If we shall taft a fruit or two in specialty, I will only try to
do it in this notion here, and under this Capacity of Light.

1. Knowledge, even that of nature is a Light: and man's soul still is the Lamp
of God (says Solomon) and a Wisdom residing therein that Recedes as far from
folly, as Light ftom Darkness; and this was all those great Philosophers --
Animalia Gloriae had, which puffed them up so: For this has some tincture of the
Serpent, and soon inflates; yet alas! Man's salvation is that Grove and
Mystery, -- Nulli penetrabilis astro, not pervious, nor peirceable by the
starlight of Reason. There must come a supernatural Light from Heaven, which
as in the Giver, it is called a Sun of Righteousness, rising with healing in
his wings; the dayspring from on high, and the True Light: so in the Receiver,
it is called a great and mavelous Light, of which, Will you hear St. Paul, --
I count all loss, -- (...) for the supereminence of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord: this indeed is all, for in this is all: This is Eternal life to
know Thee, -- and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ; to know him for my
Jesus, to apprehend him for my Justifier by a second Grace, by a true and
lively Faith.

2. Faith then is another Light of the sanctifying Spirit, superinduced on the
Light of Reason to raise and perfect it; for it is not in stones or beasts. God
can from stones raise up Children unto Abraham, but if so, the work must first
be done by Infusion of a rational soul, and the golden Key of this Grace then
fitted to the prepared wards of reasonable Nature. It is not amiss to compare
it to Sybillaes golden bough, which grew to, and upon the Trce, and as he adds,
-- Auri per Ramos aura refulsit. -- So this superstructure out-shines the
utmost endeavors and perfections of Nature and Reason, and resembled it is by
some, as the Seal to Wax. It is not naked and mere reason, as Air is Fire, but
Faith is rather printed reason; and there joined Light, (if we wilfully
exstinguish not their flames) will yield the bearer fair Direction, and
Confidence, and Consolation. There may be, there will be a coarctation, a
compression of this flame in the act of Faith, a damp upon the alacrity
thereof; yet if there be not in us an evil heart desirous, nay, wilfully set to
depart from the living God: If you abide in me, says our Savior; then
certainly as his Father, and he with the sacred Spirit jointly made Light at
first, and pined it to that Sun, which was never wholly darkened since; and as
he the true Light, breaking from the clouds of the blessed Virgins body, and
joined to man's nature, retains that nature still now glorified: so the Spirit
of this Grace possessing thy spirit, loves never to part again, but grieves
when we offer to quench his celestial fires; O then learn not to despair of
Mercy and Assistance! Clouds and Eclipses obscure; and wandering and wicked
thoughts, self-accusings, and self-condemnings, and Satan's suggestions may
trouble and affright us. But if we abide in him, and be strong in the Lord, and
in the Power of his Might, and resist the Devil, he will fly from us; and our
hope in Christ; and the Power of his Resurrection, like a rising Morn will
scatter all the delusions and rebellions of the Night; and remember his
gracious Promise, Hell-gates shall not prevail against a Faith of Adherence:
All the Powers of Darkness let loose upon St. Paul, yet he was safe, I know in
whom I have believed. I live, (says he) no not I, but Ckrist lives in me; and
it is his Spirit only that can give assurance, that whereas I was darkness, my
Faith in him makes me light in the Lord.

3. As for Love, another Grace, the Grace of Graces, the bond of perfection,
and especially of that celestial Armor and Ardor of the soul to God: What
might we say? Whatdo they feel, into whose breasts is shot this right
celestial flame, and there shed abroad by the holy Ghost which is given them?
Away then with all wanton fires of earthly Love or ambition; set them but by
this, and they will appear poor and wan, discolored, pale and drousie things,
and like meretritious females, shown with modest and noble Matrons, dashed all
out of countenance.

4. Lastly, (for I am not too long to insist on these Graces, so perceptible to
the Possessors), if we would have true and lasting joy, Where shall we seek it?
Is it to be found among those Pangs, and Convulsions, and Palpitations of an
earthly sensual mind? -- Mala mentis gaudia -- as the heathen Poet calls them,
and placed by him far within the Porch of hell: Meteors of imperfect mixture,
Scansory, and seeming to mine and aim at lightsomness, and height of Spirit:
But having cracked awhile and blazed down, they slide again, and resolve into
their first earth and drossiness. But he that has tasted of the heavenly gift,
the joy in the Holy Ghost, wherein the Kingdom of Heaven on earth does
principally consist, can tell you of a joy that is full, a joy unspeakable and
glorious, consisting in a dispersion of all that is dark and desolate, and a
true Light, that is, Lux in Domine, Light in the Lord.

Thus have we traced this Oriens ex alto, and thus far described that Method,
that Lucidus Ordo of Gods procedure in descent of his Spirit, and defluence of
his Graces. Thus far we are come to meet with this great Bishop of all our
souls, this blessed Visitor, and have observed his way of baptizing with the
Holy Ghost, and with enthean fire, and confirming his People with the manifold
Graces of his Spirit. But yet since he is in Heaven, and that Spirit is to
descend on us, we are not satisfied till we know further of this Divine Method,
which is the Aquaeduct, the Ventiduct, the Luciduct, which way still does
Christ in his Spirit conveigh this Holy water, this gentle Air, this blessed
Light to our Spirits?

I confess this is one of the most necessary, important, and most useful
Queries we can make; and which being clearly resolved, will shame both Papists,
that hide away as much as they can, and other Heretics that blaspheme the
Scriptures, and pretend to a Spirit enthusiastic, which is nothing but the
Devil of delusion, and spirit of Giddiness. And therefore for our best Resolve
upon this question, Let us do as our Savior in the point of marriage, enquire
how it was in the Beginning; Look back then to the Creation, consider, how came
Light at first! At first the Spirit moves and broods over that which is in it
self a confusion, a depth, and a darkness; and then his mighty Word, -- Fiat
Lux. He spoke, and it was Light then: Then when all was dark, he made material
Light; and Christ Jesus is the WORD, (...): For as Speech is the Image of the
mind, so he the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his
person, Heb. 1.3. The immaterial Light that was never made, and the Spirit of
the true God in declaring the true Way of his Worship, and man's true way
thereby to obtain eternal life, (as the very heathen trusted to the false gods,
fained Oracles, which of necessity must be revealed before man could find or
follow it) goes that way still, that is, by the WORD. His Word, wherein is his
Will revealed from Heaven, both makes, and is our Light. This world is Gods
Book, wherein as in a Glass of wonders we discern him; but that print being Dim
to us that are sin-blind, it pleased him by lively Oracles to make a Mirror far
more clearly revealing his mind. And as God engraved his form on his Son before
all worlds, so what that Son is, and what the Father is to us in him, the
Spirit proceeding from both, delivers in the Scriptures of both Testaments. And
as the Sun guilds and enamels clouds and streams, and hill Tops with his rays,
but thrusts his own pure Light, his own living sire through the bodies of the
stars: so other Authors can but yield a faint reflection of that beam which is
direct and native in his book, where the very Law he styles a flaming Light;
The Prophecies -- a more sure Word then any Eye-evidences of the Apostles, to
which we do well to look, says St. Peter himself, as to a Light shining in a
dark place, till the day dawn, and the day star rise in our hearts. But then
the Gospel written and spread by his Evangelists, and held out by his spouse
the Catholic Church, is his mavelous Light. He brought life and immortality
to Light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy, 1.10. and in Acts 26. 16. I have appeared to
thee (says our Savior to that choice vessel of his Grace and name) to make
thee a Minister, and a witness, etc. And now behold, I will send thee to the
Gentiles; to what end? A glorious end: to open their eyes, and to turn them
from Darkness to Light, from the power of Satan unto God; and accordingly we
find it, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that perish, in
whom the god of this world has blinded their unfaithful minds, that the Light
of the Gospel of the Glory of Christ, who is the Image of God, should not shine
unto them. And in the sixth verse, he shows the Walk and Circuit of this Light.
God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our hearts
(there first) and then the casting of the beam, to give light of the knowledge
of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. O then you have the means of
Light and Grace among you Ministers; you are the Light and Salt of the earth;
and who shall question that truth, which the Truth himself has testified? And
would it not be a very dark and desolate, and a very flash and unsavory world
without a public Ministry of the Word and Sacraments? The Clergy, however
despised, are all out Spiritual Fathers, Propter quos hanc suavissimam Lucem
aspeximus. But yet you and they both must know how they have it; and the
Apostle tells us that too in the next words, -- We have this Treasure in our
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the Power might be of God, and not of
us. You are not sent to a Means and Medicine of our preparing, or any humane,
but to Gods Divine Ordinance, that which is his Power and Wisdom to Salvation
to every one that believes! And therefore this may be enough to give all humble
Christians satisfaction and acquiescence. Speak then thy Word O Lord, and thy
servant shall be healed, shall be undarkened; and though like Bartimeus, though
sin-blind, have my eyes opened with a word; Mar. 10.12. St. Peter spoke but
words unto Cornelius, but words whereby he and his house should be saved, words
so richly blessed, that the Text says, while Peter spoke these words, the holy
Ghost fell on all them that heard the word; Did not our hearts burn within us?
said those Disciples, Luke 24. to whom our Savior opened the Scriptures. And
the Apostles hearers pricked at their Hearts, cried, Men and Brethren, What
shall we do to be saved? And what a large field of the Fathers testimonies do I
here forsake to break (by your patience) into an Enclosure or two of the very
Papists our enemies, and the enemies of the Scripture. Yet see the excellency
of Gods word, even those enemies being Judges; Cardinal Bellarmine himself is
in his superlatives, Certissima and tutissima regula credendi. lib. 1. de verb.
Dei. ca. 20. and need we any more after so full a witness? I Will name but
another, but one Instar omnium; It Is he that in a traitorous itch of wit took
on him purposely the abuse of Scripture, that by mis appliance, and profane
wresting, he might so abuse our Princes, and our Church. Mark yet what he is
forced to say, and sure it is worth our observation, if I diminish him not in my
English. There is in Scripture (says he) an invisible Majesty, an hidden
splendor, a Glory unperishable; a wisdom in-exhaustible, The solace of humane,
and the beginning of a Divine life; made by the holy Spirit, and making our
spirits holy, compat'd with which, the Egyptian sages will look pale and poor;
the Chaldee impure, the Grecians blockish, Plato no body, and Philosophy it
self a fool. It Is the print of Heaven on earth, and if any where the Joy of
Paradise, or at least a brave Resemblance of Divine Light be showed, it is in
Scripture, containing all that is severed from the actual Vision of God
himself. Again, The paper burns me not, yet am I all inflamed in reading it.
It Is no composure, no artificial tread the Scripture uses; yet am I drawn, and
rapt to follow her, and she lifts me up beyond and above my nature: so that I
am no more mine own, but with a secret violence and new fire I am consumed and
compelled to acknowledge the voice of God that speaks therein. Thus far that
Papist. But I speak (I hope) to men enlightened, such as prove and find in
their own souls the power and Energy of the Divine Word both when it is read, and
when it is sincerely preached, (for I have in my Discourse mingled both those
ways of Gods delivering it.) And I would know of you, beloved in our Blessed
Jesus, did you never in the preaching and hearing the Scriptures read, feel the
Gale, the sweet and gentle assistance of Gods Spirit pass into your souls? Did
the Preacher never come with darkness and disconsolation, with Isaiahs anxious
and perplexing thoughts, -- All the day long have I stretched out my hands, etc.
And did thou never meet him in the vanity of thy mind, to mock or else to
catch and betray? And yet you both discerned before you parted, a blessing of a
good God upon you both. Both that he was sent of God, and that the power of God
was there to heal thee? Luke 5.17. And if thou have sound it so, Take heed of
quenching the Spirit -- nec in te, nec in alio, says Aquinas: in thy self by
despising, in the Preacher by discouraging or disparaging, which is all
injuries in one to an ingenuous spirit. Rbet. 2. For the Philosopher reduces
them all to parvi-pension. I mean not a small pension, or salazy for our
recompense; but dis-esteeming, under valuing those that are the Ambassadors of
Christ, and Secretaries in the great affairs of his Spirit. Bethink your
selves, could any Angel in Heaven have said to man as our Lord to Peter? Feed
my Lambs; my sheep: Go, preach, baptize; whose sins you retain, they are
retained, etc. Are these (says one) terrestrial sounds? or are they uttered
from the clouds above? But look not so high, descend into your own bosoms: were
not you once darkness? are you now made light in the Lord? Which way came that
Influence, was it not by the work of the Ministry? That's our part; and that's
the end of our second part, which brings us to the third part of our Catechism.
Gratitudo, or man's duty, in these last words of the Text, Walk as children of
light.

SERMON 2.
PAssing the former part of the Text, I past you through the cloud, through
Darkness, the Lapse, the fall of man, the first part of the Catechism: And I
brought you thence to the second, The Pillar of Fire, which gives Light in the
night of Ignorance. Lux in Domino, the workmanship of God in Christ Jesus; The
Restoration: Now remains only Gratitudo, Our duty. Man's obedience due to
Dominus here for our Redemption, from the bondage of corruption, and restoring
us to the glorious liberty of the sons of God, brought from darkness to be
light in the Lord. Which Duty is here called A Walking. Walk as children of
Light, which is the third and last part of our Catechism. And it would afford a
walk of many hours; I shall strive to reduce it into one. The Stations, the
Pauses I shall keep are these. First there is a Bivium (figured in the
Pythagorean Y) two ways, and but two. There have been, can be, shall be but
two ways from the beginning to the end, and after the end of the world; for
all shall walk in light or darkness, and both are in the verse, You were
darkness, but are light: there is the Bivium. But our way is the way of Light,
and even this is of comfort by the way, that the way of Gods servants is a
lightsome, and a delight some way, a clear and open passage.

Secondly, this way may be gone; For the words are the only wise Gods own
Exhortation, and then it must be gone, for the words are his own commandment
and our duty. Thirdly, Here are Pullies, Evidences, Inducements, three. 1. Quia
Filii, because Children. 2. Etiamsi, though but Children. 3. O's (...), as
Children of Light, taking the Light for our example and direction, and that
will be double; first the Light of Heaven, the Sun, and then he that is our
Heaven of Light, the true Light, the Way, the Truth and the Life, Christ Jesus.
Thus far the explication, and then a word of application will finish this walk,
and set us onward and encourage us in the way, and cause us to walk as Children
of Light.

First then there is a Bivium, and both here, but the Darkness is past, the
worst is over then; For this is a way foul, and deep, and dangerous: The way,
the vilest way that ever man went. Will you hear them both briefly described,
in language the best that ever man heard? What! mine? God forbid I should mean
so. No, not my rusty iron: No, nor any glittering tin-soild enticing words of
humane wisdom, but the clear fiery tried, and seven times purified silver of
the Word of God, dictated by the holy Ghost: In that language we find this way
and walk called Tenebrae, abstract and plural, Darkness, and termed elsewhere
the way of the Gentiles, their own way, after their own imaginations, in the
vanity of their mind; inordinately walking as men, i. e as mere men, according
to the course of this world, in crastiness, in the hidden thing; of dishonesty,
after the flesh, in lasciviousness, lusts, uncleanness, excess, riot,
revellings, etc. according to the prince of the power of the Air, the spirit
that works in the Children of disobedience; till the paths of their ways (says
Job) come to nothing and perish; till they arrive at the issues of death (says
Solomon,) and all their Foundations, Plots, Projects, Hopes, Aims, be out of
course (says David,) going on so long, and departing from God, till he be
forced to say, Depart for ever, Go ye cursed, and so ends that walk; O no! well
were it for them if it might end, but it never ends; for this dark and slippery
way slips them into Hell, and that Gulf enlarges her self, that horrible pit
opens her mouth wide upon them, from whence there is no Redemption, but they
shut out from the Father of Lights, reserved in endless chains of Darkness to
abide eternal eternal Damnation. Methinks I hear you now upon that Respond in
the Litany, From thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, good Lord deliver
us. The good Lord has and does, and will deliver us, if we will be delivered.
If we will but walk the other, the better way, the way of Light, which
elsewhere is called the good old way, Jer. 8. The way of old Enoch, Noah,
Abraham; a walking with, and before, and after God in his Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances, cleaving to the Lord with all the soul. A walking in liberty and
safety over Lions and Dragons, through Darkness, through the valley of the
shadow of death. A people walking humbly with their God, and God going along
with his people in the Light of his countenance, and blessing in the midst of
their Camp, Tents, Tabernacles. And in the New Testament it is called a
following of God, of him who is the Light; a walking worthy of the Lord, worthy
their vocation, circumspectly, wisely, honestly, orderly, in Truth, in Love, in
Knowledge, in good works, in newness of life, in the fear of the Lord, and in
comfort of the holy Ghost. And in this Church Christ walks amidst the seven
golden Candelsticks, and this Church shall walk with him in Albis, in white
stoles, when all believing Nations shall walk in the light of the new
Jerusalem. Behold I have set before you light and darkness, the good and the
evil way; but choose the good, eschew the evil, and walk as Children of Light.
For first,

We may do so, for the words are an exhortation, and the Wisdom of God exhorts
to nothing impossible. No imposing upon his creature, without a previous
disposing. He enforms us of no Duty, but he gives means of performance. We
shall have a portion; the danger is our running away from our heavenly Father,
and wasting our whole stock. We shall not want Grace to help us in time of
need, if we receive it not in vain, if we abuse it not, if we turn not his
Grace into wantonness. He invites us to a race, who assists us also in the
running, and calls to us to cast off all that may hinder us. And if he lay any
thing upon us, first he promises it shall be no more then he enables us to
bear, and then bids us cast our care upon him, for he cares for us, and he
carries for us, has carried the most insupportable burden, bore all our sins
in his body on the tree, that we might be at perfect liberty both in body and
soul. And if the Son so make us free, then are we free indeed; and being thus
at this liberty by Christ, we may well go on our way prescribed, having our
hearts enlarged; as David says, I may go, nay I can walk thy ways O Lord: yea
then I will run the ways of thy Commandments. And surely till then, till the
ripe season God does not call upon men; for mark the exhortation here, and you
shall see it leans back, and listens to the words before, and is like a pair of
Compasses, of which, though one foot stand stiffly here on (...), the verb of
Command, and of present activity, yet the other is as far removed, as (...),
the adverb of time; Draw them up together, and we shall enclose the whole Will
of God; Put the adverb to the verb, and it is together (...). -- Now walk as
the palsie-bed rid man, now, and not till now, not till healed in case to walk.
When you were darkness, you could not see to walk as Children of Light; then
you saw not, you regarded not God, and that time of your ignorance God oversaw
too. He regarded it not, but now under the Gospel Dispensations, he will have
all men to come to Repentance and knowledge of the Truth. In corrupt nature
mankind lay as in fetters and manicles on hands and feet, like St. Peter bound
with two chains; but if an Angel of Grace come down with a Light into the
prison, then Peter will up, and follow the direction of that Light, then he
will, when his Irons are knocked off, and then shall nothing hinder him; then
the Iron gate flies openof its own accord; strong prevalent lusts, to which he
has been locked and wedlockt; and that Iron sinew in his soul, that rock of
Adamant shall dissolve and break into a bitter-sweet flood of Repentant tears.
Such advantage may we make of this little Particle Now, now we have got it into
the heart of the exhortation. It is Gods Will ever, now walk, now or never; to
day while it is called to day, lest hereafter you have no more days. And now
while it is this instant Now, lest we never have another Now; Now while we are
called upon, labor and pluck up our feeble knees, and give all diligence to
make our calling (begin there,) and so our Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. and so is
St. Paul here and elsewhere to be understood. While you have time, and light,
and free Grace offered in the Word of Grace; Now when called to labor in the
Vineyard; O delay not; have a care of your precious souls, and work out your
salvation with sear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.

2. As we may, let us do this work, nay we must; for the words are Imperative
mood as well as present tense, and none exempted; they are in the plural number
too. And though the verb be of the active voice, yet it implies our whole duty,
what we justiy own to Christ our Savior, which is both an active and passive
obedience. Active first: And in that is first to be considered action immanent
within the heart, devotion there upon that Altar, that's most acceptable to God
who is the Father of spirits, John 4. seeks such to worship him. I will marry
her, and speak unto her heart, says Christ by the Prophet to his Church, his
Spouse, and betwixt spoused Pairs the offices are mutual. God sanctifies your
hearts by his Spirit, and his holy Spirit calls upon you in his Word. Sanctify
you the Lord God in your hearts, 1 Pet. 3.15. We are renewed, and purified, and
dressed by him habitually: But in use of his Graces, in acts of Faith, and
Repentance, and Obedience, we must be daily renewing and purifying, like the
spunging of a Statue, or trimming of an Armor, (it is the Armor of Light, Romans
13.) though done yesterday, yet must be done to day again, and in this sense we
must be careful for to morrow too. Secondly, In Actions transient, for we are
his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. What then? we to do nothing for our selves? Yes,
that follows in due place and time, -- His work-manship created in Christ
Jesus, -- To what? unto good works which he has ordained, that we, we should
walk in them. For whether that of Cajetan be exactly true or no, that infused
habits are of the same nature with acquisite; Thus far it is true, that both
are preserved and maintained by works and action. Have thou Faith? show it: Let
your Light so shine; and God is glorified when his Children of Light are seen
walking in Love. All vain pretenses then, -- Et utinam hoc esset, -- and been
latuit, -- and fallentis semita vita; and so the monkish solitude, with their
Mors pretiosae are here all together shaken out of this walk: and likewise the
proud and painted Pharisee, the swelling seeming Justiciary, which sect
repuliulates, and comes up thick in every successive Generation. Solomon saw a
brood of them, pure in their own eyes, yet most impure: of a strange alloy and
medley, religious and wicked. And those of St. Paul's order, he confesses, to
be Zealots, very strict in appearance, fast twice a week, tithe all I possess.
This was well, he ought to do so; But Christ that saw his root was vain glory,
brings him on the stage for our learning to play his part of Miles gloriosus,
with a Panegyric of his own praises in his prayer, With Lord, I thank thee
that I am not like other men. But all such flaring Hypocrites are met with by
St. James, Thou have faith, so has the Devil, says he: Is that faith, which
is all words and no works? Can that Faith save thee? Or is it vera fides? Very
faith indeed? No, it is the other Fiaes rather, that is a very Fiddlestring.
Says not St. Paul as much? Sever it from works of Charity, and it is a mere
sound, and an ungracious sound too, A sounding brass or a tinkling Cymbal.
Again they are met with by this Apostle, where expounding this Text, he tells
them and us, that walking in Light, is all one with walking honestly. Now is
there any honor whence honesty is derided? Is it not a shame? Is this to deal
fairly? Is it fit men should so mis-use God and Godliness? What? make a show of
Godliness, and have nothing to show for it, when it comes to the proof? If
nothing but profess, says Christ, I shall be even with you one day. Now its
your day to appear goodly and glorious before deluded men, and to be thought
Saints. But when I come to be made manifest in my true and real Saints, and to
glorify them indeed, then I Will profess too; I Will profess to you, I know you
not, I know you well enough from the heart root; but to be the men you call
your selves, My Saints, my Elect and choice servants, for such I know you not,
Depart from me, you have been Retainers and Pretenders to, and talkers of
piety, but workers of Iniquity.

2. So far of active, now for passive obedience. A Christian ought to be such a
one as old Philosophy and Poetry did Ideate only and imagine, -- Sibi
imperiosus, and totus teres atque rotundus: A kind of Aeneas, or Ulysses and
Achilles mingled, not only to do, but suffer nobly. For which end, the Stoics
made men believe they had no infirmities, but had turned out all their Passions
and affections, which is impossible. Nor is that the thing which God requires;
It Is not a disparking, a disforesting, but a Cicuration, a Subjugation, a
Captivity, a Crucifixion, a Mortification; and then farther respecting
Christian profession, Walking here implies a bold and constant course both in
our faith, and in our obedience, the life and soul of faith; a course
undaunted, an Eagles flight, bold and forth on. Comes humane injury in the way?
The heathen could rowse his friend with a Te moneo ut omnem gloriam, qua
inflammatus fuisti, omni cura and industria consequare, magnitudinemque animi
ne unquam inflectas cujusquam injuria. A Christian virtue then should be a
crassiore tela then for every file to break. It Is for a weak or guilty mind to
be troubled with injurious words; like our Duellists, preventing the day of
Judgment, and calling their brother to account next morning for every idle
word over night, by sending him the length of their sword. And since I have
mentioned Duellists, let me have leave to throw three or four cool words this
morning on that fire which is but Ignis fatuus, and a Meteor that has a place
only in a middle rank and region of mankind. The whole sky of women are clear
against it. Nobles for Council sit or government, will learn to look down with
storn upon it. Beggars and the poorer Tribes ca^ live and die with a few brawls
and broken heads The three professions are better taught, and men of Trade and
Occupation in Cities and Corporations understand not the word Business in the
quarrelling Dialect. So that fighting is confined, it descends not usually
beneath a serving man, nor ascends above a Knight: and being thus comprest, the
hope is, it will shortly vanish into nothing. For it rises from that which is
next to nothing, that is, Vanity, and Lies, and Vapors. And you shall observe
them still most tender of that dreadful word, the Lie, on whom it falls in the
nature of a true jest; and such most enraged about Reputation forsooth, whom
wise and honest men know to have very little or no Reputation to lose. Briefly,
What think these Gallants of the old Roman bravery, and height of spirit? Can
they show me from all that story a pair of worthy courages (unless they will
allege those mercenary Fencers) embrandled and fighting a duel for the Lie,
or the son of a whore, or any such poor froath as flies from men in wrath, or
vexed with distemper in drink or play? But I am preaching to sober Christians a
Religion that never occasions, much less necessitates any Disciple to a fact
which must inevitably draw on, or endanger their hanging, or damning, or both.
And have we so learned Christ? Did not that Lord and King of Glory empty
himself first of all his Glory, and make himself of no Reputation, and then
endured such contradiction of sinners, such cruel mockings and revilings? How
many false accusations bore He before he bore his Cross? So what a Tullying and
declaiming of Tertullus! What Rattles, and Drums, and Gunshot! And what a
Catalogue of sufferings past St. Paul before he could finish his course, and
attain the Crown of Righteousness? and even in the shock of painful
afflictions a man of God endued with a true Christian fortitude and Patience,
will learn to take up his Cross, and learn by it as a a sound Distinction, and
take it as Gods useful Fan to unmingle him from the chaffie and feathery
things of the world; and will look through it, and find Gods primary intention
of Mercy in sending it. So David, the man after Gods own heart, did experiment
his afflictions to be good for him, and reductive of him into a right way. And
such a passive walk was his clean through; In his beginning, the Bear, the
Lion, the uncircumcised Philistine; then Troops of enemies with arrows, and
arrows prepared, shot, and shot privily. Cost, and Care, and Wit employed to
ruin him: yet he sings, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom then shall
I fear? Nay, so far from fearing, that if we belong to God, it belongs to us to
look for crosses. What son is it whom the Father chastens not? It is the lot of
all his genuine Children, it is the walk of all his pasture-sheep. In the
sheep-walk comes the storm, the Shearer, the Butcher; Why? For thy sake are we
killed all the day long, and counted as sheep to the slaughter. If it come to
death for Christ or his Cause, it is the highest dignification to our nature,
next his own assuming it, that parting with life is the consummate, the best
part of thy walk; that severing is Union, and that dissolution make; the knot
indissoluble.

1. We come now to the three Inducements first, Quia Filii, because you are
Children to Dominus here. So it is not improper, if we take the Light here for
Christ the second person; for he being the Wisdom of God, is his Son from all
Eternity, and yet a joint-Parent; as Eve is Adams daughter, and yet trne mother
of all that call him Father. Walking then is our filial obedience, in Faith, in
Fear, in Love, as dutiful Children, else the Heathen will shame the Christian
with his Morals; and our Religion in the Practicks is but moral virtue
explicated. There is by it no third part added to our soul and body; The Dr. of
Heaven tells us he came adimplere, to fill up the Law by supply, where it was
too narrow in the precepts. And therefore the explication and enlargement being
his, it should excite and enlarge our obedience, specially considering whom we
call Father, the same is our Lord here; And shall the Creatutes shame us? The
Sun will stand still, or back his fiery steeds, as in the time of Joshuab and
Ezekiah; the stormy Winds and Tempests fulfilling his Word. And is it enough
for us to take that name into our mouths, to cry only, Lord, Lord.
Cuiresnomini subject a negatur, nomine illuditur, says Tertullian. And take
heed says the Apostle, God is not, that is, God will not be mocked: If
Children, then be ye followers of God as dear Children. And this puts us in
mind of our Fathers presence, and of our due observance in this place; a
subject to a proclamation, though it be but to fill his head, will use a
reverent gesture; A Son will address and prepare for his Fathers presence,
especially if then and there to ask his blessing; more if he be to hear his
Fathers Will read and opened in what (...) concerns his Portion; most of all
will be hear^en attentively, if the Father he then to pass the In^eritance. No
so graceless child as will be then and there disorderly, or that at parting
thence, will pre^ently fall foul and revile his Father. All this might ^e
particularly applied; but I dare not ask some ^earers, how they prepared
themselves for this place ^^st night, or this morning in Word and Deed. (...)
would we had no cause to fear what they will re^urn to say and do, as soon as
gone from hence, from ^he presence of him, in his Ordinance, whom there ^hey
called Father, and pretended they came to ^^ave his blessing, as we all ought
to do quia Filii.

2 A second pully or Incentive to our duty is, Eti^msi. Though but children,
Let not the name dismay: Best of all if we feel our selves to be but children.
For there are the same steps of Seducement in humane and Divine Learnings. Men
cannot abide to be children: we all affect a Magisterium. A Christian course is
like a line drawn through; but drawn with a trembling hand. It Is a salvation
wrought but, but wrought with fear and trembling. And a ^hild will cry, and
yet follow, if led by a stronger hand: and we are in the Lords hand here, In
domino. Remember then who leads, who bids us follow: He leads the way, that is
the way that makes the way for us, and opens an access, not by his Fathers
acceptance only, but his own intrinsique Virtue, Power, Office. We are weak,
but that weakness in^ites his Might and Mercy: thy weakness is from ^^ture,
which has her stint and measure, but thy strength in Domino, who as he
possesses, so distributes infinitely. As in Creation when he had made he left
not things to themselves. There is a ma^^ tenency, else all would crumble back
into their Atoms. So in this Recreation, Dominus suppo^^ manum; rude and poor
Lumps of our selves, no seet, no wings, but born on his Eagles wings as on a
seatherbed, we are soft and secure, and kept aloft, fa^ and free from danger.
It Is hard for weakness and childhood to bear a yoke; But his bearing with us,
and his Spirit assisting us, makes the yoke easy, and the burden light. It Is
the saying of the sons of Beltal, His ways are always grievous. Hearken to
our Apostle, Our conversation is in Heaven; Maria ibi non erat ubi erat:
Children of Light are where they would be. It is but three steps with Gods help
(says he) and he says it to these Ephesians, cap. 2. ver. 5. He has quickened
us with Christ, raised us with him, and made us sit together in heavenly places
in Christ Jesus. So sure of possession if we be his Children, so sure to hear
that voice meet us from the clouds, Come ye Children of my Father, etc.

3. Lastly, As Children of Light, using the Light for direction and example;
and this exemplary Light is double. First, The Suns course is imitable. And
Secondly, The Sun of Righteonsness is our highest and chiefeit Pattern. For the
first, Look how David dresses the Sun. Psalm. 19. In a Tabernacle, and presents
him as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and as a Giant rejoicing to run
his course. So may we find St. Paul in this, and the like places, sets forth a
Son of God, a child of Light embraved like another Mordecay O far beyond all
Fayorites of the highest Kings or Potentates, in a Robe of Righteousness, In
Domino, and in the inner man (not outward splend or with -- Introsum turpis)
made bright and pure from sin by Sanctification of the Spirit, proceeding to a
darling and confounding beauty of Holiness, shining in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation; and the more for their perverseness by an
Antiperistasis. Learning of the Sun, which is not retrograde for winds or
clouds, nor weary of his luminous operations after so many thousand years of
Circuit, sets him not down, but moves still in a circular, in a celestial and
communicable motion; which motion if any dare traduce, and call it a Pad-way,
ot dispute it into terms of false, inconstant or serpentine, as they use the
Sun; let the Persian or the Indian adore or curse; so let the unclean
worldings, or churlish hel-hounds bark, the child of Light will like the Sun,
cut a clear passage through all, and smiling, rise from out the liquid snares
and jaws of giant clouds unhurt, uncaught, and like a Sunbeam (says Seneca)
though forced to shine on dung hills, converse with base and wicked company, --
yet comes off untainted, Et hoeret origini suae, still cleaves inseparably to
the first spring of Light.

There is yet a second observation in the race of the Sun; he is tropickt and
kept to his Zodiac and Ecliptic line; and so are we confined. Gods Will and
Word are circle-wise put about us, (as Popilius served Antiochus) and God has
set out the boundures of our walk, which we must not pass. When the Sun
perceives the Tropic, he will advance no further; so what ever full evidence
of Gods revealed Will restrains, where his prohibition lies, there is the
Barrier. Then better walking in a fiery furnace with those three Children of
Light, then walk on to fire unquenchable and utter darkness. Then know O King,
that though our God will not deliver us, yet will not we transgress the bounds
of his Law to worship the Image that thou have set up. But then, in this case
we must look to our evidence, that it be clear and sull Light, nor straightened,
nor enlarged by our own, or other men's false expositions. For allow him but the
ordinary gloss, and every sinner will excuse his grossest crimes. Is not the
prohibition plain enough, Thou shall not commit Aultery, Fornication? Let it
not be once naned: yet all this with a Roman wash of venial sin, or their rule
of Caute si non cast, will easily persuade some of their Novices or she-
Prosylite, that there may be a kind of witty fornication tolerable, or moderate
Adultery. So that Command. Thou shall not steal: Let the Highway thief, or
Highland Plunderer interpret, he will tell you, -- Its true, unless you be
under an invincible necessity, or else promise to restore or account one day,
though you intend the day of Doom; and such glosses men allow themselves in the
main Articles of the Creed. I believe the Catholic Church: Ask the Anabaptist,
what it is? It is a company whereof he is a prime man illumined, needing no
Scripture-rule, but the Law of love and liberty. Ask the Papist, And he says,
it is nothing but a fine man at Rome with a triple Crown, and a number of
Fellows in red hats like Minstrels attending on him, while with his foot he
kicks off the Crowns of Kings, and treading on the necks of Emperors, cries, --
super Aspidem and Basiliscum, etc. Or briefer thus, The Catholic Church in our
Creed is Ecclesia Catholica Romana; which though it be a Bull, and infold a
contradiction, yet it serves for a Charm; and the poor seduced Papist, on whose
breast it is hung, is therewith stupefied, and dare not stir out of that Circle;
if he do, the Devil will take him; for God has no deer out of that Pale;
that is the Ark, and out of the Popes Parish there is Salvation. So then it must
be no false or new-devised, but old and full Light from Scripture that shall
guide us. And it can never become any Child of Light to cast his conscience
into cloudy, and raw, and scrupulous fetters, and startle and fly out of a
Christian course, or from a Christian Church upon conceited or imaginary
Tropicks; much less, when the world or Devil would draw us to disorder our ways
by their Cancer and Capricorn; the griping claws of earthly Profit, or the
goatish Delights of sensual and carnal Pleasure.

Secondly, And above all our Saviors Light is our best Direction; And observe
that Sun of Righteousness, ere he rose, a clear Light comes forth of Promises
and Prophesies, then a Day Star, then in fullness of time he breaks; the East
discloses, and he shines on in Wisdom at twelve years old, -- grows in stature,
in Grace and Favor with God and man. After his Baptism, and taking on him the
Ministry, He goes about Preaching, Healing, doing good, and suffering evil;
till he die, rises, ascends, sends the Holy Ghost, intercedes in Heaven for us,
and on earth is with us by his Spirit and Word to the end, and in the end, his
final Re^olution and Revisitation to bring us to those joys that have no end.
This was, and is his course, Vade tu, fae similiter, Go thou, and do like him;
How can we? Why! Be followers of God. The Child may follow, though non passibus
aequis. In his action he said, I have given you an example, and of his Passion
the Scriptures says, He suffered, leaving us an example. Children learn to
write and sew by Copies and Samplers; so must we, and so shall we, if once our
hearts be touched with an Adamant, if once tramed on by the Epiphany of such a
star. Then like those Eastern Magi we shall rejoice to follow it; yea content
to take up our Cross and follow him, content to be down, and dark and
despairing, so we may rise to Light and stradiation and enabling Grace;
pursuing him through Ignorance, Error and Death, who is the Way, the Truth and
the Life: And never giving over our Revolution and Resolution, till we come to
set where we rose, born back with endless and impatient desires to enjoy Jesus,
the Author and Finisher of our says, and the end of our faith, the salvation
of our souls.

I have done with the explication of my Text: There remains a word of
Application; to our selves first; so had we best, or it will be done to out
hands with Medice cura te ipsum. May I have leave then once more to look upon
the Light, and apply it first to the Learning, and then to the Life's of clergy
men: Wherein if I shall seem to teach any of these my Reverend Fathers, or of
my Learned Brethren, it is with this protestation of primo meipsum,

1. Our Learning first must be Lux in Demino: we are Seers, eyes to the Mystic
body of Christ Jesus. Dark Ignorance then to us should be a thing most
horrible, as it is to that sense in nature. A foul and fearful sight, if those
holes in our faces were empty, and those bals of living fire plucked from our
fronts. What is it when me want filling for so large a Sphere as our profession
is? A woeful Spectacle to see a blinking Glowworm where a star of Magnitude
should shine! We are Gods Lawyers and Physicians with truth of Direction, and
severity of observance in our cures. And is it not scandalous and dangerous, an
Ignoramus, an Emperick or Montebank in our Calling? unless as Circe and
AEsculapius were both accounted Apollo's offspring; so Mediocrity and
Excellency make no difference in Profit or Repute; which makes so many take up
with Atalanta, -- Declinat cursus, aurumy; (...). But God would have us
workmen, able Ministers, dividing the Word of Truth arighe. And is noe Learning
a mighty wedge and wrest in that Affair? Aristole handles the affections in his
Rhetoricks, and sure I am, that all our Rhetoric has edge little enough to
pierce into the wooden and stony affections of our common hearers. Orpheus it
had need to be in Sylvis, to draw Beasts and Blocks. And what shall we do in
learned Audience? They will soon perceive upon whose wheels our motions are;
such as can taft every vein of water, and tell which savours Sulphur, Vitriol
or Steel; but worst of all, in convincing the Adversary. What will become of
our empty Frigates grapling with a man of war, or a Jehu Jesuit tha^ charges
furiously when he finds a wak Adversary! We must walk then to the Heaven of
Scripture, and stars of Interpreters; no casting off those Beam; without a
self-illuminating, and to get us work men's tools; for sharp and flat pierce not
alike, though there be the like percussion. We are Gods Smiths and Armourers,
and shall we have nothing in our Shops, but old Saws, and a Hammer-head, with a
b^g pair of Bellows? Solomon tells us of nails fastened by the Masters of our
Assemblies: and it was Jaels nail, and not her Milk and Butter that poured into
his ears, could pierce the head of Sisera; and so to strike sin dead, we had
need of nails, and files, and skrews, and fire in the work, and the Masters of
Assemblies, our Superintendents to urge our Improvement. It is municipal Law,
Interest Reipub. and it is National Law too, and why not Ecclesiastic?
Interest Ecclesia, I am sure, that every man's stock of knowledge be improved to
our Lords advantage, that so we may walk before his people as Children of
Light. And let no profane Interpreter abuse or pervert this admonition, as if
I misinflamed men to a vicious or inordinate assection of gaudy learning or
strong lines, and so evacuate the Cross of Christ; I am far from it. I know we
must all preach Christ Crucified, and all our Sermons, and all our Catechizing
(which if soundly, and seriously, and constantly done, might prove our best
Sermons) to be so many lively Crucifixes. I press therefore for a crucified
elcquence, such as may serve to nail and fasten, to strike and rivet that Cross
to the Souls of our Hearers; and I keep me to the Pattern here of Light. No
fluid or vaporous, or misty Depths, or cloudy passages, nor lightning flash,
nor beams embowed in burning glasses. If storms and wind arise with the
morning, they help her not to spread and dress her Light, but rather hinder it;
so what need distorted Gellures, or tempestuous voices, like Huricanoes in
delivering of the fair, and easy, and gentle Truth? It Is clear truth which is
the joy of Heaven and earth, the souls food, the Understandings Bride, (...),
the breath of God, kin and twin sister to the soul, which makes them love so
well, and we therefore to affect Truth for the soul of our Sermons, and then
Light for the body of Interpretation to edification. But Sermonlearning is not
all, there is another Knowledge requisite in points of necessary controversy,
(for there is a mass of superfluous ones) when we go out against him we call
the common enemy; And who shall then afford us a smart sling and polisht
stones, or make us that stuff which may fell the Philistine, and choke the
Dragon of Superstition? And blessed be God, even from the first Reformation we
had some Chiess in our Church, clear and able Lights; who some of them in the
Marian days, were used like the Christians in Neronian nights, who were lapt
in pitch and rosin to make highway Torches, and such as the Papists would not
believe to be Lights, till they saw them on a light fire. And among their
modern Successors, may we not show some learned and laborious works published in
the eyes and defiance of our Adversaries Tenets? Behold that late volumn of
Dissertation, with a grand and prime Jesuit, concerning those great points of
Councils erring, and the last Resolution of Faith, and the Popes Insallibility,
wrttten with puissance and clearness, such as the Christian world will hardly
match it. A piece of Divinity, like a piece of Ordinance, so rammed with round
and irresistible Arguments, able to make a lane, and sweep away a whole Bank or
Army of Jesuits; and such a Brass-piece too as will live an everlasting
monument of Lear^ing to Polierity. And I can show you here another great
Defender or our Churches Doctrine, that has so disimpostered the grand
cousenage, and so be-headed their Head, so laid low their Supremacy, and then
(like another Ehud) has so daggered himself into that Eglon, the fat beily of
their Mass, that he has left them neither Head nor stomach to answer him.

My next Application is to our lives; We should be stars, thickest parts of
Spheres, not dullest, but abler and better compact. And surely if our
Conversation be not Lux in Domino, our Learning and natnral Parts will prove
but Auctoramentum, and Press money to Implety, and culpa suasoria, as Amb.
speaks. I know the Vulgus malignum regard nor Life, nor Learning in a Miniter,
so he be some silly Neophyte, or poor fellow whom they may feed quarterly, and
rule, and laugh at when they list, or else some jovial and bone companion.

And I know there is a cloud of sour Critics that will of force have all the
motions of the clergy come in and close on perfect Circles, and not allow to us
one spiral line, or any the leaft encentricity. But my monition presses no
further then to a pious and watchful behavior, remembering we are Lux in
Domino, and to our Lord accountable: That when he shall Re-appear, we may hear
him say, not so much well said, or O well preached, (though that would be well
too) But Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy.

And now to spread this exhortation, and take in all the Assembly, all our
proceedings must be regular, like the Light rising, and setting in a course
that is orderly. The Subject of the Canon Law, is Homo dirigibilis in Deum and
bonum commune. And as order helps in Civil Conversation, so is it prevalent in
our way and walk of Religion too. Disorderly Reubenites, men of division, have
ever been, and are, and will be found to be the Bane of Kingdoms and Common
wealths. For pull but that Pin of Order, and the Machine of the world
dissolves. Even the Stoics in their Primordial fire taught it did (...)
proceed by a set order. Order that is the harmonious beauty, and beautiful
Concord of God, and Angels, and men; in no Convention, in no Council, in no
Assembly let it be forgot. It shall not be forgotten in that mighty Confluence
and meeting of God and Angels, and mankind. For even then it is said, Every man
shall rise in his own Order. Therefore as King Porus comprised all good usage
in (...), so the Apostle all good manners in (...); in walking not
inordinately, but doing all things decently and in order.

There is another application, which (though I have been long) I dare not leave
out, it is so tied to the Text, and follows at the eleventh verse, Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove them rather.
I may not stay to reprove them. Suffer me to name a work or two of darkness,
and I Will commend you all to the Father of Lights.

First, Sacrilegious Simony betwixt a layman and a Clerk; It is a vice of
wickedness, that like Adultety defiles two persons at once: and like Adultery
is a work of Darkness If one see them, they are in the terrors of the shadow
of Death; Deprendi miserum. And therefore this bargain is ever driven in the
dark; And like a piece of conjuring they get both within a circle, and have
their spells and charms for secrecy. You shall swear never to reveal what I
paid, and I will be drawn in pieces ere I tell, how many score, how many
huudred pieces: But my Patron when gone aside, he boasts, and cannot choose
but tell his Lady perchance what fine things these presentations are? sell my
land, and it never comes again; that cruel word Ses heirs. But the Dunce or
drunkard that bought, may be forced to sell again, or else resign, or chop, or
be put out, or dye, and then there is more money. Thy money perish with thee.
Thou, what shall I call thee? Be what thou will, and quarter what coats thou
can, thy great Ancestors name was Simon Magus. Well, is that the worst? No,
Remember what St. Peser said to Ananias, why has Sa'an filled thy heart? and
who it was that entered into the heart of Judas, when he went to betray and
sell his Mafter: thou sellest thy Master and thy Masters Patrimony, Patrimonium
crucifixi, The Patrimony of Christ crucified, so it is called. Tush caveat
emptor. You of the Clergy are the Magus's, it is true: and where is the Purchaser
too going to swear? a dreadful swearing! And have thou done it? What, Neque per
te, nec per alium? And can thou again look God in the face, in his beauty of
holiness? and take his word into thy mouth? Have thou any Lot, any true clergy,
any Portion in our Ministry? But quis talis fando, and quis tam ferreus! -- and
hec dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.

Secondly, Oppression is a work of Darkness, though practiced openly, in
extorting Ossicers, and such men as greedy of Gain entrench and enclose
themselves from others, and hurl out the poor members of Christ, turn them a
walking, to enlarge their sheep-walks. Do these men walk honestly, and as
children of light? And is there not a Brood and flutter of Prodigals that tend
to oppression too? Country Gull-Gallants, that like NERO at first lap up
horses, houses and Lands into Balls, and throw them away in Dole and Lottery,
till they come to a Dysentery. So long mis-demeaning themselves, in lavishing
and flying out, till it come to a cruel missing of their Demesnes in the end;
and then are forced to skrew, and rack, and grind the saces and bowels of the
poor, with Neroes resolution too, Hoc agamus ne quis quicquam habeat.

Thirdly, Drunkenness had wont to be a work of Darkness; But now it defies the
harbor of duil night, and dares look day in the face. But the Apofile meets
them terribly, both the Extortioner, and the Drunkard: Neither of them shall
inberite the Kingdom of Heaven.

Fourthly and laftly, That desperate and indesensible sin of swearing; when the
soul is let go for nothing. No profit, no pleasure, unless hell and everlasting
darkness dwell in men's desires. But I forgee the time; and I hope for better
things of you, and snch as accompany salvation. And I trust I shall fitly and
sully apply the Text to all that are here; and in the Repetition of these words
take in all the Congregation, and postremo meipsum. Beloved, we wers once
darkness, are now light in the Lord. Let us then walk as children of light.
Which that we may do, let us pray to the Father of Lights; Almighty God, give
us grace to cast away the works of darkness, and put on the Armor of Light,
etc,

S.D.G.

A SERMON AT COURT, July, 1640.
MALAC. 3.17. And they shall be mine, said the Lord of Hosts, in that day when
I make up my Jewels.
WHich words afford a double Privilege of Gods servants (be the times what
they will) in Reference to their owner described by his high and stately style
of Dominus Exercituum. First, his own they are, his peculiar. Secondly,
esteemed of him at a high rate, for they are his Jewels. The first privilege
is laid out in this plain conclusion; They that in a Deluge of corruption (such
as covered all in time of this Prophecy) are yet emergent and bear up against
the stream: They that in desperate and desolate times dare yet make proof that
they fear this Lord of Hofts, and think upon his Name, they are Gods own, his
peculiar. For so the Rabbis interpret this word Segullah by peculium,
peculiare, proprium speciale, praecipuum, singular. God has a propriety, a
specialty in them. I conceive your thoughts and expectations have by this time
called me off from this seeming dry tree: for what fruit shall you or I gather
hence, in being Gods own and of his peculiar people? But I am even for this
Imaginations sake desirous to insist; and so far to entreat your patience too,
that I may yet be resident, that I may spend the hour wholly incumbent on this
little thing, as it may seem of mine, which yet in opening will appear I doubt
not a rich and an inexhaustible Mine of Treasure, and such as will prove useful
and appliable to every Hearer. You may then mistake, you may prejudice me: you
cannot tell what work God may be pleased to enable me to make of this Text
before, and when I come to resresh the honor and comfort of my lise in
preaching again in this Audience. Now I mean not to part with this my first
part, in the Royalty, the Priesthood and peculiarity of Gods people (capable of
that former Description) which is comprised in this claim, and promise and
assurance (for it is all those) And they shall be mine, says the Lord, etc.

To every Text belongs but explication and application; I intend both. In the
explication first, that is now the opening, that is the working of this Mine, I
shall present you with the riches of the Ore, and then the refined Gold; or
draw first some materials from the Mine wherewith to build our comfort, and
then super-induce a roof and crown of pure Gold, in precious things in Christ,
under the New Testament, which was under the old too, but not so clear, so
complete, Where God in Christ reconciling the world to himself, wears the
crown of Mercy manifold, and enwraps us in a Robe of Totius; total consolation
by uniting us with the bonds of his Love, by a plenteous Redemption, made not
with corruptible things as silver and gold, but with the blood of Jesus the
Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.

The first material from this Mine may be the very strowing of some grains of
Golden comfort in our entrance on the consideration of Gods Word, and work
with man. It Is a special hightning of the spirit, a mighty complacency and
satisfaction to a servant of God, to believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of those that diligently seek him, Heb 11. for even Moses is said to
have had this in his aim, he had an eye to the recompense of Reward; David
begins his first Psalm (where he describes Gods service) with Beatus.
Blessedness is a blessed pully to Devotion; and therefore both the Day Star,
and the Sun take this course: both the Baptist and Christ Jesus come preaching
the Kingdom of Heaven upon our conversion to God. It is observable, that as God
has bound himself to a perpetual Revolution of Winter and Summer; that Spring
and Harvest in Autumn shall never fail. So his whole will and Word is a
miscellany of Law and Gospel; and such lightsome and comfortable Texts as this
found in Isay many, and in David many, very many Evidences Evangelical; and we
in that respect to attend this hour to the Gospel of St. Malachy: For not a
Prophet of God, not the least or last but has an Inlay of mercy wrought up
with Judgment and sweet and gracious Promises mingled with comminations. They
bring us down to discontent by the waters of Marab and Babylon, to bitter
weeping in the Valley of Tears; to persecution of a red Sea, the biting of
fiery serpents, and a killing letter of the Law: But they leave us not without
discovery of a Brazen serpent to cure us; and many precious assurances, that
God will put all our tears in his bottle, and w^p^ away all tears from our
eyes: That he will take us out of many waters, and bring his own again from the
deep of the sea, and revive us by the glad tidings of the Gospel of Peace and
Reconciliation. And experimentally Gods servants shall find it so in his actual
dealing with them, that look how God has not left himself without witness in
his general Providence showring down on earth his balmy Influences from Heaven;
so in his secret impartments of hidden Manna, and in his open appliances to his
holy Ones in those celestial dews of mercy, which sall only on the fleeces of
his Pasture-sheep, when it is dry upon all the ground beside, we find this
exemplified in the head of his Church, who as in himself he is a Light shining
in darkness, so as the darkness comprehends it not; so his whole life and death
was like light in a Lanthorn, or lightnings from summer clouds, pauses of
sorrow and dejection with various glimpses and coruscations of his glory mixed
and interweav'd. For crucified dead and buried, our Creed assists us with a
glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and Exaltation of that same crucified dead
and buried Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. So to present you with several
members of his mystical Body, in their interchangeable Robes of sackcloth and
tissue; their Coronets of thorns and Roses, were an easy task; I name but
two, the Father of the faithful, and the man after Gods own heart: whom one
while we find in fear, horror and great darkness and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed them; another while rejoicing in hope and assurance of Gods
All Sufficiency, and with hearts dancing for joy, as that sweet singer
expresses it: and how could I make this truth notorious but without a sailing
over to the prime Apostles in the New Testament? which I purposely reserve for
a new and latter discovery, when we come to close with the consummation of this
Consolation; mean time in this very first opening of the Mine, you see enough
discovered to consute such as think there is no Golden Vine nor branch of
comfort in Gods service; but seduced by Satan pretend an inequality, a rugged
unevenness in the ways of God, which God himself disclaims, and imputes it to
our ways. It is not the Religion of God that is unprofitable or vain, as those
foolish people in this Chapter openly professed, nor does his service incline
men inevitably to sadness and melancholy.

A second Material from this Mine is the connection and combination of this
comfort, in that God chains this mercy to a preceding mercy; He begins here
with a conjunction -- and they shall be mine, -- and then couples it to a
succeeding mercy, -- and I will spare them, etc. Comfort past, and present, and
to come: Many feathers of Gods Wing: many showers of Manna and of Quails: The
whole srame and pile of comfort from the beginning of the sixteenth to the end
of the seventeenth ver is pitched as a Tabernacle of Joy with courtains and
coverings, with loops and taches of consolations in conjunction; God is and
ever was a God of conjunction and communion; a God of Order and combination.
Discord and disunion are from the Devil: God in Essence from before all
beginning was unsolitary. God that in wisdom saw it was not fit for man to be
alone, in his wisdom saw it was not good for God to be alone. He is God alone,
that is, there is no other: But I am not alone, says Christ, never was so,
that is, without the Father and the Holy Ghost. All the three blessed and
glorious persons as co-essential, so coeternal and coequal, which makes for
us; we better apprehend, and better apply God in the Trinity of persons; so
branching and reaching out more fruit to us, then the contemplation of the
Unity; And as in Essence, so in works of God, which respecting us externally,
are all co-operations of all three Persons: we find in nature first, all things
produced in number, weight and measure, and all things in connection still. One
brother holds another by the heel, and as our eyes enwrapt in several tunicles,
each under other, so are those films and skins of spears imaginary, nothing
but the vaultages, and enwombings, and enwrapings, and swathings of the
constellations and coverings ore those conjoined Elements, which are lodged in
one another laps, and inlaid and mortis'd into one another bosoms. And so in
his mornings and evenings dole and distribution; in his daily providence and
Dispensation, all is done in order, and by a set conjuncture of his Officers.
The Heavens appointed to hear the earth, the earth to hear the corn, and wine
and oil, and they to hear us, Hos. 2.22. Such a chain of causes in things
natural, while the Cause of causes, and the God of all these conjunctures, has
the upmost link fastened to his Divine will in heaven; But all the Links let
down are wrapped about his beloved creature man, in mercies that compass him
round, and embrace him on every side: In midst whereof guarded by Angels that
pitched their tents about him, man takes Repose and sleeps to the music of the
hollow murmuring winds and waters, which seem to whisper in his ears a memento
of his service to that Lord for whose sake they are yet in service to man. But
secondly, in works of Grace is God observable to be a God of conjunction. In
his first gracing of his chosen Israel, to enable them for a great and wise
people, he gave them a Law from heaven, Deuteronomy. 4.6. which was a Law conjunctive,
both affirmative, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength: and thy neighbor as thy self. Two tables joynd by Gods own
hands, and a Rejoinder by our Savior. This is the first and great
Commandment, and the second is like unto it: keep both, or neither. he that
fails in any one, is guilty of all: and also Negatively, Dew^. 5.^7. Not kill,
nor cozomit adultery, nor steal; and so the Apostle, Be not dsceived. Neither
fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor covetous, nor drunkards, etc. 1 Cor. 6.9. Not
yet to show you further of this in that new eapanfure and firmament of his
Grates under the New ^ estament, till I come to the consummation I intend ^or
the conclusion: But by the way, even this connection of comforts may awake our
consideration, and raise our admiration, and by that call up and address, and
enlarge our thankfulness. St. Beraard wonders, as well he may, at those Dual
jun^toes of God and man, and of maid and mother: and then that admirable
conjuncture in man of faith and reason, mixing their auxiliary forces and
mutual assistances, to comprehend and believe this Mystery. How can our souls
then escape an ecstasy of comfort, when we light upon those conjunctive
precious Promises? God will give grace and glory, and no good thing will be
withhold: Glory and Honor and Immortality on every soul that does well; and on
the contrary, the Remembrance of the Law of God given in conjunction, should
make us tremble to sever what God has so joined, and entender our consciences
to avoid every wickedness, not abhorring I^ols, and committing sacrilege, not
pretending to fear God, and yet dishonor the King, and yet hope to escape the
chain-shot of Gods Judgments which come in conjunctions too; and for them that
treasure up sin, he treasures up wrath against the day of wrath; he has
treasures of hail and stormy tempests stored up for the ungodly, plagues of
famine and sword, and diseases, tribulation and anguish, temporal, and
spiritual, and Eternal.

3. A third Material, is, the Expansion, the extension of this golden Ingor.
The spreading and dilatation of this comfort of our being Gods peculiar,
(before we look upon it Refined in Christ) in the state and trial of adversity:
For if thou be of those that in corrupt times can fear before the Lord,
and think upon his Name, which are the qualifications of these Jewels of God in
the Text, in what blessed Ark and Repository then art thou! How safe do thou
dwell under the shadow of those wings that are never nipt, never lose any long
feathers; wings that are a tent in time of peace, in time of war a Pavilion and
a strong tower of defense and protection. Let then the world hate, disclaim on
thee, Caesar frown, Princes persecute, the whole world against thee, as it was
once said of Athanasius: yet as Athanasius entitles one Psalm, the 62. Psalm.
Adversus omnes Insidiantes, all enemies of state, fame, body and soul; so may
thou write over this Text, and make hither thy appeal, and hence derive thy
Cordial and Restorative; in this that thou art Gods own, the Lord of Hosts is
with thee, the God of Jacob is thy Refuge. All the Sentences of Scripture
containing gracious Promises, are as St. Jerome told Pa^la, fences for the
breast of a Christian; How is this then able to hoop it round with steel, and
keep it up from sinking in despair, be the affliction never so forcible to
press it down; Though thou were humbled with all David's miseries, that thou
could take up all his complaints at once? Though the proud rise, and
assemblies of the terrible seek after thy soul, and thou bear in thy bosom the
Reproaches of all the mighty: though thou art left as a sparrow. or as a
Pelican in the desert, a brother of D^agons and companion of Owls; thy Lovers
and friends put far from thee, and thy acquaintance into darkness; and though
thy bones are burnt up as an harth, and sorrow has dried up thy strength, that
thy bread is ashes mingled with weeping; though thy soul melt, thy spirit
ore-whelm'd, and thy heart within thee be desolate: though the terrors of
death compass thee, and the pains of Hell get hold upon thee; or were thy
wretchedness equal to that of holy Job: Broken with a tempest and filled with
bitterness, the venom drinking up thy spirit, thy reins cl^ven asunder, and thy
gall poured out upon the ground thy face foul with weeping, and thy eyelids in
the shadow of death: Or in thy Reputation like him. made a byword and tabret
for drunkards; or like St. Paul, the spectacle of disgrace, a fool, the scum
and offscouring of all things; Yet all this fire is quenched in one drop of his
mercy whose thou art, and who is thy keeper and Defender. Thou shall be mine,
says God, mine for all this; the sooner for this I will look upon thee,
respect, remember thee, own thee, raise thee, lift thee up, visit, mark thee,
seal thee, and make thee up a Jewel for my self.

4. This was the Expansure and Dilatation; next is the complication of our
comfort, as it is wrapped up here in Dominus Exercituu^, the Lord of Hosts:
Indeed, the arresting and conserving of all joys is in him that wears that
Name by a right Excellency. And this Title falls fitly in our way to be tried,
before we can make a full extraction. For though the Emphasis be in They -- as
we shall see anon, and the comfort enclosed in ^^ ine: yet would this Mine
prove but heavy leaden Ruff. Verbum frigidum (as St. Cbrysostome calls moum and
tuum) were it pronounced by the greatest Monarch upon earth. The life of it is
in that the living God has spoken it. For shall not the Judge of all the world
do right? and has the Lord spoken and will not perform it? That Lord whose
Attributes of Power and Mercy, both are specified in this Appellation of
Dominus Exercituums? The pith and strength of all lies in this; For though this
Name seem incidental here, and by way of Perenthesis, yet is it axis and cardo,
the hinge on which the whole hope of the Righteous turns, and it would break
the sense of the whole sentence to leave out this; The sense I am sure of the
blessing not so full, nay none at all, if he were not Dominus Exercituum.

The School makes three Degrees of perceiving God by Names both in nature and
Scripture. First, Negationis, remotionis, He is not the Sun, not finite,
mutable. Secondly, Perfectionis, affirmationis: when what is most excellent in
things create, we apply to God by way of Analogy and Resemblance; so we call
him Just, Merciful, High, Glorious. Thirdly, Names of Excellence and
Supereminence, as this Title here; for to seek him amongst the Hosts of his
Creatures, yea in the highest things we know, is Ridiculous, but to determine
him there is impious. Vltra altra quarendus, cries St. Bernard; And yet though
it be an impotent hope and impudent attempt to imprison God in Names, yet as
God (every way incomprehensible) to make some impression of his Nature to
Moses, gave himself a Name; so we find the man after Gods own heart, and by his
own inspiration, say, the Lord is a man of war, The Lord of Hosts is his Name.
By which conjuncture of War and Hosts in that Psalm, we may first consider God
in this Name as a Warrior, and as the Lord Generalissimo of the War, but not
so as men receive that Name for their Command over one and their own Army; but
as Commander over all Armies, and all wars Offensive or Defensive, that have
been, are or shall be in the world. For it is not only in spiritual Furn ture
that Isay dresses God, and arms him Cap a pee, but the Prophets ost in the
literal sense (as if God took a special complacency in the style) and none more
frequently then David, so present him. In Psalm 46.8, 9. he calls us to behold
his Mirabilia, and add^ a special proof of all by Gods not Warring, but doing a
greater work then that, in making wars to cease in all the world. (O were it
once so his great and gracious work in this our orbis Divisus, our little world
of great Britain!) He breaks the how and knaps the spear in sunder, and burns
the Chariots in the fire; But when he will war and show how dreadfully he can
come on, the Text tells us, he looks but on the earth and it trembles, but
touches the mountains, and they smoke. And even Nebuchadnezz^r will in the end
acknowledge as much to his glory, that all the Inhabitants of the earth are
reputed before him not only as Grasshoppers, but as mere nothing, and he does
what he will in the Army of Heaven, and him that walks in pride he is able to
abase. And therefore an horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man from
this God of Battails; No King can be sase by the multitude of his Host. It Is
this Lord incline; the Victory as he pleases. Secondly, whereas other names of
God in Scripture are less luminous in reference to his servants succor and
protection, such as shield and fortress, and Desence, like particular refulgent
stars in the Firmament of his Power and Providence; This as the Sun wherein he
shines forth more Illustriously, more diffusively, more manifoldly. This, a
whole Heaven, a circling and enwrapping sky with all the Constellations and
affluences of his own Essential and immediate, with those of the Angels and
other Creotures co-assistances. So that a gracious and a glorious, a full and
clear and constant consolation is derivable from the fullness of this Name; and
every soldier and servant of his may sing and say with the Prophet and the
Apostle, The Lord is my light and my salvation; the Lord of Hosts is with us.
And if that Lord be with us, no matter how many Lords and earthly Kings be
against us. Diogenes could boast and deride, and choose all Tragic fortune,
upon that conceit that he was a friend of Jupiters; and the Jesuit Serarius
says, even the flames of Purgatory are not dreadful, respecting the assistance
of the Patients good Angel; How much more, and on what better ground may we
build and raise a foot of comfort, and erect a lively hope from the true
Jupiter, Opt. max. the God of those good spirits, and whose Charriors are two
hundred thousand, even thousands of his victorious Angels! What wars or rumors
of wars, what numbers of enemies can dismay the man of God, when Eliahs boy can
espy these battalias in the clouds of Heaven, whereof one alone in one night
without hoft, or Cannon, or sword, or spear, or noise is able to slaughter
180000 thousand of Assyrians? And as great Chiefs are vigilant to take places
of advantage, and so to dispose their troops as one may give Relief unto
another, so this Sovereign Commander for the succor of his poor Infantry here
below, has lodged those Legions and bright squadrons of winged spirits above,
to be in readiness, and in whose aid that man of God says he will be
confident, and so he may, and so may every David; for God himself has placed
that Guard while himself is pleased to attend the watch and go the round, and
designs and emploies those flaming Ministers in their Ranks and Orders for the
service of his Elect. Is it not so? Art they not all ministering spirits sent
out for the good of all them that shall be heirs of Salvation?

Thus far the Materials of comfort drawn from this Mine, both in the radiant
mixture, and connection, and expansion of those diffusive joys, whose nature is
to supple and sustain them in adversity; and all this again complicated and
arrested upon the contemplation and proof of their Lords being Dominus
Exercituum. And now lastly, (to keep promise) I shall try to superinduce a
Roof and Crown of pure Gold over all these Materials, which is the Consummation
of the Saints Consolation, as God becomes ours, and we His, in the only
Mediator, Christ Jesus: which before we can well discern, it is requisite we
discover to the bottom of this Mine, and find the first foundation of Gods
people laid upon the only love of God, in making choice of them at first for
his Peculiar: For to be his in general is the common lot of all his Creatures;
The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. Again, His delight was ever
with the sons of men, Acts 17. and he made of one blood all mankind to dwell on
all the face of the earth: All live and move, and are in Him and His Offspring
and Generation; and he provides for all Light, and Influences, and showers of
fatning rain, to fill their hearts with food and gladness. But in Exodus 19.5.
where we find this very word in the Text, denoting Singularity and Choiceness,
God tells his Israel, whom he had derived from Abraham, the father of the
faithful, that if they would obey his words indeed, and keep his Covenant,
then they should be a peculiar Treasure to him above all people; For all the
earth (says God) is mine; but not so mine as You: for he goes on, You shall be
a kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation. Only the Lord there lays down the
Cornerstone of this building, and discovers the bottom reason of his electing
them, which was not says he your multitude, for you were the fewest, nor your
inclination to my service, for you were an obstinate and stiff-necked people:
but only he had a delight in their Fathers, (so we have it, Deuteronomy. 10.) to love
them above all people. Which love of God, as it drew on his first calling them,
so it occasioned his preserving them from all the world, when planting this
Vine in Egypt, (where it was pincht and straightened) he made room for it, and
transplanted it to grow and flourish in the vast and barren Wilderness, and on
the sandy botome of the sea, till removing Nations greater and mightier then
they, he made that people possess the gates of their enemies, and his Blessings
and Protections still eminent, and imminent; still over their heads, even then
when they provoke him to send them into captivity, from whence yet he gathered
them again; and as that daughter of Sion, that Church through the four
Monarchies, so after he had joined and made up a Church of Jews and Gentiles,
he blessed and preserved it through the ten Persecutions, and to this very day;
For now we are refining this Gold, and extending this propriety of God in his
Saints and servants under the new Testament, as we have cause to do; we that
live since that fullness of time which delivered him to the world, in whom it
pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell. Then cartainly this
consideration of our being Gods Peculiar in Christ, the Sen of his love, will
rise to a full consolation: For in him we know the Covenant was renewed, and
sealed in his sacred blood, whereby those great Rivers of Creation and
Providence flow over, and fall into the large sea of Redemption; and by that
sea we may sail fairly on to the fair havens of Sanctification, and compassing
the point of good hope, of a true and lively hope, arrive in the end at endless
Glory; All this will be done, if once we be his own in him, that is, his only
Beloved: if once he admits us into the league, make us Confiederates and
Princes of the Union, Kings unto God by his blood, Rev. 1.7. The Emphasis is
upon His, for that blood of his, that Unction, that Inauguration will effect
it. He and They, God and Man at distance, at enmity before, by him who is both
God and man, and so a fit Modus and Medium, and a fit Mediator, are reconciled.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. No wonder, though this be
not only called a grand Mystery, as it is considerable in the person of Christ
alone, God manifested in the flesh, that God should be made our very flesh; but
also as it reflects, as it returns to us, and brings us back for our flesh his
Spirit: That Is a Mystery, even Marriage, wherein of two is made una Caro, one
flesh; but this is more, when we are joined to Christ per eundem, by one and
the same Spirit. The Fathers are bold and industrious in the mintage of new
words to express the nearness of God and man in Christ's Incarnation, by
Corporation, Illumination, Adunation, Contemperation. But what man or Angel
knows a word large and entire enough, and high enough to title that Union by
wherein the Apostle says, Man joined to the Lord is one Spirit, and changed
into the same Image from Glory to Glory? This is that nuptial mentioned in Hos.
2.18. and rementioned in the Gospels; and all Solomon's song, and David's Psalm
45. are Epithalamions, wholly spent in Celebration of this Solemnity. It was an
happy Contract, the Union of great Britain, when in the worlds Temple two
Kingdoms were the wedded pair; a gracious King was Priest, and the Sea like a
marriage-ring encircling both. That was the way (had it held) for the education
of both Realms to a Grandeur and Convalescence. And even in story of time past
it is a pleasant, a delightsom Consideration, to behold an Infant-state rise to
maturity, as in Rome or Venice. But will you put out the eyes of all History,
or Poetry and dis-illustre all the Senate, and becloud all the Clarissimo's of
all mankind? Look then upon God in his Son Christ Jesus, founding a most noble
Incorporation, whereof all bodies Politic are but weak representations.
Excellent things are spoken of thee, thou City of God. And we know how large
that holy Father Augustine is in delivery of those excellent things in his
Civitate Dei, whereof Christ is the supreme Head. The parts of this society,
Kings and Priests venerable, and sacred persons in all antiquity; and where
other bodies want a soul, the Ligament and soul of this body is the holy Ghost.
For by one Spirit are we baptized into one body, and all made to drink into one
Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. So that in this Center all meet, Gods possession, the Saints
privilege; and in that, these are become words all of one signification, His
Chosen, His Holy, His own, His Royal, His Peculiar People.

Nor can this choose but prove a pure refined golden Consolation indeed, when we
find the proof in Gods own Testament, that Jesus is not only the Mine wherein
all the Treasures of Wisdom are hid, but Jesus is the pure and grand golden
Ingot of all the Comforts contained in holy Scriptures: out of which Ingot are
coined so many Medals, some with Serpents and Anchors, and some with Lions, and
Lilies, and Doves, and Crowns, and Roses, and Carduus Benedictus too, good for
Tremor cordis, and all with the Effigies of that Cross whereon our joys
depend, and wherein is found that (...) of the Apostle, the exceeding riches
proclaimed and offered to sail by the Possessor himself, saying, Buy of me fine
Gold; for fine Gold is he to the worlds brasse-farthings, or as the Sun let in
on stars, or seas on pools, which overrun, chase away, engulph and strike out
their petite drops and sparkles. Shall we hope to reach it in a big comparison,
and so comprehend that which is incomprehensible, and cannot enter into the
heart of man to conceive? What Speaker can search out words, fit for the
unsearchable riches of Christ? As Sopor Domini is the language of the Holy
Ghost for the deepest sleep, and Tuba Domini a superlative for the loudest
found, and Gandium Domini to express the very joy of Heaven: so the Apostles,
Gaudete in Domino, even here in the Kingdom of Grace, implies the best and
purest consolation. It Is with an Emphasis, that if there be any consolation in
Christ, there is an (...) in the joy as well as in the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, my Lord and my God, with an Abfit too, God for did I should
profane or mix this joy with any thing else; I shall not need; for this is
enough to make St. Paul overflow exceedingly, to abound with all joy; and St.
Peter to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. This is comfort enough for
every Christian, to diminish, and bedwarf, and dis-illustre all those
glimmerings and Glowworms, all those gleanings in risled fields: and all that
we are fain to feign to find in forelorn Ariadnes, that is, other men's leavings
of Wealth, and Beauty, and Wit, and Honor, which are but empty Rinds, and
Husks, and widowed shells, and shoos thrown away in contempt and weariness. And
yet this Crown of Consolation here set on our souls in Grace, is topt, and
phan'd, and crowned again. This Consummation has another Consummation yet
above it. The Emperor that keeps his hungry Eagle still, (poor man) when the
Romish Harpyes have devoured his dainties, is glad after two duller Crowns to
take a third of Gold which his holiness (forsooth) puts on and off at pleasure.
But the Christian faith which makes us Kings in Jesus blood, and embalms us
with his oil of gladness, assures us of a tripled Comfort, when on those Crowns
of hope and joy below, the holy of Holies who will invest us with a Light yet
inaccessible, will also place another Crown of Glory inaccessible. And so in
the allusion, the contemplation of those joys that go before the entrance into
our Masters Joy, and those that follow after in fruition, will easily stir and
fire our souls to cry or sing (...) to this son of David, Blessed be he that
comes thus in the name of the Lord, and is the Lord that comes thus from the
Father and God Totius, of all consolation, anointed to his great Office and
Design of binding up the broken hearted, by the Holy Ghost the Comforter, Luke
1. and is himself by way of Excellency styled the consolation of Israel. And
thus this first glad privilege of Gods fearful and faithful servant, is
refined and wrought up to perfection from this Mine in Malachy the last of the
Prophets, to that Mine of St. John the last and liveliest of the Evangelists;
or rather that Mine of our Lords own discovery in John 17.10. Thine they are,
and all mine are thine; and thine are mine. Mine, But who is he? All our
comfort even now was complicated and conserved in Dominus Exercituum. And is he
so? That style indeed wears out in the New Testament: but is abundantly
recompensed in (...) The only Potentate, the Lord of Life and Glory. Most of
all in that name above all names, which all tongues must confess, and at which
all knees should bow, that sweet and powerful, that gracious and glorious Name
of Jesus a Savior, and able to save to the utmost, in whom all fullness dwells,
and in whose hand is all power in heaven and earth. And had not their eyes been
held down, and the Jews hearts vaild over, they would have perceived and
received him for the true Messiah in this very notion and nature of a Lord of
Hosts: For in him were all their Moses's and Joshuales, all their Captains and
Saviors, their Baraks and Gideons, and Sampsons and David's, and Macchabees,
all revived and restored to the world. But they knew not the manner of their
King (and to mistake a King, may be a world of misery) nor of his Kingdom, nor
the force of his Artillery in the dreadful Canon and Ordinance of his Word and
Spirit; Nor that the Scepter of his new Law should prove the Iron Rod to break
and subdue both men and Devils. They considered not his stupendous Miracles,
proving him the Lord of Hosts, in commanding over the whole frame of Heaven and
Earth, and Seas, and all the host of them, and bowing whole created nature to
his obedience; To rebuke tempestuous winds and roaring waves, as a Nurse her
child with Peace and be still: nay, suspend and silence, and deprive Devils of
their possessions with a word. To lay his command on Death it self, and force
him to let go his hold after four days seizure in the grave. Will Jews or
Jewish hearts attend my voice, that would not hear the thunder of those
Miracles! But for support of the true Catholic faith, and for the consummation
of all our consolation, King and people, Christ Jesus is become our Dominus
Exercituum; Christo auspice regno, and regnabo too: and his bloody Cross a
braver badge then that of Castor and Pollux. This is polleus lux ipsa. For is
it not he alone destroys our raging lusts and nails them to his cross? and he
alone that against a world of opposition, and all the opposition of this evil
world, cries to his host, be of good comfort, I have overcome the world, He
alone that came to dissolve and destroy the works the strong holds of Satan,
and to vanquish powers and Principalities in high places, that had the vantage
ground over us; He that breaks in on death and sin and hell; and like a
Conqueror in the triumphal Chariot of his Cross made a show of them openly, and
as Triumphers used to do, when he ascended up on high and led captivity
captive, he gave gifts unto men. But yet more to prove him the Lord of Hosts,
by being more then that name can imply: for this Name is observed to be too
young for the ancient of Days: that is, a Name taken up since and from the
Creation. A Name indeed that draws and scatters on us all we can look for from
our Maker and Preserver. But all his powers and mercies are resolved and melted
into this Name of Christ Jesus. Without Christ, without God (says the Apostle)
in the world, we are but mere pieces of the mass, nay far worse is our
condition: born children of wrath, and in state of enemies; and so the Lord of
Hosts is against us, and all the hosts of Heaven and spirits of Hell, and all
the creatures, and our selves against our selves. And when there was no Name
under heaven to save and deliver us from present and wrath to come, then came
this Prince of peace, and became our Peace; pledged himself for us, gave his
life a Ransom, so making peace: So prevailing over the Lord of Hosts, binding
his Almighty hands, and God content to accept terms of peace; may we not say
so! Came not that Voice from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, in quo acquiesco,
in whom I am at peace with all the world. If all this prove him not a Lord of
Hosts, he will one day to the further consolation of all that love his
appearing, appear to the consternation of all his Despisers, in flaming fire to
render vengeance. And as in the days of his flesh then unglorified, and
compast about with all man's infirmities, he could have been encompast with more
then twelve Legions of Angels; so then he will meet those two Hosts, those
droves and flocks of sheep and goats with another Army of his Saints and Angels
from Heaven, with whom we shall be caught up to meet that Lord in the air, and
so shall be ever with the Lord.

If we desire yet higher to raise this Crown of consummate consolation in
Christ, I will come to Visions and Revelations. I will open that of St. Steven,
Acts 7.56. I see heaven opened, and the son of man set on the right hand of
God, which place being further opened by St. John, makes us see him on a Throne
of Glory, covered with light as with a garment, under his feet Deaths pale head
and a red Dragon, and all his enemies: about him stand the Armies of his
Angels, and of mankind a greater number then any man can number, of all Nations
and Languages; On his thigh that Name written, Rex Regum: and Dominus
Dominorum; The Elders casting down their Crowns adore him that has many Crowns
upon his head. And we may safely add this Title to those Crowns of Dominus
Exercituum, and rejoice to think how those Crowns are encinctur'd and enchas'd
with precious stones for the twelve Tribes of Israel, and with manifold unions
of God and man, of grace and glory, for the consolation of the Gentiles also
thereby fully made perfect, and partakers of the divine Nature, and all these
Unions contracted in the blood red shining Summit of his cross, by the power
whereof that Throne and Robe, and all those Crowns are become ours: and we
become one with him in an union most high and holy, even as he and his Father
are one; and higher we need not, we cannot go, nor well so high; for that it
should be thus we scarce dare ask; but how it should be thus, is above all that
we are able to ask or think. Thus far the first privilege of Gods servants in
being his Peculiar; The second now should follow of being his Jewels, with the
useful application of them both, together with the Assignation of those
several Days wherein these Jewels are to be made up: all which I believe will
make up a second and a third Exercise. For this time I proceed no further, but
to beg the Blessing of God upon what we now have heard.

P.R. S.D.G.

THE SECOND SERMON. September, 1643.
MALAC. 3.17. And they shall be mine, said the Lord of Hosts, in that day when
I make up my Jewels.
THE Word of God (says St Paul,) is not bound, nor we that preach it, bound to
Formalities and courtly Decencies, or much to care, whether our Hearers be in
good humor or no; it is true; nor are we to be Time-servers, (as we have been
charged) nor Men-pleasers in any ill sense: yet since we are at liberty
throughout the Garden of the Scripture, to cull a Posie, such as seems best to
us, affording us a pleasure, why may we not be thought therein also to preserve
our just Devotion to God, together with an intention for the complacency of
good men too? For which cause I blush not to acknowledge my respective choice,
or rather my recollection of this Text, (whereon I have preached in royal
audience before) because though it look back upon vicious times, and most
ungodly men, yet it will allow us for the present a Prospect (as I verily
belive) upon some choice spirits, and Gods gracious servants (yet by his
Reserve and special Mercy left alive) while they are yet alive, and I alive to
apply this Scripture to them in special, which in general suits with the
condition of this time.

As men the sons of Time, so Times themselves have their Parallels. As the days
of Noah were, (says our Savior,) Mat. 24. so shall also the coming of the son
of man be; eating, drinking, marrying, till the day that Noah entered into the
Ark, and knew not till the flood came, and took them all away; so it shall be
in the last times, and so it is. And we have no livelier proof that these are
the last times, then such our usages, and in them such our security. The
Scripture foretells a soul and dangerous Sea of corruption that should prove
rough, and swell, run high, and the waves thereof rage horribly toward the end
of the world; when men should be more then imbrutished, void of natural
affection, (...), implacable, traitorous, heady, high minded, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, pretending the Spirit, but being sensual,
and bringing in damnable Heresies, having a show of godliness, but denying the
power thereof, pretending to Piety, and Law, and Order, but reviling Dignities
which God has ordained; with Balaam greedily loving the wages of
unrighteousness, and perishing in the contradiction of Core. But alas! We have
undone both Prophecy and Description, put down both History and Poetry,
Examples and Imagination too; even those Giants before the flood are now not
monstrous, for we have defiled and made the earth more corrupt, filled it with
a bloodier cruelty and violence, provoking the holy one of heaven to hurl down
hills of miseries on our heads and hearts, and to let in Torrents of his fierce
wrath mingled wiih Christian blood in every street, and a surrounding universal
Scourge and Deluge to overwhelm three whole flourishing Kingdoms at once, from
end to end, and bury them in endless desolation; while senseless sinners we
seem to contemn the Power of Gods wrath, by letting loose the reins to all
licenciousness, when he is pouring down the vials of his anger, and (tumbling
delightfully in our own) tear up the wounds of our Savior, betrampling the
sacred Blood that redeemed us, and counting the blood of his Covenant (a
Covenant of Mercy and Peace) an unholy thing, crucifying again to our selves
the Lord of Life and Glory, and making a mock of him, by grieving, quenching
and doing despite to the Spirit of his Grace: So that our condition is worse
then of this people here, in this Prophet, though in very many things
resembling us; for in the first chapter we read of their Unkindness,
Irreligiousness, Profaness, snuffing at the Table of the Lord, and holding it
contemptible. In the second we find their Idolatry, Adultery, Infidelity. In
this third Sorcery, false Swearing, Oppression, Sacrilege; and at last it
breaks into open rebellion and defiance of God, voting down all divine service,
and decreeing it vain, and no profit to walk longer in his Ordinances; and then
this was a brave time (it must needs be so) for proud and wicked people which
were lift up like a skum over the face of clear and wholesome waters; only such
(says our Prophet) were built to Wealth and Honor. And yet for all this
sorrow, there is a comfort comes up close at the sixteenth verse, of use and
advantage now for us. Gods people still remained, though secret, not altogether
silent; they spoke one to another, admonished, exhorted, comforted one another
mutually; and these their Colloquies and Consultations were frequent and
succesfull. God came into their Assembly, sat President in this Council; and a
book of Remembrance was written before him for all them that ^eared before him,
and thought upon his name; and after all comes out his gracious Proclamation of
Peace and Love. The Patent under seal, Test mei^so, -- and they shall be mine
(says the Lord of Hosts) in that day when I make up my Jewels.

Which words afford a double privilege of Gods servants (be the times what
they will) in reference to their Owner described by his high and stately style
of Dominus Exercituum; First, His own they are, his peculiar. Secondly,
Esteemed of him at a high rate; for they are his Jewels. There is a third part,
The day or time set for the making up of these Jewels, admitting a fourfold
Interpretation. 1. Either the day of punishing the ungodly, or 2. The day of
powerful preaching the Word. 3. The day of death; and 4. The last day, the day
of final Judgment. In all these days God will manifest his Mercy and his
Power, (both enwrapt in Dominus exercituum here) and then the Specification,
the Verification, the real and actual spreading of both in this that God in his
holiness has spoken it; It shall certainly be so; for so says the Lord of
Hosts. The first privilege is laid down in this plain conclusion, They that in
a Deluge of corruption are yet emergent, and bear up against the stream: they
that in desperate and dissolute times dare yet prove that they fear this Lord
of Hosts, and think upon his name, they are Gods own, his peculiar. For so
first the Rabbis interpret this word, Segullah, by peculium, peculiare,
proprium, speciale, praecipuum, singular, God has a propriety, a specialty in
them. But I meddle no further with that first privilege; it has been the
subject of a Sermon already: pass we then to the second privilege;

Which is, That Gods fearful and faithful servants are his choice and
reserved Rarities. He is the great Preserver of men, but for his own he has a
special Reserve or Cabinet to lay them by themselves: at lest their state and
condition is well expressed in the nature and worth of Jewels. For this same word
is by the same Rabbis also rendered in those term of Argentum, Aurum, Lapides
preciosi in Thesauro, Thesaurus dilectus, and res desider abilis. And therefore
the Geneva translating a flock, are far short of this words Energie, which we
find. but in two places of Scripture beside, and both forcible to our present
purpose. God uses it, and chooses it in Exedus 19.5. for the decoring of his
own people, the house of Israel, who there he promises on their obedience shall
be his chief treasure. And then David (with more advantage to us still) uses is
in 1 Chronicles. 29.3. to express some reserved choice Jewels which he dedicated and
destined to the decoring of the Temple, the house he intended and prepared to
build for the Lord. Now those precious stones we call by the name of Jewels,
are a kind of natural glass, made out of a subtle mixture of earth and water,
says Albertus. Others conceive them to be but purer Metals, as Plato imagined
the Adamant a further excoction out of Gold. Another describes them to be a
kind of Light daintily confined to a terrestrial thickness; but however sramed
by his divine hand, who works all in all things; mention we find of their use
and esteem even near the beginning, in Job 28. mention of the Onyx, Saphir,
Topaz; describing paradise, and naming Havilath, Moses adds there is Bdellium,
and the Onyx stone. The Israelitts borow Jewels of the Egyptians, and 2 Samuel
12.30. David takes the King of Rabbaths Crown of a Talent weight, set with
preciovs stones: And mention again we find of precious stones brought by the
Queen of Sheba and by Solomon's Navy, 1 Reg. 10. And that of the Prophet shows
an ordinary use of them. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her
Jewels? But above all other, two places of Scripture, the 28. of Exodus, and
the 21 of the Revelation; In the first is Aarons Breast Plate, with twelve
precious stones figuring the twelve Tribes: And in the other, the new
Jerusalem, the City of God with her foundation on twelve precious stones,
shaddowing out the twelve Apostles, both conferring much strength to this
Assertion.

5. To descend then to some (but few) particulars in this Resemblance, look
first how the stone or Jewel depends not on the Merchants Report or mad
credulity of the vulgar: their Honor, and Esteem, and Approbation is from a
skillful Lapidary, an exact Workman, a cunning and professed Jeweller indeed: So
the Apostle sleights the approof of common breath: I pass not to be judged by
you; not he that commends himself to others, or whom others, but whom God
commends. So it is here a comfort drawn from the Mine, You shall be Mine (says
the Lord of hosts.) It Is I lay claim that will justify you; Who shall lay any
thing to the charge, not of man's but of Gods Elect? Let the base world put you
to the touch and trial; I will avouch and warrant you sound and good amidst an
heap of dross and counterfeits: And hence that difference noted by our Savior,
That which is vile among men, is highty esteemed of God: and contrary, Men
devise to put him by whom God will exalt, Psalm 62.4. And no wonder if a
gracious servant of God see himself so used: God himself was abused so. The
stone which the Builders refused, threw by among the rubbish, that God made
(says St. Peter) elect and precious, and set him right in his own place again,
the Chief, the Headstone of the Corner, where both walls meet to support both
Church and State. The world may guild, enamel and perfume great ones, and
proceed in prodigious flattery, till it come to Suffumigations and Altars, as
we read of some both Heathen and Christian; and yet these Deifications, and
these Canonizations done to such as are in Gods sight abominable. Again it may
and often does account such as dross as have his Image and Superscription, such
as are encircled with this Motto here, of Faciam eos in Gemmas, -- In that day
when I make up my jewels. The world will say to a righteous man, if nor rich,
nor potent, sit here at my footstool: but God that sees the heart, and beholds
the radiance of his wedding Garment, and how clear it sits upon his soul, will
say as in the Gospel, Friend, sit up higher. The world casts dust and obscurity
upon them that are good; But God makes that true of them which is spoken of
Brutus and Cassius in the funerals of Junia, -- Eo ipso praefulgebant quod non
visebantur. The world cries up the Noble, the Rich, the Wise; God cries them
down as fast, Not many wise, not many noble, not many mighty are called. The
world proceeds in mischief, and envy, and madness against honest men, as the
Church of Rome deals with ingenuous Writers. Dare he speak full Truth, and so
disgrace her Impostures? Away with him, a Spung and a Deleatur shall bedash
him, and extinguish him. But God the true Corrector of the press, Judex and
Vindex, upon a Review, comes, and commands with his powerful Inseratur, and
re-invests with former honor, re-instates, and re-inthrones his servants, and
gives them just cause to rejoice and say, This is the Lords doing, and it is
marvailous in our eyes: Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be
the Glory.

Secondly, Jewels by reason of Gods working them out of the rough and first
Quarrie. So dealt he with his dearest Jewel that lay from all Eternity in the
bosom of his Father, the brightness of his Glory, and the engraven form of his
Person, Heb. 1. in whom though there was no sin to work out, yet was in his
humane nature, cut from the same quarrie; clouded with afflictiont, and
compassed about with all man's infirmities; in his birth Daniels stone cut forth
without hands, Dan. 2.34. and in his death Zacharies stone graven, and cut full
of eyes all over, Zach. 3.9. Not to mention those main Furnaces of affliction,
whereby he was consecrate and polisht for us. And yet as in the midst of all,
to give a taste of his Divinity, God transfigur'd him on the Mountain, made him
shine as the Sun in his strength: so when his time was fully come, the day that
this Jewel must be made up, First, his Body is glorified on earth, and then
assumed into Heaven, and a place for this precious Gem at his own right Hand,
above Principalities and Powers, and a Name given him above all names. And now
that blessed Face wherein the Jews saw no beauty, yet was fairer then the sons
of men, which they defiled and spit upon, is adored by Seraphims, and both
Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of his Glory. Now God observes the
self-same method in all the rest; finds them out among the refuse of the world,
amongst flocks and herds of Nations; from the first rude quarrie of the Chaos,
from utter vacuity and nothing, assembles their attoms and smallest dust:
breaths in a lively spirit, exalts, purifies it, grafts on it Knowledge, Faith,
Love, Holiness; and having begun a good work of Grace, never leaves it till he
bring it to perfection, filing away their dross, and grinding out their grains
and Ices, and clouds of corruption, till he has refined them to a brightness;
as in St. Paul a rough stony-hearted persecutor, wrought by certain scales and
barks pulled away, to become a chosen vessel to bear his name among the
Gentiles, Act 9. A bright star on earth, and now a glorious Saint in Heaven.

3. Jewels then thirdly they are for that care and love which God affords them:
men prize their Jewels, Reserve them curiously, take a glory and perplacency in
possessing and wearing them. So God having bought them at a price inestimable,
purchased not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the blood
of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot; then he sets his
heart upon them: all his delight is in the Saints that excel. Those he tenders
as the Apple of his eye, sets them as Josiah for a seal and a Signet on his
right hand; hides them under the shadow of his wings; and so also God glories
in them, and holds them out to the amazement and confusion of the world of
gross and earthly souls, which are as foils to their perfections, and commands
them to do him grace, and to be an Ornament to him. Let your light shine, etc.

Again. The Comparison would hold (for the task is easy to pursue an Allegory)
for Rarity; Rari quippe boni -- apparent rari in gurgite Vasto, in a sea of
froth and foam: and for the place, and manner of breeding and growth. But I
forsake the rest, and choose to insist only on Properties, respecting which
Righteous men are justly termed Jewels, and chiefly two; of clearness and
luster first, and then of firmness and solidity, which are the Vrim and Thummim
of a Christian.

1. In the first precious stones excel, being compact of the finest Atoms; and
this holds well: for as while we admire the pure Orient Pearls, the radiant and
sparkling Carbuncle, the serene bright Saphir, the green Emerald and the like,
we may raise our contemplation to the beauty and clearness of the stars and
Sun, and so ascend to him that struck light out of darkness at the first, that
dwells in perfect Beauty, and in light inaccessible, and covers himself with
Light as with a garment: so in a spiritual manner that Light of Grace in his
servants, attracts others also to behold in them, Him, who is Pater Luminum,
the Father of all Illuminations; and so that fair and pure soul which gives
Light in the darkness of the Body, and night of Ignorance, returns with
advantage to him that gave it, with the gain of other souls won by beholding
their chaste and illustrious conversation. They tell of Diamonds belonging to
some of the house of Luxembourge (and Theophrastus has it of other stones)
propagating their Species, by turning first the circumstant air into water, and
then contracting that water into a more earthy substance like themselves. But
it is true of these precious and living stones, who born of Gods immortal seed,
by a new Light shot from Heaven, do likewise in Reflection, and by aggregation,
assimilation, and an ardent sympathetical combination and communion, work
others to the same conformity of the godly Nature, inspire, illumine, and
propagate others with a kind of Divine Generation. And as that Godlike
creature, the child of Heaven, and Gods first born, Light, when delivered from
the womb and jaws of Darkness, is able to deliver over it self without ceasing,
without Annibilation, Fraction o^ Diminution; and as Love in moral minds, and
true Charity in Celestial souls, not leaving its own habitation, will walk the
round to those spirits which are capable of its Society; And as God the Son is
of the Father, God of God, and Light of Light, and Love of Love (For God is
Love as he is Light) so are his Regenerate and Adopted children also, all from
him, and one enlightened from another.

Secondly, Solidity, firmness, constancy; the Christians is a standing Credo,
(it was wont to be so) Lord I believe, without distrust whether my
understanding comprehend it or no: without curiosity to be further confirmed by
Miracles; Lastly, Credo Audacter, without dissembling or fear to acknowledge
it. This is stere (...) -- in Col. 2.2. that firm and full assurance of Faith,
I mean in Resolution not to alter or shrink, as was in courageous Joshuah -- I
will serve the Lord; and hearty David, that endured much and long, yet he
recedes not from his Vow: no, I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed; And
Job, though he dyed for it, yet it should prove no this way dissolution. And for
this cause God allows the Name, calls it the most precious faith of his Elect,
and chides those Recreants that Recoil so easily -- O ye of little faith; Those
are no right Jewels of his, they are but Glowworms and Hypocrites, or as glass
and Sophisticate shells, and vicious stones, which have an inconstant and
languishing shine, or whose splendour is only in a morning, or under a clear
sky, and lasts not in gusts and storms of persecution, or which in age decrease
in Grace and Virtues, and come to lose their abilities: No, it is said of Gods
Palms and Cedars that they flourish on, and bring forth more fruit in their
age: And for this firmness, even moral men have made strange approaches, and
professed the conquest of it, resolved to retain their virtue and honor
untainted, maugre all the rage of bloody tyrants, and either allurements or
encombrances of a base and vicious world. How much more Christians to endure
the torture, the Rack, the fire, that which is the Crasis of all these, The
Inquisition; to despise that trial of cruel mockings, and resist even to blood,
and ready to lay down our lives, rather then betray or prevaricate and shuffle
in the cause and quarrel of Christ Jesus and his holy Church! As no sin shall
tear me from that Root of Gods Love: so I am persuaded, says the Apostle, no
affliction, Romans 8. (and he had good store) shall slacken my hold upon this
Rock, shall severe me from that love of God which is in Christ Jesus my Lord.

Other Properties they ascribe to precious stones, and some such as are
marvailous. The Jasper (says Pliny) was wont to be worn in all the Oriental
Regions as an Amulet against poison, and is of virtue to expel noisome dreams
and Visions, to clear the eyes, and assists against all adversity. So the
Saphir in a Ring or Amulet contributes toward all prosperity, increases
Devotion, and helps against Ire, Envy, Sadness; The Sardonix against Pride; The
Chrysolite against pusillanimity, all melancholy fears and follies: The Turkese
they say deliver; from imminent dangers, and discovers them when they are near;
The Topaze from frenzy and sudden death; The Chrysoprase availes against
covetousness, as the Beril is a hater of idleness; Finally (for I may not
reckon all) the Diamond for frienship; styled therefore the stone of
Reconciliation. The Hyacinth is powerful to procure cheerfulness, and to
preserve from thunder and lightning, and all diseases. The Amethist good
against surfets and drunkenness, and advances men to the favor of Kings.
Others are reported virtuous, (and those I am use you could wish me) to help a
man to eloquence, and to make him quick of dispatch. But now I confess I allow
not this for a point of Divinity, nor put it to you as a piece of good History,
for in the stories and traditions of these things, I doubt not but there is a
mass and mixture of praestigious vanity and untruth; yet am not I of their mind
utterly, that think all Jewels v^id of all efficacy; for doubtless as we
believe the influences of stars, and virtues of medicinal herbs and Roots, so
it is not disagreeable to Reason, that in these glorious creatures the Creator
may have impressed (beside their luster) some other secret testimonies of his
excellent power, which not only for that God vouchsafes here by them to
describe the excellency of his Saints, and calls his own blessed and beloved
son by that Name of a precions stone, but also I am the apter to believe by
reason of those two places of Scripture which I named before. The 28 of Exodus,
and the 21 of the Revelation, to which again I reser your reconsiderations.

Allowing then a possibility for many of these Properties in precious stones,
we may reduce all to two Specialties. 1. They do encourage to good. 2. And
preservefrom evil, both of sin and punishment; and herein however qualified in
themselves, they may surely be of good use for us to make an apt resemblance,
and to express the condition of righteous souls: such servants of God as fear
him and think upon his name. These are Jewels to the world in example, stirring
and provoking others to emulation: shining in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation: And these are they that like Lot in Sodom restrain the
vengeance, and overwhelming storms of fire from Heaven upon a world of ungodly
wretches. These are those blameless souls, who when Achitophel and Haman are
hanged up with all their rotten policies and ragioni d^^stato, shall shine,
and whose light God will make to break out as the morning, and to rise in
obscurity, and their darkness to be as the noon day, and then they shall be
called (according to their qualities) the Repairers of the breach, and
Restorers of the paths to dwell in, Isay 58.12. But the cunning Statesman
laughs at this, and shakes his head to think that honesty or Religion should
prescribe to such Grandees, and Superintendents of fine but unrighteous Policy;
That the Bible, or the Rules, or the grace indeed derived from thence, should
afford a way of enabling men in discharge of that Duty which is seen in
Governments. Lucian he likes, but Machiavel admires; those are his Scriptures.
Yet let such a man take the experimental proof of this from secular story.
Seneca the Jewel of Neroes youth, and a braver Defense and Ornament then that
so famous Jasper of his, wherein he was pourtrai'd, armed completely; but his
Armor of proof was Seneca, preserving him five whole years in a form of
Regiment equal to the best of his Predecessors. But his Jewel once thrown away,
he fell to all excess of wickedness. Or if a Scripture-story may pass, let him
look on that 2 Chronicles. 24. it may serve abundantly for all Examples. Joas a young
King, yet does right in the sight of the Lord, so long as his Jewel lived; the
Text is plain, all the days of Jehojada the Priest, ver. 2. Collections for
repair of Gods House, Oblations and Sacrifices renewed; But when this Jewel was
called for back to Heaven to be treasured there at ver. 17. come the Princes of
Judah (no worse) and they crouch and make obeisance to the King; for what? for
a change of Religion, and how succeeds it? as they could wish. For the King
hearkened to them, and so they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers,
and served groves and Idols. And as in States and Commonwealths, so in Cities,
and Towns, and private Families Gods servants in the due preservation and
practice of Piety and Goodness are as means of encouragement to others; so
causes also of Restraint from evil of sin, many sins of swearing, whoring,
drunkenness, and consequently preventers of Gods judgments for such sins. As
Moses interposed himself as a precious Jewel of excellent virtue in his prayer:
and Aaron with his fire betwixt the living and the dead, and caused the
Destruction to stop there. So no question while just men live, the whole
Country, Town, Family is the better blessed; and when they dye, God takes them
away from the evil to come.

So far the bodily part of the Sermon in the explication of this second
privilege of Gods servants, They are his Jewels. Now to infuse a soul by
breaking this speculation into practice, into such uses as I account the very
life of preaching; For our first useful extraction then is to teach us wherein
consists true Honor, Joy, Nobility, Blessedness. It Is not in the endowments of
Nature, not in thy large capacity, or faithful memory, swift apprehension, thy
penetration of judgment or facility of Elocution, not in thy height or depth
of learning; no, nor in the exercise of moral virtue, thy valor or thy bounty,
though these are Ornaments I wish on all my friends: much less is it in thy
purse, or clothes, or titles. Not though thou were a Joseph or a Mordecay; to
feed in Gold, be dressed in Purple, sit next the King, and be called his cousin,
which are reckoned in Esdras for the prime favors of an earthly Monarch; for
alas, all these things may thou have, and yet be but a mere worldling, and
after devolve to a worse master. Kings may give their favorites, and Popes
bequeath their darlings and their Nephues earth and air, Title and Territory,
and make them Lords of so many Parks, Manors, Honors, Towns, Counties: Yet if
but one victorious Army of boys or Pesants chance to overrun a Kingdom with
noise of weapons, as the Prophet describes it, and rolling of garments in
blood, what then become; of all their glory, their Pattents and painted wax? If
then you seek for right enobling, and to be truly honorable, or if you would be
men of good estates indeed, and enjoy certainties and perpetuities, sludy to be
in the favor and protection of the Lord of Hosts; for then however it go for
this world, you shall be sure of Eternal blessedness in another, at that day
when he shall make up his Jewels.

Secondly, a contrary use for all those wretched souls as pride themselves in
being none of Gods Elect, that mock at mention of Grace and Godliness, whose
language is fully recorded in the second of Wisdim, and their Posterity to this
day praise their saying, and continue the same frontless impudence. A Race of
impious scorners, Solomon's fools, imagining it the utmost of disgrace that can
be stuck upon them, to be called or counted Religious, or Lovers of God, a
profession fit for a crew of sullen melancholy simpletons. Mean time in what a
fearful condition do these Jewels of the Devil live I and glory in their shame
and perdition! for let me speak to some one roaring Leader of this band, and
say, who has bewitched thee into this Delusion? It may indeed advance thee to
some friend ships and full tables, that thou art a full swearer, a curious
drunkard, or an Eloquent Historian of those sins wherewith thy body bewrayes
thy youth to have abounded and yet thou art content to belie thy self in the
Relation; and being thus far from remorse, thus given over to a Reprobate mind,
thou art not able to conceive the Apostle, where he tells thee, they are
without hope that are without God, and that it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands; what is it to fall out of the hands of the living God? and so that
he which made thy soul, filled it with noble faculties, offers it Grace, and
Holiness, and Purification, should be forced by thy wilful rejection of Grace
and Mercy to give over his work, to cast thee off for ever, that thy soul
should contract so much dross and defilement; thy works of darkness so
extinguish all impressions of Light and Beauty, as thy Creator should not, I am
sure will not own thee, but say to thy everlasting horror and astonishment,
Depart from me, I know no such workers and boasters of iniquity.

Thirdly to try our selves; Do thou believe that God esteems thee as a
Jewel, purchased by Jesus blood, and that he sets his heart upon thee? O take
heed this be not vanity and mad presumption! Reflect on what we said last of
those properties inherent or ascribed to precions stones, and show me first thy
faith by thy works: What are the virtues and precious operations of thy faith
and profession? If thou be of a refined and sanctified nature, thou will be
a grace and an honor to thy God; And where is that thy love to his name, thy
zeal to his glory? and then is thy life operative upon others, by thy example
won to goodness; Art thou precisely careful and curious to preserve others,
specially those within thy charge from Ignorance, Idleness, Profaneness,
Wantonness, Bribery, Drunkenness? Or on the contrary, Is thy manner of
conversing with men scandalous and ignoble, sinful and shameful? O remember
then, however thou may have a name to live, thou art but dead, though thou
seem pure in thy own eyes, or the applause of Parasites; yet those eyes truly
enlightened, would see thy own deformity, that thou art yet in thy sins, and not
cleansed from thy wickedness; yet in thy pure, that is, thy impure naturals,
and far from being any Partaker of the divine Nature. Consider then our selves
by those two property, especially, Solidity and Clearness. First, Are we firm
and sound, no counterfeits, constant in the practice as well as profession of
Christ? Never worse times then these of late, but never better times for trial:
And if our hearts have been preserved unshaken, there is yet a Scrutiny and an
Inquest after our Holiness, and Purity, and Clearness; for God will have his
Jewels untainted. Our God is of pure and fiery eyes, and no impure thing must
tarry in his sight: Come out says God, and touch no unclean thing. and then
you shall be precious in my sight, be my Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6. In those
precious stones on Aarons breast plate was engraven Holiness to the Lord; and
Gods material Temple so beautified, tipically prescribes what those souls
should labor to be which God vouchsafes to make Temples for his holy Spirit.
Unclean spirits inhabit wicked souls, but the holy Ghost takes it in despite,
is grieved and quenched with our pollutions: and so for God the Father, the
Father of Lights, he will not endure the deeds of darkness under color of his
service. Pure religion and undefiled even before God the Father, is in a main
branch to keep a man's self unspotted of the world, James 1. ulc. i. e. escaping
the corruptions which are in the world through lusts. God is good to Israel, i.
e. to all that are of a clean heart. Indeed a Jewel of God, (...) has its
honor thence; vocatus fuit inclytus is the Paraphrase, so called for its
excelling Purity. And so lastly in reference to our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, that redeemed us to be a peculiar people to himself, and like
himself. Tiberius would not suffer the image of Augustus in Ring or Coin to be
born into any unseemly Place; so the adopted Sons and Servants of God will be
careful of disgracing the glorious Image of Christ Jesus, sealed and imprinted
in their souls, by admitting stains and blemishes; but be careful to abstain
from the least appearance of evil, and to purify themselves, even as he is
pure; because till then he is not thoroughly enamored of his spouse the Church,
till her neck be comely with rows of stones, till she be as the Rose and
Lilly, all fair, and no spot in her.

Yet all this is spoken, and must be taken with the Apostles Caution and
Restriction, not as if any had, or ever could attain perfection here: No, they
reckon a number of infirmities that the most precious Jewels are subject to.
There is Fumus and Vmbra, Nubeculae, Scabrities, Capillus, Sal, Punctum,
Scobes, Plumbago, Ferrugo, Rubigo, Vomica, which distain the purest stones; So
in the choicest of Gods people, in the rarest vessels of his honor prepared
unto Glory, remain those Relics, like Clouds and Ices. They have all their
grains, and spots, and Delict a quotidianae incursionis; and St. Austin
speaking of the Churches brightness and perfection, adds -- Ad hoc Electa, non
ut jam sit talis, sed ut ad hoc paretur. Their goodness may be true, because
unfeigned, but not altogether fair, save only by comparison. So has sin
poisoned the fountain, and such a physical and real Influence it has on all
man's habits and actions. And if the estate of the best and purest be no better,
what shall we boast our selves, who as they say of Northern Jewels, that they
are of a vicious softness, and will not endure the file? so certainly in
respect of the primitive Christians, when the Church was a true heaven upon
earth, we are as far from the brightness and miracles of their works, as from
their firm and miraculous faith. It remains that we encourage our selves, and
stir up the Grace of God that is in us; and though we cannot approve our selves
in a perfection to a perfect God, in whose eyes the moon shines not, (says
Job) and the stars are impure, yet if we be but vigilant to dress the paradise
of our souls, and keep out the Tempter, preserving our breast at a garden
enclosed, and a fountain sealed up; if we but earnestly contend for the faith
once delivered to the Saints, and labor to shake off the sin that cleaves so
fast unto our nature, if we run and press to the mark and strive to purify our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to grow up into full
holiness; such is then the manifold Grace, and Goodness, and tender mercy of
our gracious God, that he not only assists, but accepts of our weak endeavors
and approaches, so far as to impute the very Act of cleansing and obtaining
pardon too, to such a frail condition and contention. We do not, we dare not
say with Bellarmine de purg. lib. 2. cap. 10. it pleases Christ to join our
satisfactions with his own; but by our complying under the hand of God, and
intention and love to work according to the influx of divine Grace, we do by
his indulgence impetrate for those sins, for which we can never make
compensation. And as the Scripture enforms us of a cleansing by Redemption, and
Remission through the blood of our blessed Savior, and a second by application
of that blood, and a third by infused Regeneration; so there is a fourth of
mortifying and repressing of Concupiscence, subjecting to the Regiment of
Grace, and also in renouncing and expelling sin by the contrary Acts of virtue
and obedience of faith, and works of Light expelling Darkness; wherefore the
Apostle says, All that have this hope in them, have purged themselves even as
he is pure; And again, You have purified your souls by obedience to the Truth,
through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 2.22. Here then for a close, falls in fitly that
exhortation of Zophar in Jab 11.14. If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far
away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles; for then shall thou lift
up thy face without spot, yea, thou shall be steadfast, and not fear; thine age
shall be clearer then the noonday; thou shall shine forth, and be as the
morning: But all this is still upon that condition in verse 13. which is, If
thou prepare thy heart, and stretch forth thy hands toward him; which puts us
in mind of Invocation, and the use of Prayer for Gods assistance. For as it is
with Pearls according to the dew which it receives from Heaven in quantity and
quality, so does the shelfish breed her Pearl; and after the Measure, and
Shower, and Proportion, and Instilment of divine Grace, which our souls drink
in, we increase and grow in Purity and Sanctification, and therefore we should
put this into our hourly Letany, as the woman in the Gospel, John 4. Lord
evermore give us of this water: We know Lord in our selves there is no more
goodness then in the mass of mankind; in the rest of our fellow dust and
pebbles, but that thou by thy powerful Grace and holy Spirit are pleased to
drop, and pierce, and work upon us, and purge away our dross, and make us thy
blessed work-manship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works; we have nothing,
can have nothing from our mixture or specifique forms, or power of those
materials whereof we consist; and therefore to that end we may work. Do thou
first work thy Will on us, instruct, inform, inlighten us; cause thy face to
shine upon us, and so quicken our dull and earth-affecting souls, that they may
conceive an heavenly fire, and ardent affection, and intention, by working
together with thy Grace, and so causing us in the end to work out our own
salvation through Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

S. D. G.

THE THIRD SERMON. At Oatlands.
MALAC. 3.17. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when
I make up my Jewels.
THis Text at first and second opening afforded us a double privilege of Gods
people in reference to their owner, styled here by his high and stately Title
of Dominus Exercituum; First, They are his own, his peculiar; and then they are
his Jewels. In handling the first Privilege, I endeavored to discover a Mine
of Consolation even in this; and drew certain Materials from this Mine; namely,
the radiant mingle of Light and joy discernable in a Christians Profession,
Disposition, Conversation. Secondly, the Connection and Combination of Graces
and Mercies from God observable in this Text, pitched like a Tabernacle with
Curtains and Coverings, with Loops and taches of comfort coupled one to another
in Conjunctions. And thirdly, the Expansion and Dilatation thereof over all
Adversity: and then the conserve and Complication of all our comfort in our
great Protector, who is Dominus Exercituum, And lastly, I set on the Crown and
consummation of all Consolation in Christ Jesus. In our Discourse upon the
second privilege of Gods servants, in being his Jewels, was shown in what
respects especially this Metaphor is maintained; and in what qualities the
resemblance chiefly is most clear and useful to us. All which being done, that
which is left us now to do, is a Retrospect and a Prospect: to look back first
to the very Groundwork and Foundation whereon God lays this whole pile of
Comfort, which will be found to be nothing but his holy fear; and then we are
the more cheerfully to look and go forward with the end of our Text and the end
of our Faith, and Hope and Pravers; that in the work of God upon our bodies and
souls in those several days wherein he promises and will perform this making
up of his Jewels; which days are four. First, the Day of punishing the
ungodly. Secondly, the Day of powerful preaching the Word; then the Day of
Death; and last, the Day of the last Judgment,

Our first business (and it is indeed the main business) is to look to our
Foundation. Other foundation can no man lay, but what is laid, says St. Paul,
that is, Christ Jesus. That's most sure, but so is this also, that every one
which calls on the Name of the Lord must depart from iniquity: and this again
as sure as the reft, that without instruction and divine wisdom no man is able
to do that; and then the only way to that wisdom is This Foundation of Fear.
The fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom. And there God begins here, and
we must follow his method. Look back into the former words, and you shall find
the qualification of his servants. Those that he allows for his, and will one
day reserve as his jewels, are they that in perilous and corrupt times do fear
before him, and think upon his name: They, there is an Emphasis to be placed on
them. They, and none but they shall be mine. Three things we may touch in this
observation: First, God requires this qualification. Secondly, we are to
enquire after it in our selves. Thirdly, to comfort our selves in Gods Grace
and Mercy in this Appropriation, that both this Amulet is tied to a man's own
bosom, and also all consolation in God grounded upon his Fear.

First, God will have such as are capable of this Description here: no talk of
comfort without this qualification; when St. Peter says God is no accepter of
persons, Act. 10.34. that word is but a regarder of Faces, and refers only to
that distinction which he had newly learnt of God, to be no longer an
imbarment, a wall of partition, that is the difference of Jew and Gentile. A
Jew was now of no more advantage, no better accepted then any other nation: but
in the next verse, he assures himself, and his hearers, and us, and all: that
(...), He that fears God, is (...), That's the man, by way of Excellency. That
man that fears him, shall not need to fear his being accepted of him, and so
God is an accepter of persons: a curious Decipherer, an exact culler out of
such as shall be his servants, takes no man's word: Veneris commendat epistola
Marti, -- that's usual among men; a great man's or a great woman's letter; and we
esteem it of weight, that poor addition of a proper, of an handsome man: But God
sees not as man sees, says Samuel at the sight of many proper men; looks not
on the outward appearance; but what we balance least, is of most value with
him. Honesty, Religion, an heart endued with a holy fear of God. And then
though it is said his thoughts are not as man's thoughts, yet he tells us here,
that man only that finds God in his own heart, is a man after Gods own heart:
and he that so thinks upon Gods name, God will so think upon him, that he will
hear him, hearken to him, and set him down in the Book of his Remembrance, in
the former verse; and in this verse of my Text, he will own him, make him up
one day for his jewel, and spare him as a man spares his own son that serves
him. So that all this cry and trail of Blessings before, and in, and after the
text, depend upon, they belong to, and listen after that which is past, of Fear
and Devotion. For it were not fit that any person unqualified should have so
large, so excellent a portion as this, which embraces, which contains all that
the soul can receive here or hereafter; For God changes not their tenure, not
his very term of mine, at that last, and dreadful, and joyful day of Judgment.
But then it shall be made evident in the eyes and a truth enforced upon the
hearts of all such souffers at Religion as are mentioned in cap. 1. ver. 13.
The wisdom of all such profane contemners of Devotion, as say it is in vain to
serve God, and what profit, etc. at ver. 14. shall be blasted and confounded,
and then you shall discern, says the 18. ver. then you shall find a difference
betwixt the Righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God and him that
serves him not. But in mean time those glorious and these gracious Speranda and
fruenda are all incorporate in these Agenda here. God will have such a field
for his seed, such trees to graft upon, such Materials to raise his Temple.
Otherwise as no earthly Prince how gracious soever will hear and hearken to,
and put such a servant down in his book of Remembrance as shall apparently
forget his duty to him: so God has testified abundantly that on Isreal's
defection, he will neglect his own Property and Propriety, his own choice of
his chosen Israel, and they, even They shall be the generation of his wrath,
Ier 7.29. liable to that fierce wrath of that God who is a consuming fire, and
a generation of his wrath, fuel of his wrath, till their end here, and of his
endless wrath hereafter. As it is one way upon Repentance he blots out all
their sins from his Remembrance, so from his Remembrance, he blots out all the
Promises of this book upon their contempt; Forgets then what he had said of his
firstborn, and rebu^ing even kings for their sakes, his dear Child for whom
his bowels were troubled; the Signet on his hand, tender as the apple of his
eye; heirs by Promise; All, all evacuated; because all subconditione, of
applying their hearts to the Covenant: and that Covenant is here established and
renewed with us in these terms of fearing the Lord, and thinking on his Name.
This is our first particular in this Foundation of comfort to look to our
qualification, because God admits none but of this temper. The second by way of
application to every single breast, is to search and examine our selves whether
we have this blessed Fear, and holy thoughtfulness; and so can thence fairly
argue and prove our own being Gods own; our peculiar privilege of being Gods
peculiar. For first this may be known; for the Spirit of God is not in his
servants, spiritual men, as the foul spirit by possession or obsession in a
Pythonisse, or such as are his senseless utensils, and perceive not the power
that transports them, feel not the operation of their Mover: and thence it is
that we have so frequent Monitories, (which were vain and useless if it could
not be done) of prove your selves, try the spirits, know you not that Christ is
in you except ye be Reprobates? And indeed though a man will find, or fain to
find a Dictamny, a medicine made of wine, and noise and company to throw off
the Arrow; and some men think it probatum that there is (in this sense) a
sword-cure, that is, there is an easy way to heal up any wound that the sword
of the Spirit, the word of God in the Ministry of his servant can make; it is
but sleighting the Preacher, or allowing him for a blunt or bold fellow; and
the Sermon a dull or a dry piece; yet such a man knows he does but dissemble in
all this, and withold the truth of God in unrighteousness, bemisting and
darkening his own conscience, or else that Cassandra, that Prophet in his own
bosom, (if she might be heard) would make him wiser: teach him better and
clearer, then the most illustrious Divines, that is the best, that is the
plainest Teachers. For that incorrupt and incorruptible Judge is joined in
Commission with the Holy Ghost to lead us into all Truth; and to bring all
such, that is, all needful truth to our remembrance. The Spirit of God bears
witness, but it is with our spirit, and so enables us to pronounce sentence of
self-clearing, or self-condemnation. When therefore I dare knock at that privy
Chamber door, at that closet, and dare ask that question, Am I a Divine
Royalist, a true Deilift, a godly Christian? One of Gods peculiar? where then
is my fear, my thinking on his Name? Do I serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
before him with reverence? Do I indeed as one of his Royal Priesthood present
my body and soul, and all their children, all their offspring, the actions of
my hands, and the Imaginations of my heart and projects of my brain as a lively
sacrifice unto my God? Does my justice and honesty, my chastity and sobriety
(for even these may rise from corrupt springs) flow from this only
consideration? Is the bottom of my conceited happiness any better then a sick
man's dream, or mad man's boiling fancy? Do I indeed feel my confidence grounded
on a modest, a tender and reverential fear? Do the Larum, the remembrance of
this strike louder and faster in my breast then all Satan's temptations? with
meminto Philippe, Henrics, Garole; not that thou art but a man, but that thou
art no man's man, nor no woman's man, nor no devils man taken captive to do his
Will: This I must thus enquire, and this when I thus know, then I must resolve
with Joshua, Let others do what they will; I and my house, at the least, I and
my heart, and all that is within me will serve the Lord. Shall such a man as I
that profess Christ and his Gospel, shall I fly says one? Can I do this
wickedness, and sin against God? Shall I take the members of Christ, and make
them the members of an harlot? says another of Gods fearful and faithful
servants; God forbid: Do I profess to serve that Lord of Hosts, who keeps a
book of Remembrance, whose eye is ever zenith, and so pure, that no iniquity
can tarry in his sight, and shall I not pass the time of my dwelling here in
fear of his most blessed name? And do we, can we think then, nay do they, or
can they, (say what they will) can they indeed think in good earnest, can they
believe themselves to be Gods peculiar people, and such a Priesthood and
chosen People, as Christ shed his precious blood to purchase, who though they
dare not but fear men, and tremble at the sound of some great name on earth,
yet have no true fear of God before their eyes; such as dare curse, swear,
pollute and blaspheme that very name, in which both we and they profess to look
for both Protection and Salvation!

Thirdly, Our third and last particular in this observation about the
Groundwork of all our comforts bottomed on our fear of God, is the joy and
blessing the Grace and Mercy, and tender indulgence of God unto us in this
Appropriation, that God vouchsafes to tie this cordial joy fast to each
singlehearted Christian, and so admits him under this signet to be of his
cabinet Council in the inward Testimony of his Spirit, assuring him and his
spirit that he is the ^ords own, that so the Joy of his faithful servants may
(as himself has spoken it) be full, and that not by rejoicing in another, but
by finding and feeling the Ground and Principles of true Joy and Confidence in
themselves. For I am not therefore honest or valiant, because some credulous
brethren, or some brethren of the Sword repute me so, and would so give it
under their hands: No, I pass not for yours, or any man's Judgment (says St.
Paul) a silly fame is that, into which a man is voted, or for which he has a
Testimonial or Certificat. I know says he, in whom I have believed; and so
every just and justified man lives by his own faith, as well as he lives by
that very bread which himself eats. It is no trusting to Salvation implicit,
if I pin my soul to that great name of the Catholic Church, and know no
meaning of it, but only him that calls himself the Head of it, when he can be
scarce, or but at most a corrupt member; or if I make a Pope of that poor
private Priest that creeps in at my window. If I freely resign my soul to him,
and say I must confide in you, for so millions profess and boast themselves to
do; Can I tell whether this Romist will carry it to Heaven or Hell. or neither
in haste, but make it stay in purgatory (as some souls they tell me must do)
till the day of Judgment? I cannot relish that dependence on any man's
infallibility; for if I could be certain of their high Priests election, that
all things therein had been rightly and canonically performed, which is very
difficult, if not impossible; yet for his low Priest, whom he sends to me, and
who for his own food and maintenance, brings me the Sacraments of Penance and
the wafer-god to be assured of his intention, (on which they teach the very
essence of all Popish devotion depends) they must acquaint me how I shall be a
Searcher of hearts, which God has reserved only to himself; and therefore
assuredly as some Papists have openly jeared the pretended infallibil^y of
their Father; so no doubt but his white sons the Jesuits, like the Latin
Augurs do laugh when they meet in secret, at the open gullage of the world,
willing to mistake their infamous mother for the very Catholic Church in the
Apostles Creed; and yet our own Ladies in stead of Preserves from St. Austins
boxes of Prascriptum Legis and Pradicta Prophetarum, which are soundly mingled
with this holy sear in the Text, are content to swallow their conserves of
implicit faith and blind obedience, and comfort their hearts with the cold
consideration of an Indulgence, when yet the blessed and the blasting, the
cordial and yet confounding Truth of God in this ponit has wrung (after a
thousand wranglings) that plain consession from a learned, but a bitter and
violent Papist, that the Church by her Ministry and Magisterie received of
God does cause us to believe: yet for all that, the very Reason wherefore we
believe, is not the Church, but God speaking in us: This is Stapleton in his
third book of the Authority of the Scripture, cap. 12. And indeed when all is
said and done, nothing but the Testimony of Gods own Holy Spirit is ever able
to minister true consolation in believing. The God of peace it is that fills us
with all peace and joy in believing, if we belive St. Paul' to the Romans, cap.
15. verse 13. But this is not meant of any private whisper or Enthusiasus,
(which is deceitful) but of the spirits Testimony, joined to his Holy Word in
the clear evidence thereof, assuring our spirit that God is become our
Salvation: and I come to feel and know this of a certainty by Gods Power made
perfect in my weakness, which I discern in finding his Holy fear rooted in my
heart, and so fixed, that no stout words of profane, nor incursions, nor
invasious, nor seas of overwhelming Corruptions in the examples of godless men
about me can prevail over me to abandon my Religion, which is bottomed on my
holy fear, and reverend thinking on his blessed Name.

For (as I have said) the mercy of our indulgent Father appears not only in
tying this amulet to our own bosom, that every man is saved by his own faith,
and not another man's, bnt also in the manner of this ancorage; It Is his special
Grace that my being Gods own is made descernable in the Light imparted to my
own soul from his Word and Spirit, whereby I perceive the Covenant sealed
betwixt God and me in Christ Jesus. But this is more wonderful mercy still,
that my assurance and modest infallibility of salvation is fastened by his
Almighty Power, and so surely fastened to so slender a cordage, so weak, and
tender, and bruised reeds as my Faith and fear are: for these two are to our
purpose terms convertible. This fear in my Text has Gold and Treasure in it,
and contains the precious nature of faith too, and discovers the same Efficacy
and Properties of lively faith: so that he who possesses, or is bereft of it,
is so of God himself; See for this, Jer. 2.19. This is an evil and bitter thing
that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee,
says the Lord God of Hosts; So he puts Fear for our whole Religion. So rare a
Builder is that Lord of Heaven, that as he made the Heavens themselves, and the
earth of nothing, and hung says Job, the earth in the midst of the air upon
just nothing: So in this mighty work of Grace, when I am afraid of not being
fast enough, his goodness makes that very fear the means of fastening and
confirmation, and anchors my assurance to my fear. Behold the unsearchable and
unspeakable riches of his mercy in this, that he forsakes not man therefore,
because he finds not in flesh and blood the Pority of Angels, but as its said
to Levi, Mal. 2.5. My Covenant was with him of life and Peace, (and Life and
Peace include all Blessings) and I gave them to him; For what? Observe it well;
The free Grace of God in this exchange. I gave them to him, for the fear
wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name: and just such is the
Appliance here of all this consolation; for God hears and hearkens at verse 16.
and a book of Remembrance is written before him; for whom now all this, and sor
what? For them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name; and they shall
be mine, for that I will love them for that inward testimony and qualification,
and that inward Testimony and Qualification shall assure them of my love. Is
not this enough to make every one of us say, at parting hence, Well! I shall
think the better of the fear of God as long as I live, for this Sermon: Do so
in the name of God, and take this further resolution with us; Never to listen
to the harsh and cruel doctrine of the Romish, (which a man would think, were
enough to throw down all the rest of their building in unstable souls; if
those souls would but seriously stay to think upon it; if they would not like
unclean beasts, still swallow, and never chew the cud; and yet since it is
fallen from them, they must, their Priests must by the oath ex officio, all
desperately maintain it, as if they were told openly by one of their own
Doctors at the Council of Trent) and that is this, That God will never be so
assured, never so contracted and espoused to believers hearts in everlasting
love, but even after all their Merits, and Satisfactions, and Penances, and
Pilgrimages, and Supererogations too, (Is it not strange? considering how wide
they open their Ark at first, and assure all clean and unclean beasts that will
come in of never perishing;) Nay after all Pardons under the swelling seal, and
all plenary Indulgences (Is it not a miserable case?) The wretched fluctuating
Penitent after ablution, extreme Unction, Absolution, and all must be content
to die in discontent, and fall with horror and perplexity of Conscience, and
all his comfort in a little faint hope, that it is not wholly impossible for
him to get through long, and dreadful purging flames at length to the joys of
heaven. But let us in Gods name still continue to repose our souls on Christ,
and resting on this ground of comfort, in this appropriation, we shall find no
reason to conceive hardly of him who is the Father of Mercies, and God of all
consolation, or impute a rigidness and tetrical sowerness, or rather a
tyrannous enwrapping us in inevitable damnation. To admit no such jealousies,
and fears, and suspicions of our Lord here, but wisely learn to compound, and
keep close in conjunction that which God has mixed and and put together: That
is, a rejoicing in the Lord with trembling, a worship joined with godly fear,
and joy in the holy Ghost; and so we may return from his service as the women
returned from his Sepulcher with fear and great joy.

PART 2.

WE are come to our second part, the Prospect, the day of our deliverance, and
making up amongst Gods Jewels; which day is fore-fold, 1. The day of punishing
the ungodly, such a day as some think is described here at cap. 4.1. In such
burning days the trial shall be made, and then God will resolve this scruple
here at verse 17. twixt them that serve him, and such as serve him not; and his
Jewels in that day he will save: spare as a man spares his own son, as men
incline to favor their peculiar, and their Jewels and Treasure above all their
stuff of less value, as men in danger of shipwreck, reserve a Jewel, though
forced to unlade the ship of all her other burden; or as they catch away in
times of war, or fire, or thieves. some precious thing above all other goods.
And this renews the former consolation, that to these Saints which excel in
virtue, these precious Jewels, whose says is precious, sastned on the most
precious blood of Christ, belong all those precious Promises of compassing,
hiding, embracing, covering, relieving, defending, comforting, setting his eye,
heart, soul upon them; of opening his ears and harkening to their cries; of
drawing near, helping, respecting, assisting, establishing, blessing,
delivering by Protection, Exaltation, Coronation: and this no empty, but a real
comfort including all time. He has, and does, and will deliver us, says St.
Paul. He has done it to his servants in the evil day, in all their evil days
of sorrow, Sickness, War, Plague, Famine, Prison, Deluge of waters, or of
ungodliness: So Noah was boxed up in his ark, riding on his horse of wood over
all the surges that devoured the world of the ungodly. So in the time of Ahab,
and in the time of Queen Mary in our own land, when the waves of persecution
rouled high, and raged horribly, God reserved many Prophets in a cave by means
of Obadiah, and many thousands that bowed not the knee to Baal, or were won to
crouch to the Romish superstition, or shrink from the Reformed Religion. This
is the mercy of God, that when sometimes the wicked are swept away, as the
house of a Spider, when the arrow flies by day, and terror by night, then comes
out the Indulgence and Dispensation, Touch not mine Anointed; a thousand shall
fall before thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, Psalm 91.7. Or if God do
not ever in public calamity give his own a temporal deliverance, for -- Cadit
and Ripheus, yet he promises to redeem their soul from deceit and violence, and
precious shall their death be in his sight; Psalm 72.14.

Secondly. The day of making up these Jewels is understood by some, of the time
of powerful preaching of the Gospel, principally when Christ himself and his
forerunner the Baptist entered on the office of converting the world: so much
also is intended here of that Sun of Rightcousness, rising with healing in his
wings, and his day star coming in the Spirit of Eliah, cap. 4.2. And we find
indeed the time of our Savior called the time of Reformation; and surely by
that powerable Instrument of his Word it is that his Jewels are made up. John
prepared the Way, and cleansed the people by baptism to repentance, Christ
wrought up many by himself, more by his Apostles after; St. Peter at one Sermon
three thousand, at another five thousand souls: And in that time of our
Savior, those Jewels were made bright, and manifest even to their Despisers:
See Anna, Elizabath, Zachary, Simeon, whom the curious Pharisees reckoned among
the base vulgar that knew not the Law; but they then were known for Jewels and
the other for a generation of Vipers. Thus when the World in the Wisdom thereof
knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe, and to make what the world accounts weakness, his Power to salvation:
For to this is ascribed first the birth and breeding of these Jewels; For to
which of the Angels said God at any time, This day I have begotten thee? But as
that speech has a natural Interpretation of Christ our elder Brother; so
applied to us in a supernatural, Of his own Will begat he us by the Word of
Truth, Jam. 1.18. which is therefore styled the uncorruptible seed, 1 Pet.
2.12. God makes thee (as he made this All) a work of power, but in recreating,
in producing Light of Christianity, uses his Word and Wisdom to give thee form:
so in the New Testament his Word precedes his Miracles; and the Donative to the
Apostles first was, Fieri Vehicula scientiae; such as enliven the Receivers;
For man lives not by bread only; and for this cause, the Saints are called
living stones, built on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself the chief Cornerstone. Again, The word as it breeds and gives
life, so Light, Grace and Luster. We cannot with the waxen wings of sense or
reason fly up to the Deity, not as revealed in Christ; and ripeness, and
perfection, and rectifying of mere Reason gains us nothing: It loses rather,
and builds downward, disclosing the earthly Globe, and shutting up Heaven: Only
God is able by the power of his word to take hold of our souls, and like so
many keys apply the graces of Faith, and Hope, and Love to the wards of
prepared rational Nature: For the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is that which
by original Purity, and perfect obedience, and satisfaction in his death he
has acquired to and for all his members. But the noble Instrument to work that
Grace a way into our souls, is the declaration of his Gospel in use and
Ministry of his Word. Yea the Scripture informs us of Illumination by this same
means in the very Angels, Ephesians. 3. But the purest Saints are all in darkness
till this flaming light be held from heaven; no previous disposition in the
soul, no Platonic Recordation would ever bring us to the least glympse of
salvation, were it not for this dew of Grace, which from the Word we drink into
our understanding, and thereby direct our Wills, and even in their imaginations
find it powerful against all those starts and exorbitancies, reducing and
bringing into Carptivity every thought to the obedience of Christ Jesus. For as
health is the absence of sickness, and serenity nothing but the avoidance of
clouds and shadows; so the Word, where it comes, has an innate and genuine
property to dispel sin, like David's harp, driving out Saul's devil. You are
clean (says our Savior) propter Sermonem, by reason of the Word; therefore
resembled to rain, medicines, fonntains. Such an eager and piercing operation,
and opposition as it penetrates the closest sin, and is a Discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart; so Magdalens whoredom and nest of Devils
dislodged; Zacheus swollen to a Camels grosseness, abated to the smalness of a
thread, fit to be drawn through the eye of a Needle, fit to enter into the
kingdom of Heaven; with this was Lydia's heart opened; all other appliances but
charms, or holy water. This mighty word of stones able to raise up children
unto Abraham; this the double edged sword of the spirit; this the fire, and the
hammer, and file to frame and work out Gods Jewels from the rough, till piece
by piece God thereby has removed those ruins which through Adams fall,
oppressed all humane nature, and hid away the primitive beauty and perfection of
our souls. Lastly, It Is this that transforms from Profaneness. Rebellion,
Hypocrisy, and purges the most dissolute: Were with shall a young man reform?
of all other the most difficult; by taking heed according to thy Word; and then
this Word it is which adorns, and teaches how to hang about the neck and ears
of Gods holy ones, all those shinning graces of precious Faith, and Hope, and
Charity, and Meekndss, and heavenly-Mindedness, etc.

And therefore in our passage, are we not to take notice of this? I say, we
both Preachers and people; we first as Jewellers, to sever the precious from
the vile; if speak, to speak as the words of God, and yet to furnish themselves
with all helps of learning; the better to insinuate by Similes and riches of
discourse, and so to raise the imagination, and fill the understandings of
their hearers: but above all, it points directly at the curiosity of our pains
and careful industry, to be workmen, needing not to be ashamed. They must be
workmen indeed that dcal with Jewels, specially with cuting them to the life
and perfect beauty, and fashioning them in all their points, that the man of
God may be perfect, lacking nothing. Alas! if the unprofitable servant be cast
out, what shall become of the Malignant, the Covetous, the Proud, the
Luxurious? How are we then to think of that triple charge of Pasce, of Jacobs
enduring frost and heat, of the shepherds keeping watch by night, and then of
Leo Rugiens, to devour both Pastor and Flock? And how are they able to resist,
if we assist not, unless we exhort, rebuke, exhort and minister a word of
consolation to every soul that is weary? and then the people to be swift to
hear. How precious is the treasure we bring, though in earthen vessels! Is it
not the Word of God we bring and offer you? To men's words we owe temporary
belief, ( if they speak wisely) and a Resignation of our Judgments, till we
hear them out. But to the Word of God, which is diffused into a Sermon, (or
else woe to him that makes it) we owe an absolute Resignation and perpetual
captivity. Take heed then of contempt or wanton ranging after an heap of such
Teachers as are after our own lusts, lest we cause God to withold this bread
from Heaven, and endanger the famishing of our souls! Let England remember the
error of the Jewish Church once the Jewel and peculiar of the Lord of Hosts,
the defection of the Romish, the Degeneration, and then the demolition and
abolition of Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, and many others: O think in time (for
we draw very near it) of this peoples sin here at the twelfth and thirteenth
verses, They held the Table of the Lord contemptible, and snuffed at it,
perchance respecting the gorgeous Idols of the Gentiles: In the same corrupt
affection as many carnal Gospellers not ashamed to let men hear their wishes
for the stately and triumphant shows again of Mass, Dirges, Processions,
Pilgrimages. God has blessed the Land and Church, even to the stupor and envy of
our Neighbors, with abundance of the Gospel of peace, and the blessing of God
in his Ordinance, and with many curious and exact workmen, Jewelers of souls;
and will we not bless the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever? Will we
not prize this unsearchable Riches of Christ? Shall we rather strive to quench,
and do despite to the Spirit of his Grace by despising Prophesying, and like
Swine and Dogs trample upon, and turning again rend and tear such as pour these
precious Pearls before us; stoning them that are sent unto us, with hard and
bitter censures? If the ministration of the Law was glorious, what is that of
the Gospel? Examine it; Is it not the Power and Wisdom of God? and in the
Administration of the Sacrament, is not the bread we break the communion of the
body, and the cup we reach out into you from God, the communion of the blood of
Jesus? Are not the offices of the Church, such as distinguish us from Dogs and
Infidels? Let me then first creep a little into mount Ebal, and bitterly curse
all those thas have evil will at Sion, and then fly into Gerizim, and
cheerfully bless with blessings of the right band; Praise, and Honor, and
Salvation upon the heads of all those Christian Kings, Princes and people of
all conditions, who in their several places seek the advancement of the Truth
of God, and the encouragement of his faithful servants; while their own hearts
strike them with the conscience and guilt of maliciousness, and propenseness to
Idolatry, or schismatic Innovations, that dare not say Amen.

3. We come briefly to the third day, (to which we must all come) the day of
death; when Gods own having past the fervor of youth, and clean escaped the
flesh, and worlds contagions, and the fiery darts of Satan, having in short
done what they came for, they descend into the grave with their bodies, like a
rick of corn into the Barn in due season, and their spirits return to God that
gave them, when even death is to them precious, as well for rest and security,
as for that new Newness of life which then begins in death, clearing to them
that whereof Euripides doubted, whether to die were indeed to live; and
contrary; for so St. Paul determines it, Christ is to me life, and death is to
me advantage, and therefore desired he this day of his dissolution, wherein he
might be more perfectly united to his Jesus. For these his holy Jewels are
never so well set, as when inset in the joy and Glory of their Lord and Master,
which makes that in such souls, even the approaching toward death, fills and
purifies with high and heavenly apprehensions: as it is in natural motions,
nearer still to the center, or as in Diggers in a Mine, who work most
earnestly, when near the Treasure. But if it happen that any of these Jewels be
so far dignified as his Lord accepts his life in sacrifice by Martyrdom
consummate, in sealing the Truth of Jesus with his blood, how does this add
fresh ornament and addition of honor to these Servants of God? as came to pass
with that Protomartyr St. Stephen, first made up a Jewel after his Master;
those stones the Persecutors threw, surrounding his head as a precious Crown of
Glory: However they are all that die in the Lord enfranchised from those chains
of corruption, which abide the best alive; for we dare not boast our Saints as
Bellarmine does Gouraga, or his Fellow does Phil. Nerius, who was fain to pray
God to depart from him, and draw back his mind from heavenly things. No, we
have learnt another way of humble acknowledgement from St. Paul, I know that in
me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing; and St. James, In many things, we
sin all, and the day of absolute absolution from sin is not till this day of
dissolution, wherein these Jewels by death come to take possession of
everlasting life.

4. The last, is the last of days, Novissimus, and the day of Renovation,
which none but the ancient of days can know, and of which also there is a mixed
mention in the beginning of this fourth chapter, The day of the Lord comes as a
furnace. and Rev. 6. The great day of his wrath, called the day of the Lord
Jesus, and the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.
Romans 16. The first day we spoke on, the day of affliction, and the last we
spoke on, the day of death, do roll up sometime all together: It befalls alike
(says the Preacher) to the clean and unclean, to him that swears, and to him
that fears an oath; and for the second, the day of powerful preaching the
word, Hypocrites elude it: The devil can transform himself into an Angil of
Light, and his zanies may make a fair show in the flesh, says the Scripture.
But at this great day shall be a real Partition of Sheep and Goats, of Wheat
and Tares, which yet flock and grow together; then he will gather his elect
from the four winds, and declare his mighty Power in glorifying both their
souls and bodies, both the Jewel and the Cabinet; both which, at that revealing
of the Son of God (when he appears) shall also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.

Nor shall the association then of the body be (as it may seem,) any diminution
of glory to the soul; For first, The School resolves it, that though the soul
separate may seem more to resemble God, and therefore happier; yet joined, it
has the nearer Resemblance, having esse perfectius, it being then more
perfect: As in the heart, whose perfection is motion, does therefore more
resemble, God when moved, then when quiescent, though God never move as all.
Secondly, Though virtue severed from matter be Potention, and so Faelictor in
absolute speech, yet not so in such virtue as has a nature and property to be
in matter. Thirdly, Even in the Act of Understanding, the glorious body shall
be adjuvant to the spirit; for as much as the glorified Body will cause the
soul more perfectly to produce her operations; and so the good redounding to
the body in Glory, shall instrumentally serve to the souls perfection, as
Anistotle says, external goods, instrumentally contribute to his felicity in
the action of virtue. Lastly, Though the soul have fullness of delight in God,
and so cannot receive addition by the body joined, which is but finite, where
God is infinite Goodness; yet extensive they say, it shall avail ad plus,
though not ad majus; and Intensive too for the reason aforesaid, because then
the operation of the soul, whereby she is born toward her enjoying of God,
shall be made more perfect, being in her own natural state: This is meant by
that Apoc. 6. Lord, how long? and so much is arguable from proportion of pain
in the damned, which shall be then augmented. And again, Though this
corruptible Body weigh down the immortal soul, yet the glorious body shall be
more compliant, when all that shall be removed whereby there is any reluctance
made to the souls actions, as finally it seems most of all clear by that
gracious invitement of Christ Jesus at that day, Enter into thy Masters joyce
So that in this day, these Jewels are wholly refined, and purified, and
beautified with Salvation, as it is Psalm 149. For then, as if they were made
up into one chain with God, and so many stones in a Bracelet, God shall be all
in all, above all, and through all, and in them all. When the pure Bride, the
wife of the Lamb, shall have the Glory of God, and her Light like unto a stone
most precious, even like a Jasper, clear as Crystal; O how glorious things are
spoken of thee, thou City of God! and how great Riches have thou reserved for
them that love thee! For of their very bodies, the Scripture witnesses that
they shall shine as the Sun, and like unto the glorious body of Christ Jesus
himself: And what do the Fathers and Schoolmen comment upon the Subtilty,
Impassibility, Agility, and Clarity, and Incorruptibility, but for the Soul,
into what a glorious liberty of the sons of God she enters, and exceeding that
of Paradise, which was posse non peccare? But this Novissima, this Power shall
be Non posse peccare, an impossibility of sinning any more for ever. When there
shall be no further need of working by that blessed Engine, the Word of God,
Verbum Domini, but we shall sweetly enjoy Verbum Domini, that Lord who is the
Eternal Word, the Wisdom increated; when there shall be no longer sacrifice,
because no expiation; no more Sacraements, but Res ipsae: Things themselves
presented us, the substance and thing signified: Here the Saints are fed with
the leaves, but there with the very fruits of that Tree of Life; and all these
endless in that incomprehensible Vision of the Almighty; for there Felicity
begins and ends. As in Philosophy, they that made it consist and rest in Con
templation of Forms separate, do add this reason, because souls do emanare, do
flow from thence; So is God Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last. The
beginning of our blessedness is to proceed from him, to be his Offspring and
Generation; and the last Resolution is that Fruition, Vision, Union with him,
an Union so high, as no tongue of Man or Angel, no comparison can reach it, no
thought of man's heart can ascend unto it. For though the ocular Vision of God
shall be terminate only in his Saints, and in beholding the person of Christ
Jesus, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily; yet the Intellectual
Cognition shall pierce into the Essence of the Almighty: For we shall see him
face to face, see him as he is, and know, even as we are known. To make a
delightful Knowledge, there are three things requisite. 1. The sensible or
understanding Faculty. 2. The Object; and 3. The Union: And by how much apter
and abler that apprehending Power is, the Object more noble, and the manner of
uniting more inward, still the more delight. Now all these are here per and
super-transcendent; First, The Understanding now not alone above sense, but
beyond it self in Purity and Glory. Secondly, The Object, Goodness it self, and
in abstract. Thirdly, The way of Combination, an open and clear Vision,
penetrating the whole mind of the Beholder. If sounds and colors strike the
senses, even to a ravishing; O what a heavenly kiss, and spiritual Embrace
shall that be, when after a world of fears, and languishings, and longings
incident even to this caelestial Love, we come to interminable Acquiescence,
Satisfaction, and Appetite perpetually interchangable! This is to enter into
our Masters very joy, nay Gaudium Dei, above men's or Angels joy. No; This is
not to enter into it, but to have the joy enter into Us, as unable to
comprehend it; to which joy, etc.

S. D. G.

GODS VISITATION.
JOB 31.14. What then shall I do when he rises up? And when God shall visit,
what shall I answer him?
THE Text comprehends those two notions which comprehend all; God and Man. For
the whole world was in God before he made it; and when he made it, he made it
all for Man; and made it all over again in Man; and made Man in his own Image
like God. And that Image defaced, and Man lost, to recover him, and make him
new, he vouchsafed to make himself Man, God and Man in one person; and the
consummation of all his works, (which is also the consummation of all Man's
hopes) is to bring God and Man into to one place. But this must await his time,
and obey his own Method, which he so frames by his powerful hands, his
Understanding and his Will, that as in infinite Mercy, so with his Honor and
his Justice too, he may assume them to that place of Glory. He will give Grace
aad Glory, Psalm. 84. but Grace first, therefore enlightening, rectifying,
purifying their Understanding, Will, Affections; hewing and polishing, pruning
and dressing every stone in the building, every branch in the Vine: and in that
nature we find him here, visiting, looking to the ways of Man, that Man might
look up to him.

Briefly, (not to reflect yet on the Coherence, at which I shall touch anon in
place convenient enough.) The Text delivers us two parts: First, Gods office.
Secondly, Man's office. His to visit, Man's to debate and answer.

1 God is the Visitor. The School makes these degrees of perceiving God in
names. First, Negationis, Remotionis. What God is not, not the Sun, Moon, not
finite, mutable. Secondly, Perfectionis, Affirmationis, when what is most
excellent in things create, we apply to him by way of Analogy and Resemblance,
so we call him just, Merciful, High, Glorious. Thirdly, Of Supereminence, such
as this of a Visitor, gathered from his action here, and joined with the
Emphasis of my Text, -- When he shall visit. Men are Visitors, but they more
easily answered, their place and power but Derivatives from this Primitive. He,
He the grand Vizier, Altissimus, -- most High. So that to Gods absolute power,
everywhere presence, this attribute, and this transcendent Ability of an holy
Watcher, a Supervisor, is proper. It Is proper Blazon, and Title suitable,
denoting throughout these words, not height alone, and Power, and Superiority,
-- when he shall stand up, but Majesty and Terror too, -- What shall I answer
him?

We have found his Office, but will God perform it? It Is a Question of men's
performing their offices, and a Question too of false gods. They had an Idol in
Egypt, called by such a name, Baal-Zephon, Dominus speculae, Lord of the
Watchtower, to fright their fugitives; but when Moses and the people of Israel
past that way, and pitched the Camp there; this god was asleep, but he that
keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps. He kept his Israel then and since;
he made good the Title then and since, and dare we question it now? But how
does God visit? Search the Scriptures, they testify of him; those books are
moral to teach Man his office, the whole duty of Man, to make the Man of God
perfect to every good work: but they are Historical too, and Prophetical too,
instructing us what God has done, and what God will do. Look then to those
Records, and we shall find what, and when, and how in his several Visitations.
His Visitations are his actions; Action is from intrinsique virtue; Virtue
there is none such in God as supposes Infirmity or Imperfection, as Faith,
Hope, etc. but such as argues Perfection, Mercy, Justice, Wisdom Bounty, Power.
According with these, we find his Visits: First, In general, then with
reference to men, both ways, their persons in mercy, sin upon their persons in
Justice.

1. In general, in all places, and over all things above. Heaven is his Throne,
where he overlooks the Orders and royal Armies of his Angels, ascending,
descending; in the material Heaven, disposing that numberless variety of those
glorious stars, calling them all by their names; in the airie Heaven amidst
those flocks of Fowl, his Providence extending to the fall of every little
sparrow. If we go down to the sea amongst those infinite shoals and innumerable
fishes, there we see his Wonders in the Deep; or if we go deeper, if we descend
to hell, He is there also, binding the fury of infernal spirits: And for the
Earth, it is his footstool; unmoved he sits in midst of Heaven, and yet they be
the eyes of the Lord that run to and fro through the whole earth, Zach. 4.10.
reigning above, yet containing and upholding all below; compassing all about,
yet piercing all within. But applied to Men, they are the eyes of God which
behold, and his eye lids which try the Children of Men. But first the persons
in mercy, as we use the word in our visitation of friends, or of the sick. And
of this kind (as well pleased therewith) is that where God doubles it, Visitans
visitavi, Exodus 3.16. -- Visites and remembers, visites and restores, Jer. 17.
ult. This is called the face, the beauty of his Holiness, when he causes the
light of his countenance to arise. Then secondly, Sins upon the persons, and
this changes the aspect, -- He frowns, and bends the Brows, sets his face
against them, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the
third and fourth generation, Number. 14.18. first or last; on them, or theirs, by
no means clearing the guilty. Then he is described to visit in Thunder and
Earthquake, in Storm and Tempest, Isa. 29.6. And in this sense the word is
used among the Prophets promiscuously for Recompensing, Punishing, Avenging,
and even this threatened on his own people, tender as the Apple of his eye, and
his chief Treasure above all Nations, Hos. 1.4. and 12.2. Jer. 11. Isa. 10.3.

We may not omit his merciful Visitation; should it not show like a piece of
ingratitude not to touch here first, though our voyage be to that of final
Judgment? And the first particular of his merciful visitation (wherein is his
delight) is confiderable as man is a body. God then did visit him in the house
of dust, as his last work will be joining and refining the same dust again in
Glory, and what might be said of his visitation in the womb? -- Thou saw my
substance being yet imperfect, etc. What of all those wheels and wyers within
the body, that Mill and Clock of his contriving? of his winding up; at thought
of which, David speaks with a kind of strange shuddering, O Lord, I am
fearfully and wonderfully made. What of man's Shape, Speech. Beauty? and how
largely spread might this Web be, if we took in all those threads and quils of
his Providence, by which he conveighs a thousand influences of his Bounty, even
loading Man with his benefits? Psalm. 68. -- and renewing them every morning,
Lam. 3. Light after Darkness, Spring after Winter, (as now we see that Grant in
his course, stealing an ascent over us, and subduing the cold;) giving rain and
fruitful seasons? etc. What addition to this, above all this from the Nature,
and Fabrique, and Faculties of our soul, in substance nobler then the stars,
able not only to give Being to the body, like other forms, but capable of
eternal Felicity?

Secondly, As Man is a Christian by means of the Revelation of Jesus, that
Orient ex Alto, -- The dayspring from on High has visited. -- Luke 1. that
Sun which rises with healing in his wings: And this was, and is a blessed
Visitation; for thus it runs, -- Visited and Redeemed his people. Himself did
visit, and his servants did it in his name, rising early for early visitation;
and since his ascension, he send by his Apostles, Pastors and Teachers, that
heavenly Treasure in their earthen vessels, this Manna, this Light, the glory
of his people Israel; and because that had not concerned us, it is also a Light
revealed to the Gentiles; this revives us, when he is said To visit the
Gentiles also, to take of them a people to his Name, Acts 15.14. But not that
word of Grace, though the Word of Life, and Power, and Mighty in operation; Not
all those gracious Promises, those Letters of Love indicted by the Holy Ghost in
Prose and Verse, which cry unto us to turn and look upon, and accept the
salvation proffered; that salvation which our blessed Savior wrought for us by
strong cries, and by the effusion of that blood which yet cries and intercedes
freshly for us; not all these availab, letill the third visitation of his
Spirit, which is therefore called the Comforter, Coming as Jobs friends in
visitation, both to mourn and comfort him. Nay, what Visitant, what Physician,
what Confessor, what Wise of thy bosom, what Friend, who is as thine own soul,
would so attend? for he abides for ever; So minister, (for he helps, Vna
sublevat; for the Greek better expresses it, (...), assists in lifting against
our Infirmities;) so pray and groan for us with sighs and groans that cannot be
expressed, against all our faintings and despairs, our sick fits of fear and
distrust, giving us Evidence, Earnest, broad Seal of Heaven, until the day of
our full Redemption. And this is that comfortable Visitation of the sacred
Spirit, respectively to the means of Grace, when he will not trust me with the
Bible alone, the story of his Birth and Death, not the Sermon alone, the
Exposition and Application of that Story, but comes after both, and sees how
they work, nay makes them work in me, and enables me in some good measure to
work by them.

Man's office in regard of this merciful visitation, it, to debate and answer.
Debate first, Think what we were before he visited; Lost, Captives, Enemies,
Dead in sins and trespasses. -- He then to drop his Blood and Grace, his
manifold Grace preventing, exciting, guiding, confirming, softly pierceing even
into stony hearts, which is described by many a sweet and amorous Metaphor.
These are his Flaggons and Apples, and our state a Marriage; above that too,
there is una Caro, one flesh: But this Union so high and holy, no words reach
it, Per ^undem Spiritum, by one and the same Spirit.

But what shall we do? First Believe, else we make God a liar, and there is the
quarrel, when we trample upon, despise and count the blood of this Covenant as
an unholy thing: and if we tremble to contemn him, shall we dare to think it
nothing? Shall we take a solemn Pride in despising his servants, Et eo nomine,
even therefore hold a man despicable because a Minister? Remember it is
observed as the height and Precipice of all iniquity, as far as people could
do, or God could suffer, when God rising early by them, was mocked in them; the
Text says then there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. ult. cap. But again Debate, What
shall we do? and the Apostle meets this Consultation, Make your Calling and
Election sure, and this to be done in Gods Method: Enquire after our Calling
first, and not begin at the wrong end. Hearken to that cry of the Spirit within
thy soul, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you, and not too fondly spend the
time in searching those rouls of Gods predestination; and take heed of sinking
thy soul toward a despair in his Mercy, or to a self-condemnation: For the
Spirit of God speaking peace, dare thou still proclaim a War? Or if God have
no bill against thee, shall thy timorous Conscience be framing vain and carnal
Answers? Does not God ask by way of Indignation, Where is the bill of thy
mothers divorce, or to which of my Creditors have I sold thee? Isaiah 50.1.

If so, Then what shall I answer? answer God in obedience, all the Creatures
preach this Answer: there is in all a Correspondency. The Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, hear us; and the Earth hears them; and the Heavens hear it: but all hear
him, even the most unruly Creatures are our Rule, the stormy wind and Tempest
obeying his voice. So we, his Voice without in his Word, and his Voice too
within by his Spirit speaking to our hearts; not then drown those motions, or
bury them in company, and wine, and worldly cares, or pleasures, lest so we
quench, grieve, or do despite to the Spirit of grace; and obey him actually,
not in professory Religion only, but walk in light, and bring forth fruits
worthy amendment of life.

Lastly, quid retribuam? what answer but a grateful admiration, as he that
spoke after a full apprehension, O Lord, what is man that thou do so visit
him? This sacrifice, as he counts it an Honor, so it is all we can offer, all we
can offer him on earth; and when all things here have end, endless thanks shall
have their beginning in Heaven. As that Church in triumph there, all those
Angels, and all those Virgins, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, with their loud
clarious and Trumpets, and Harps of Gold and Ivory, strike nothing, sing
nothing but Hallelujah: So we that are parts of the Church Militant, should
exalt our voices and join in full Chorus. We praise thee GOD, we acknowledge --
etc. Heaven and Earth shall thus be full of his glory.

2. Gods second Visitation is in Judgment: and for sin general. When we find
him coming forth of his Treasury, his storehouse of plagues, War, Famine, wild
beasts, Pestilence, and particular of crosses, sickness, loss: But it is the
great visitation here chiefly meant in the day of Judgment. For Job was under
temporal calamity now already at the pronouncing of this Text, yet (as we are
viatores) in our way to take notice of this, especially as it reaches his
servants, his choicest, though with limitation, with that distinction ever, ad
correctionem, non a^ruinam, and yet they fall thick; in the morning says Job;
in the night, says David; nay, visits him every morning, and tries him
every moment, Job 7.18. For is there not a swarm, an hydra, and wheel of
troubles in our whole life? per caput and circa saliunt latus, (says he) when
rose the Sun so fair, but ere his fall some clouds have seized on them, if not
on him some grief? some, nay many, many perturbations, enough I Will warrant
thee; for I have Gods own testimony, enough for the day is the evil thereof.

Upon this Visitation when it drops, when it falls, when it pours on us, what
shall we do? Why, first debate; stand and consider as Job, if all should go:
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked must I return. Is it the height,
the depth of any grievous affliction? What is it more then that of my Savior?
O but he was more then man; is it more then theirs in Heb. 11. rackt sawn
asunder? etc. Have thou yet resisted to blood, or is it come to the fiery
trial? And then in affliction, at least after it, ask thy soul, is it not good
for thee? Heb. 11.2. as the Apostle speaks of strangers, may not a man this way
receive Angels unawares? as Genesis 28.16. Jacob on his journey at Bethel, when he
waked and said, surely God is in this place: so God is in this Visitation, and
I was not aware. I took at first no notice of his Fatherly corrections, which
are indeed his compassions and consolations; Thy Rod and thy staff comfort me,
Psalm 23. But now I feel his coming to visit me is like his visiting the earth,
which he visits and enriches, Psalm 65. like a Physicians visiting an Hospital,
to cure; for if I am sure it is the hand of my God; I am sure also that it is
in Love, for God is Love, it is his Essence immutable. No reason then his
visitation should prove to an irreligious sadness, or a melancholy, a
dejection, a jealousy, a diffidence. So long as the work is his, though he
purge or cut, so he give me not over, so he cast me not out of his hands, so I
hear not that voice which is more dreadful then ten thousand thunders, Depart
from me, etc.

Thus far I am to debate what I am to answer in affliction. Surely the best
answer is no answer at all. Tacui Domine, and my soul kept silence, not as
unaffected, remorseless, but as subdued by faith, repentance, obedience,
working me to a blessed patience; captivating and bringing into subjection
every exorbitant, every wild and wandering imagination. Once have I spoken
(says holy Job) but I will no more: or if my heart will vent, I have forms and
molds ready wherein to cast my words; that of Ely, It is the Lord, etc. and
David, behold, here am Is let him do unto me as it seems good in his own eyes:
and I will confess too, to his glory, the fruit and the root; I find that thou,
O Lord, of very faithfulness, have caused me to be troubled, Psalm 119. and thy
visitation has preserved my spirit, Job 10.12. And to draw this into practice
in each particular affliction, for every one is Gods Ambassador, and none to
be dismissed, unanswered. The application is a world of matter, which I cannot
look at now: only for that I find my self in a Seminary, in a College of
Divines, I may have the liberty, the recreation too, to make for you and my
self one particular application. For we (my Brethren) that are or should be
pars indocili melior grege, if your pulse beat like mine, are certainly so much
infested with no worldly calamity, as when saevit malignum, and ignobile
vulgus, as when we find our selves disgraced, counted the seum of those that
are indeed the scum of the world; when all we can say or do, which way soever
we frame our doctrine or conversation, it is as water spilt upon the ground.
For though we pipe unto them, they will not dance; though we mourn, they will
not weep. Let a man's behavior be like John the Baptist, rough, austere, they
cry he has a Devil: or if enlarged in freedom of conversation, like our
Savior, away with him, a glatton, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and
sinners. So that the ground of the quarrel rests not in being thus or thus
affected, or qualified, or endowed, but they hate us for our very calling. But
what answer have we? I could tell you one, a harsh one, of the Cynical
Philosopher, who being demanded, How it happened that the great and wealthy
people affected rather to be liberal in rewarding Fools, and Players, and
Jesters, and beggars then men of his profession? answered, for that they might
perchance have some hope of proving such themselves, but no hope of turning
Scholars. This was bitter: But we have learned a better of the Apostle, I pass
not to be judged by you; and a better yet of a better master, Let not your
hearts be troubled: they called our Master Beelzebub, and shall not I drink of
the cup which my father gives me? (says he) so, shall we not drink the potion
which our Lord has begun to us, which by tasting first, he has sweetened for
us? Is the Disciple greater? so, is he daintier then his Master? Were we like
the Apostles persecuted, whipped, imprisoned? that consideration would make us
march on in all these dificulties; and like hardy soldiers, non gementes sequi
Imperatorem; But rather rejoicing that we were counted worthy to suffer any
thing for his name sake: and if it came to death, we know our Answer, Christ ts
to me life; and death is to me advantage. But I forget my self; for I am bound
to a further Port, to that which is appointed after death; for after that to
Judgment: When God shall visit, etc.

Of this final Judgment, the Text informs us two Things. It shall be, and it
shall be most dreadful: therefore needs debating, and casting for our Answer.
First it shall be, He will visit; Even the Heathen had an Apprehension, an
expectance of such a day, a time quo Mare, quo Tellus, correptaque regia Coeli,
Ardeat and mundi moles operosa laboret. All this frame unling'd, unpin'd and
burnt: And the new-discovered world have discovered this too, though who
discovered it to them, is hard to determine. But I speak to Christians, who as
fully as we believe God in Heaven, believe from thence he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead.

But Where, When, What? Where? I know not: about Mount Olivet; and they think
they argue it fairly, and probably from what we find in the Prophet of the
valley of Jehosophat, Joel 3.2. and that of the Angels, This Jesus which is
taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come again, as you have seen him go
into Heaven, Act. 1.11. However that, sure we are of this, his Elect, by his
Angels from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other shall be
gathered into one place, Mat. 24.31.

When? tell us when shall these things be; You know who asked that question,
and you know our Saviors Answer, Take heed that no man deceive you: and when
wicked Mockers asked it, the Apostle sets no day; he durst not, he could not.
Job was resolved in the Article, he shall stand the last upon earth, Job 19.
but no time limited. The Prophecy fathered on Elias, tells us of two thousand
years Inane; two thousand Lex; two thousand Dies Messiae, and then the
Conflagration. But our Savior controuls all, overrules all; Of that day and
hour knows no man, nor Angel, nor the Son kimself. Only by many signs
accomplished by the Apostles, calling those the last days then; what may we
imagine now? if but (...) then; a Tantillum then: that span of time is now
contracted to an inch, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.
But what, what will he come for? he will come to visit such a Session,
Visitation, as none before it. No Star Chamber, no high Commission, no
Parliament-Bar, no Council Table, no Inquisition so formidable. Why, who comes
the Circuit? the LORD, the LORD-Chief-Justice, Judge of all the world; Wise,
Incorrupt, with Power and great Glory, with such a Train, all his Saints, and
his Holy Angels; and this is that day, the day, the day, the great day of his
wrath, Zeph. 1. Of his wrath, who is a consuming fire, and will come so
inflaming fire, to render vengeance with strange effects; the Sun obscured, the
Moon lost, Stars fallen, Powers of Heaven shaken, the Heavens themselves
passing away with a noise, Elements melting with fervent heat, Earth, and all
her works burnt up: 2 Pet. 3. with the great sound of a Trumpet, which even the
dead shall hear; Graves shall fling open their marble doors, and Seas vomit up
Millions of drowned Carcases: Hell it self shaking thereat, and yet all this
passing in a moment, in a twinkling, falling on the world as a snare, stealing
as a thief, rolling as the flood, confounding like lightning from the East!
Then for strictness in this Judges proceedings, as for reward first, wherein
men's Laws are lame and defective, there is a Kingdom, his own, thy Masters joy,
the same Throne, Rev. 13. and then the Purity of that Bliss, which Angels
enjoying, adore; and last, The Eternity; in Psalm. 16. at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. So contrary, those four conditions of hell torments;
for variety the most; greatness insufferable; for Purity unmixt, with least
allay of comfort, or hope of mitigation; and for continuance everlasting. Is it
not high time to debate and Answer? and thither we are come.

Consider this you that forget God; that is, you that would forget him, that
would damp out your own light, you that say in your hearts, that is, you that
wish in your hearts, there were none, what will you do? what, answer him? He
has answered me already, that you shall not be able to answer him; not able to
stand, when he stands up in Judgment; for the mouth of all wickedness shall be
stopped; your answer may be a vain cry to the hills and rocks to fall, and cover
you from the presence of that Judge. But I preach not (I hope) to Atheists and
Desperates; But when St. Peter says, The righteous shall scarce be saved, Does
he not enforce a necessity of debating? Had we a trial in law, or Debts on
Interest, we would fall to reckoning. This is more; The title of our souls, and
eternal salvation is at trial: a Debt doubled and re-doubled, in sins of Youth,
of Age, of Ignorance, of Presumption; and are our Purses nearer then our souls?
But is there no avoiding? None, not for the young men that are least touched
with remorse: -- He will bring thee to Judgment, Eccle. 11. We must all
appear. There are ways, and those ways are trodden too, many go those ways,
to elude the temporal Judgment of men. But in Romans 14.12. it is (...): and it
it (...); every one must account, and every one for himself; no Atturneyes, no
Proxies. Think too, think of our distance; shall I speak to the Lord, that am
but dust and ashes? What words shall I choose? says he, Job 9.15. Alas! all
thought of answer then will be in vain, for besides that we are not able to
answer him one thing of a thousand: that day is his day, his day of wrath; the
time of mercy is over, past, irrevocably past; his day of Doom is come, it is
come to sentence, and therefore what shall we do? Why? while we have time, put
in our answer; yet the Chancery and Court of Request is open. Now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation. My Text is future yet, He shall
come, he shall visit. Here is a latitude for Repentance; yet he expects, calls
for our answer, and we know to what: we have his Bill, his Articles,
Interrogatories, that is, his Law written, and engraven in our hearts: we must
now frame, and put in our answer: What is it?

Repentance first, For so may that of the Apostle be understood in Ephesians. 6.
where he enjoins the Christian soldier to have his feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace: I know some take that preparation of the
Gospel for a readiness to preach that Gospel; which should then belong alone to
us Ministers; others for a promptness in profession; others Evangelical
Obedience; and some take it to be Patience, and not unlikely. But may it not
also endure this meaning of Repentance too? considering it is made the first
step in the way of Life, and so the first entrance into the field against
Satan; by John first, the day star, who rose before the Sun, and came to
prepare the way: How? Repent, etc. And our Savior in the same mind upon the
same Text, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven it at hand. Sad sighs, and
prayers, and tears make up the first part of Repentance, and make up so the
sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, which God will not despise.

And have thou this? Is the rock cloven? Come drops of warm blood in anguish
from thy heart? Break there floode of bitter weeping from thine eyes? This is a
fair piece of an answer. Such tears have a voice that reaches Heaven; and not
from David only, The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping; but from
Manasseth too, a fearful sinner; because thou have wept before me, I have
heard it. It Is Music to the Almighties-self, and raises a joy in Heaven. Can
the Prodigal that had wasted all his stock of Grace, say but Father, I have
sinned? See, before he can came to say so, God, he meets him on the way, and
receives him to Mercy.

But this Answer has a second part, Take beed, lest your hearts be hardened by
sins deceitfulness. It is a Circe and a Siren; we must stop our ears, and
resolve to be deaf to all her charms, charm she never so wisely, never so
worldly wisely; giving not a faint and cold, but a peremptory and final Answer
with the Psalmist, Away from me, for I will keep the Commandments of my God:
Will keep them? I, that is, I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed. This is
the meaning of the Apostle, Tit. 3. The Grace of God has appeared, teaching
us; What? Our Answer, -- And how that? by denying Ungodliness and worldly
Lusts. The best Answer is, a flat denial, a round Refusal; like our Head Christ
Jesus, who being tempted, had his Answer ready. And this is our first Answer in
a full Repentance, made up of grief and resolution.

2. A second Answer is Obedience, our Works; for words will not carry it: Not
every one that says, Lord, Lord; And some Answers (we read of) shall nor serve
the turn. Some will answer, Lord thou have preached in our streets, and we have
preached in thy name. Tell not me of preaching, (said our Savior,) unless your
lives have preached too. Away from me ye workers of iniquity. God will have this
Answer complexioned of Piety and Honesty; when these are married, they are
crowned with the Grace and Blessing of God. A number deceive themselves, as the
Jews, when they cry Corban once; as the Papists crack of Ecclesia Catholica
Romana; so these conclude all lies in being Professors; zealous magnifying
themselves, and despising others. But what were the Pharisees? by Christ's own
Testimony, religious, and yet wicked. People may draw near with their lips, and
their hearts far enough off. If thou have Faith (says St. James,) let us see
it: Let your Light shine; How? why, in action shine, or else to bare
Profession, our Savior threats a round and proportional Answer, At that day I
will profess to you, I know you not.

Objection. But will the weak soul say, May I trust to these Answers I may I
first trust to my Repentance? I feel indeed the weight of sin, and finding the
offense of an infinite Justice, I am horribly afraid, dejected like David, when
he asked his sad soul, Why art thou so heavy? I am so; so wounded, pierced,
struck through, and my heart rebounds into my eyes. I weep, and I cry mightily
for Mercy: but can I hope it? Is not sin a Serpent, a Sea, a Fire, a Poison?
Was I not stung by this Serpent, drowned in this sea, miserably schorcht by
this fire, envenomed in the whole Mass of my nature with this corruption before
I was born? And since, alas! I have added to this Ocean, put fuel to this
fire, help to infix this sting, and work into my heart the contagion; and then
am I able to resolve against sin, to deny ungodliness, to reject the Tempter,
to give my lusts their final answer? I find indeed natural men, moral men, when
they will compound an happy man, put inthis one ingredient, Responsare
cupidinibus, and sibi imperiosus, enabling him to check and control, to
command and subdue rebellious Passions by the dictates of rectified Reason: and
their several answers to diverse corrupt affections, are enough to shame me,
and all that profess themselves Christians. But were they able to keep their
own rules, or am I able? What to hate sin so as I ought, with a perfect hatred?
I fly some enormous vices for fear of Laws. But Toll periclum, Jam vaga
prosiliet, etc. And though I know there is death in the Pot, the wages of sin
is no better; though I pull the fruit and taste it, and prove it to be naught
but Gall and Bitterness, nay barrenness and shame; yet such is my madness, to
pursue a new shame, and seek death in the error of life; falling like a Bird or
a Beast: Nay, no brid, no beast would so often fall into the same snare, same
pit, into the same sin, whereof I have again, and again repented me.

What then shall I do? Shall I rely on my second answer, and trust in my own
righteousness? Some bold men dare do so, and dare teach others so; dare boast a
stock and treasure of mercy and satisfaction. But Lord I find the language of
Canaan, thy holy Word, and the cries of thy holy servants far otherwise. I find
thy Bernard say, Nolo; Horreo meritum. Thy David, O Lord, If thou enter into
judgment, no flesh shall be justified; and thy blessed St Paul, I find another
Law haling me, etc. Romans 7. and therefore I hear him crying ripe, to say, O
miserable man, who shall deliver me? These are yet the Ejaculations of an
humble soul, asking, seeking, knocking at the gate of heaven; and this very
debating, is a fruit of the Spirit, growing on to a perfect answer. In men's
consultings and resolvings for worldly affairs, they may, they do usually
mis-count, miscarry; fortune choaks their artillery: But in these holy
provisions, the end is ever gracious, success glorious. If the Jailor in the
Acts, and St. Peter's Hearers come but to a wounded conscience, to be pricked at
their hearts, and cry, What shall I do? Mark what follows, and how fast it
follows, Believe, Repent, be baptized and saved. Saved, How? by Believing in
him, that is able to frame a sufficient Answer. He that made them wonder at his
gracious answers, and to whom no man was able to answer a word. Who was that,
and where is he to be had? If any man sin, any man that finds himself a sinner,
Let him put his answer to this Advocate: for we have him, says St. John, we
have an Advocate, Jesus Christ the righteous: He is the Propitiation for our
sins. Take then thy shield of faith, and quench all the fiery darts of the
devil. This is the new and living way of answering God, by his Son, by the
blood of Jesus, Hebrews 10. May not then the Christian Believer have access
with boldness? For shall both bleed for sin, or shall he bleed in vain? Peccavi
peccatum grande, says he, I have committed an heinous sin: yet on my Faith and
Repentance, I will go to God, and say, Lord thou can have but Blood, Merit,
Sacrifice, Satisfaction, exact Obedience. Take then thy Son Jesus; He is all
these, and all these to me: for he is mine, I receive him by faith, and I find
comfort, hope, lively hope, full assurance in him. I will not therefore fly
with Cain, and cry with him, My sin is greater; No, thy mercy rejoices against
sin; and now therefore there is no condemnation to them that be in Christ
Jesus. My answer then to thy Bill, is, it was torn, when his body was torn; it
is cancelled, and was nailed to his Cross: My debt was great, but is paid to
the utmost farthing. Thy wrath, let it be a cup, he has drunk it of; Let it be
more, a whole Wine Press, he has trod it alone. I will then put on my Lord
Jesus, and come in the raiment of my elder Brother, and be roab'd in his
innocence, and can thou then deny me? No, thou can not, thou may as well
deny thy self: For if I have it fair to show under thy own hand: Every gracious
Promise in thy Gospel is such; yea, this was thine own Act in my salvation: For
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. But may I not prodigally
and presumptuously fling away my soul in a vain confidence of Mercy? Yes, many
do so; that will do nothing themselves, not when they have the assistance and
proffer of help from Heaven. Therefore I will compound, and put all these
answers together. I will trust to my Saviors merit: But I will repent too, and
pray too, and work too, and so work out mine own salvation with fear and
trembling. And though I have no Holiness of mine own; and without it no seeing
thee at the Day of Judgment, yet thou the God of my peace wilt sanctify me
against that day. 1 Thessalonians. 5. O blessed and full answer now! and O blessed
condition of such happy souls, so far from affrightment at thought of the
Judges coming, that they shall then rejoice, and lift up their faces; and in
the mean time, are of the number and communion of those Saints that love his
appearing, looking for, and hasting to the coming of their Lord in glory,
calling and crying, Bow the Heavens, and come down; and Lord, how long? And
come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

I have done with the explication of my Text. There is a fourfold application.
First, In general, to the Land and State, whereof we are a part: God has
performed his office of a Visitor over us, both ways: In Mercy; Thus long
preserving us, and extending peace over us as a flood, even then when it has
been a Sea, a red Sea of blood and ruin round about us. Visiting us in his
vigilance, and defeating our enemies blasted attempts, in 88, in the
Powder Treason; Giving us strange and miraculous deliverances: amongst them not
the least, the bringing back our present Royal Sovereign from the hand and land
of his enemies. How many other ways has this holy Watcher from his Circle and
Seat of Heaven visited us, and kept us under his wings of gracious Providence?
And if he had not, would not our foes by this have rooted out our name from
under Heaven, and the name of English Protestants been no more in remembrance?
for wanted there either Might or Malice in them? hoping and projecting often to
have made our land like Sodom, clouds of Pitch, and heaps of Ashes? But the
snare harh been hitherto still broken, and we yet delivered by his gracious and
merciful visitation. That second way of visiting in Judgment, the Lord has
also of late begun to try among us, by that plague, which swept away so many
thousands, and by the loud and dreadful sound of War in Neighbour-countries,
that have really tasted, and actually endured all that Prophetical description;
The noise of weapons, rolling of Garments in blood, spoiling their houses,
ravishing their wives and Virgins, and breaking their Children in pieces before
their eyes; And these things befaln such as deserve from us a tender and dear
respect, we being wounded through their sides; or if these accidents beyond the
water, will not waken us God has his way in the Sea, (says the Scripture) and
we might have marked his dealing with us there; for a long time being able to do
no good there, and our enemies able to do us much mischief from thence; God
has his way in the earth and under it, and we have felt him there, sensibly
perceived his mighty hand from thence; in the air he has his path too, and
walks upon the wings of the wind, and there he caused those rotten vapors to
blend themselves into a pestilent defluxion, and pour their virulence on the
earth. And if we take into consideration the present bravery of the enemy
abroad, and our home-divisions, our great boughs beating one against another,
no man that is not extremely stupid, but will easily find that God is angry
with his people, and that our sins deserve the hastening of the last Judgment,
in the other Element of violent fire. And then what manner of men ought we to
be (says the Apostle) in holy conversation? How? watch, pray, and strive to
answer him respectively to these Visitations. But alas, for his merciful
visitation have we been responsible so much as in thankfulness? O no, it is our
national sin. Secure ingratitude wherein we sleep and dream away our lives
without remembrance of that gracious God, -- qui nobis hac otia fecit, who has
so preserved us. And to his Summons and Warning-pieces of his angry Visitation
have we returned our repentance, or our obedience and doing good? I looked for
that, says God by his Prophets, that's his aim in striking. I looked for
righteousness, but behold a cry; a loud and fearful cry composed of all our
crying sins together, and the cry continued and enforct to such an height, that
we cannot hear his voice crying to us, nor he in Heaven hear the cry of his
peoples prayers, it is so drowned and swallowed up in this Tumultus peccatorum.
What then shall we do? Every man search into his own soul, and drag thence his
most beloved sin, and sacrifice it as an offering acceptable to God, before
that last and dreadful visitation here spoken of in the text; specially such
oppressors as are threatened with his coming, in Mal. 3.5. And such deadly
drunkards as the Age produces now, who were warned by our Savior with a
special Caveat, Take heed lest your hearts be over come with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and so that day come upon you unawares.

But I am to touch upon a pair of sins here coupled in this chapter, and to
which my Text has special Relation, and this I call the second Application,
and my return to speak of the coherence which I promised. The first is
Adultery: for of that is mention made before from the 9. to the 13. verse,
implying the heinous and dangerous nature of this sin, as one of those which we
shall find most unanswerable at the day of Judgment. Every Heathen Author has
some impression; of this. Tacitus in his Poem reckons amongst fires and
slaughters, great Adulteries as a plague and cause of plagues. Horace -- hoc
font derivata clades, etc. What might be added of the defilement, disgrace,
infection and danger to the Agents, their posterity, the whole land? In
populum, patriamque fluxit: with such a flow as brought the flood on the old
world, to rince and loak it clean from this pollution, and brought Gehennam e
Coelo, Hell out of Heaven upon the Sodomites, and therefore caused David to
call and cry for all the streams, the whole Ocean, according to the multitude
of thy mercies, Psalm. 5. One place of Scripture may stand for all the rest;
that 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. Whereas if God had required nothing else, or at least,
Sanctification did mainly consist in this: so he speaks enforceingly, This is
the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that you should abstain from
fornication, that every one of you should know to possess his Vessel in
Sanctification and Honor, not in lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles that
know not God. We find by this, what is the Will of God: and what then shall men
do? What shall they answer him? First, Every man cite himself in foro, in the
consistory of his own conscience, then convicted, (for who is free in all, when
our Savior extends this sin, even to a lustful eye?) to fly and avoid it;
and, for our own strength is weakness, to pray for assistance of the Holy Ghost
to over-shadow us, and learn from Examples of holy Men, to answer this
tentation. Joseph's answer, Shall I do this wickedness, and sin against God?
Saint Paul's answer, 1 Cor. 6. Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them
the members of an Harlot? God forbid.

The second sin, to which the words of my Text have immediate reference, is
Rigor and Cruelty to Inferiors: Why is this such a matter? May I not use my
servant at my pleasure? No; It seems so by Jobs Question here; and yet in his
time, servante were slaves; but even a little, but even one degres above
beasts; the Masters being Owners, and having power of life and death; and no
doubt but these slaves (as amongst the Turks at this day) felt and endured
inhumane and cruel usage in the world. We read of a number of insolent examples
among the Romans, and God himself confined his own people, and pinned them down
with Laws, and still controules the rising of their cruelty by remembrance of
their own condition in Egypt: and for that very end, the Holy Ghost proceeds
here with a double Argument against such Insolency; which Tremelius calls
Elegantissimam (...): The first Argument drawn, says he, a Judicio Dei, (...):
The Judgment of our common Lord and Master, respectless of any man's person;
and therefore the despising either of his person, or of his cause; yea, of such
a cause as wherein he dares contend with me that am his Master! even this, God
will not bear. I must answer for this; nay I shall not be able to answer it, if
I be guilty but of this. And the second argument is taken a jure naturali in
the fifteenth verse, Is my mold or mettle better then my man's? Is a Lords flesh
and blood of a purer composition, then his Grooms, or his Foot-mans? Did not he
that made me in the womb, make him? And did not one fashion us in the womb, or
fashion us in one womb, that is, the common womb of our mother earth? What is
then the lesson hence, but meekness for all to practice, but specially those in
upper place, since none is more superior then a Master over his slave? And for
this purpose, the Scripture presents us with two strange examples; Moses so
chosen to advancement by God himself: So known of God as his friend; Dignified
by his miraculous Power in the eyes of his enemies, and by the conduct of his
people, that never man more prompted to take state upon him; and yet it is
said, this Moses was the meekest man alive. The other is David, when he danced
before the Ark, and Michal reprooving him, he told her he would be more vile,
since so she called his humility; and confesses the bottom of his heart, Psalm.
131. I have behaved my self, and quieted my soul, even as a weaned child. We
find this was (at least they said so,) in the intent of those Philosophers,
both Sceptique and Epicurean, to arrive at Mansuetudo, and Tranquillus animus;
to clear the soul like a fair and unclouded Heaven; and this was brought us by
the Doctor of Heaven, Christ Jesus, both in precept, Learn of me to be humble
and meek, and in patience possess your souls; and in practice, stooping himself
not to a survey of our miseries; but clad, enclosed, compassed with all man's
infirmities, sin only accepted; and as unashamed, as glorying in his humility,
he cries out, tell the daughter of Sion, not her Servant, but her Sovereign,
her King, the King of Kings, comes nnto her meek. -- And is it not then a
miserable consideration, a wretched spectacle, to see a proud man and a humble
God; an angry, impatient, and a merciless man, and yet a God of Love and
long-suffering! I look to Heaven, and thence I find descending, the Savior of
the world, ((...), is his Description, in Hebrews 1.3.) the brightness of his
Fathers Glory, and the express image of his person, in shape not only of a man,
but of a servant; He that commands Legions of Angels, and whose attendants they
were in the wilderness, and proud of the office, to serve him as his Cooks and
Butlers: And shall not this example work on me that am but dust and worms? and
keep me from insulting over Inferiors, who though my servants, and my meaneft
Hines and Drudges, are yet respecting him our Lord and Father, both my fellow
servants, and my fellow brethren?

Observe the provocations to this Virtue. He scorns the Scorner, resists the
proud, but gives Grace to the humble. The Meek he will guide in Judgment; in
his Judgment he will teach them his way, Psalm 25. When he shares the world,
he tells us, The Meek shall inberit the earth, and delight themselves in
abundance of peace, Psalm 39 7. which he ratifieth in his blessing, Mat. 5.5.
^ut this is earthly blessing, is it not so in heavenly things too? Hear him in
his Prophet, Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord
has anointed me to preach good tidings, (and we know what that means) To whom?
to the Meek. His first coming was for the Meek, in the same Prophet, Isa. 11.4.
And (to meet again with the Text) When God shall visit, when this Son of God
shall stand up to judge, and to cast all proud, and barbarous, and cruel
dispositions into Hell: so he will then lift up the Meek, and never leave these
polisht Jewels, till he has inset them in heavenly Glory. For the Lord takes
pleasure in his people, and will beautify the Meek with salvation, Psalm
149.4. And therefore who is a wise man? says St. James. Jam. 3.13. let him
show out of a good conversation his works in meekness of wisdom; for such is
heavenly wisdom, at verse 17. first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, etc. If we preach, it must be in love, and the spirit
of Meekness, 1 Cor. 4. ult. If you hear, Receive with meekness the Word. Jam.
1.21. If we will both Preacher and Hearers walk worthy our Vocation, it must be
with all lowliness and meekness, etc. Ephe. 4.2. For as if in this one grace
all the rest were locked and infolded, so does the Apostle speak there, and
reckoning up the several gifts of the Spirit, in Gal. 5. they seem all to be
but Meekness, diversified to several names. To end, I beseech you (brethren) by
the meekness and gentleness of Christ, Be ye clothed with humility; and upon
that reason, which is here in my Text, God visits for rigor, he resists the
proud, but gives Grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.

Furthermore, If cruelty exclude from Paradise, and disable from standing in
the day of visitation; Use this for terror against all the terrible Ones upon
earth, all exalted and crnel Oppressors: They must hear of the wrath of this
Supervisor in Heaven, who sees them from thence, and from thence they shall in
that day see him come to visit for this sin. Though they can over-soar and
escape all power on earth, yet see what a day the Lord threatens to make, in
Amos 8. and join to that the Prophecy of Isaiah 10.1, 2, 3. etc. and Jeremy
6.6. etc.

Lastly, Extend this for Consolation. Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
says he, the highest power on earth, can stretch but to their Vassals: but
over Princes themselves is his Perogative and Dominion, that here stands up in
my Text; and of whom Solomon says, hc is higher then they. In the cause and
quarrel of Christ Jesus then we must put on the resolution of those three
valiant Children, The God whom we serve, is able to deliver us, Dan. 3. but if
not, we will not disobey his Command for any countercommand on earth. And in
this, all those poor Saints of God that groan under the Turkish yoke, or
Spanish Inquisition, all those poor Tenants and servants that live rackt, and
oppressed, and ground to powder, under the merciless and rigorous Lords and
Masters, must advance the eye of their souls, with comfort to the coming of
this great and glorious Judge and Lord of Heaven: for that day of his
visitation shall be also the day of their full Redemption. My third application
is to four sorts of Visitors. First, You that are authorized over us, you see
God will discharge his Office: Do you set God ever before you, his Example, and
his Fear; and first learn his first visitation in Mercy in kindness to us your
brethren, to do us good. It Is God (we confess) appoints degres of Superiority
and Excellency in all Orders of Angels in Heaven, in the Sky greater, lesser
Lights. Lower still, Eagles and Flies, Cedars and Shrubs; among the very
Stones, the brightest tincture given to the Ruby, clearest light to the
Diamond. But by comparing parts of the body, the Apostle proves the head cannot
want the foot; among u^ specially of the Clergy, no proud infulting; for the
Rule holds on this side the water too, that the Capuchin and Cordelier, the
poorer part of this Tribe uphold the dignity of Priesthood, ballancing with the
pomp of some superior Prelates.

Secondly, Do you visit as God, -- ad correctionem, and not hold it a virtue,
Laxare Disciplinam? Remember the worlds entertaining Mahumetism is ascribed to
three causes, Pestis Arriana, Manichaei furores, and the third, Disciplina
laxata. But wherein do we need your inspection? in both, our learning, and our
life. First, See to our insufficiency, ignorance; what silly things suffered
not only to read, but (clothing their sancies with pretext of the Spirit) to
preach too; and then the main way of teaching in many places, yet unpracticed,
and that is Catechizing. Alas! What is it to enrich the peoples ears for an
hour, who if they sleep not, gape and praise the Sermon, as they like the Tune,
says Ezekiel, as they do a Love-song? Ezekiel. 33.32. Then are you over men's
lives too, over the Layety to curb their wolvish and fox-like shifts, and
cousenage in the Lords portion; but chiefly in that sin whereto my Text
appoints you in Gods stead: for Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; he
will visit, does it daily, and will then do it dreadfully. In the mean time,
are you his Depuries, Delegates, Commissioners? What though the scornful
fools, as Solomon calls them, make a mock of this sin, a sport, and pursue it as
an Art and Trade? Yet you know, it is (respecting a man's self) unhallowing of
Gods Temple, a dismembring the body of Christ; respecting others, a defiling of
the most holy and solemn Covenant on earth, a kerving asunder those whom God
has joined, and therefore stands the Commandment forbidding it, betwixt Thest
and Murder. Lastly, Respecting the Land, it is a fire, as Job speaks here, at
verse 12. devouring foundations, and hurling the flame round about it. And are
not they, who have the Power of Coertion, if they do it not, as so many
Spreaders of this fire, as so many Bawds and Pandars if for Bribes, they
wilfully palliate or wink at this Disorder, or look upon it through a false and
colored Medium? And if ever there was cause to cry loud, and lift up the
Trumpets voice to waken both you and the whole State, is it not now, when like
Egypt plagued with Frogs, the Land even stiaks of this corruption? and had we
no other Infection, enough to bring some fearful curse upon us all.

But are our lives so ciear, they need no visiting, need none from you? No? Is
not a debaucht and drunken Minister within your power? Drunkenness, a crime
hateful in the Lay, but hideous in the Clergyman: a sin in them, but
sacrilege in us; And are not you to visit for these things, and vindicate our
mother from this stain? But when? when shall we see a great and rich Adulterer
perform the open penance of the Church? Or when shall I hear an Archdeacon, a
Commissary, a Chancellor, or a Bishop rather, (for that's the title of God here,
an Over-seer) rattle and fright some of these swollen and putrid offall of the
Levites? these hateful roaring Drunkards, in the midst of the assembly of
their brethren. Remember God in his visitation on Sodom, says, he will go
down, and see whether so or no. So should you, stay to enquire, and not make
the Visitation (as the country calls it in scorn) a busy taking only, or
passing over us like a Vision rather then a Visitation.

But who should help it? how can there any thing be reformed without
presentment? this concerns a second sort of Visitors: Churchwardens. And what
says your bill my Masters? Some poor Rascal will not pay his levy, or the
piper has got a bastard: but how many has your Landlord gotten? Alas, Sir,
we are poor people, and it would be our undoing to meddle with such. But what?
your Minister, they say, he is a lewd Tosse-pot, a very drunken Sot. O no!
Omnia been, a good Fellow, a little given to company-keeping: thus the best of
you are content to mince it, or some perhaps ready to defend him; and reason
why: they keep the Alehouse, and he is the prime guest; if it were not for him
they might knock down the sign. Blessed be God, I am persuaded you know not
many such as I describe; but yet I fear there be some still within the compass
of these marks. And dare not you present them? Nay, dare you present any thing?
Shall men in office, Visitours, Wardens, nay watchmen sworn, thus play with
their Oaths? What a wretched thing is it thus to fear men, and despise God,
that great Lord Warden of his Church, who when he shall visit you for this
perjury, what will you answer him?

A third sort of Visitours are our selves, Sears called in the old Testament,
and Overseers in the New, Acts 20. all Bishaps, Phil. 1.1. Let us then learn
to discharge it, first by heeding and visiting our own hearts, reflecting on
and examining our own souls, whether the God in our Books, in our Sermons be
such in our secret breasts, and whether we hear or feel our selves rather, when
we preach, or whether our preaching run not through us like a wooden Spout,
like the old Riddle of Through the wood and never touch it; never touch, never
affect the heart. And then ore-look our learning, and strive to mend our nets,
giving our selves (as Tully says) recoquendos, till we become workmen that
need not be ashamed, dividing the Word aright, able to exhort and convince
soundly, Tit. 1.3. For this it Ars artium, regimen animarum, which to perform
as commonly it is done, flatteringly, or lazily and perfunctorily, is both easy
and acceptable, but it is too most miserable and damnable. And then ore-see our
lives, and those exempt and defend from baseness, but specially that odious
sin, which goes too much in black, drunkenness. The way to make the Seer
overseen, to lose the eyes of his mind, to drown his holy unction in drink, and
suffocate the Spirit of Grace; he must be apt to teach, (says the Apostle;)
and in the same place it follows, Not addict to Wine, left that disqualifie his
Palate and Brain, and render him Ineptum, unfit to teach, or to be taught. But
I hasten to a fourth and last sort of Visitors, that is, all Christians in
performance of that general Duty, which concerns both preacher and People, and
is indeed a prime part of Christianity, and that which St. James calls Pure
Religion, namely, to visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity, and
that which will be remembered, and enquired after at the great and dreadful
visitation by the Judge of all the world, who will demand not what we have
preached, or heard, or professed, bnt what we have done. And among those works
of mercy that shall follow, and felicitate such as die in the Lord, and shall
then rise in the Power of his Resurrection, this is a Chief, our visiting the
sick and those in prison. And the omission of this shall be taken as a neglect
and refusing of Christ Jesus in person. In as much as you have not done it to
them, you have not done it to me. Consider what I have said, and the Lord give
you and me, and us all Understand in all things.

Let us pray for a Blessing, etc.

THE FIRST SERMON AT COURT.
GEN 3.9. The Lord God called unto the man; and said, Adam, where art thou?
1. A Text ancient and catholic; for all times seasonable! fit for all
places; fit for all places and persons. Is it to a King that I preach? I may
tell him this Sermon, whereof my Text is a piece, was the first piece of sound
Divinity, and preached to the first Monarch-Lord of all the earth; yet preached
by a greater King, even the King of Kings, and Lord of Heaven and Earth. If I
were preaching to a Parliament, I could tell them this was the first that ever
was, in which the first malignant-Party was justly sentenced, and the two first
Delinquents in mankind put to Fine and Ransom.

2. Take us together, without respect of persons, and the Text will serve to
call upon every man here that professes himself a son and a servant, and yet is
apt to forget the Law of the Lord his God. Where art thou first for the place?
In whose house, in whose Courts, in whose Presence Chamber? and even this
Demand, considering our usual inconsideration is enough to shiver us, as it did
lacob with Surely God is in this place, and I was not aware. And then where art
thou? In whose Court of Judicature? and even now to be called to thy answer for
the same business as Adam here; The breach and violation of Gods Commandment.
For thou have eaten also of the forbidden fruit; for so is the committing of
any thing, against which Gods prohibition lies: and are we like then to be
found Recti in Curia? Can we answer him any one thing of a thonsand? so the
Call will concern us, and the sense of the words will penetrate to our hearts
also, if we refuse not, if we run not away from God, and seek to hide our
transgressions; in sum, it is a Text well worthy our serious attention.

3. We may call it an Introduction to a judicial proceeding of God against man,
after his sin. For after sin comes Judgment. Premit comes. So it was ab
origin, Adams case! The first book-case that ever was: And Judgment (as St.
Peter says) begins at the house, and more here, it begins with the Son of God:
for as in fullness of time he sent his only begotten Son in the similitude of
sinful flesh, and to condemn sin in the flesh; and though he knew no sin, yet
to be punished for sin; being made sin for us, and bearing all our sins in his
body; So here he comes in the beginning of time, to arraign and condemn sinful
flesh in his own Son. Christ is his honorable, true and only Son, begoten of
his Father before all worlds, by an everlasting generation and ineffable, that
none can declare: But all the sons of men are his sons too by a generation
declared in Ethnique Poety first, and then in ancient Catholic and Apostolic
Divinity, made of that Poety, Acts 17. (...). We are his Offspring and
Generation, we all are so; but our Forefather was so by a kind of
Primogeniture, as St. Luke expressly, Which was the Son of Adam, which was the
Son of God.

Whence, even thus early may we make application, that certainly it will be
then a poor and barren, a silly and impotent, a base and impudent hope for any
son of Adam to look for Impunity. Rather all must look in severals, one day to
hear this Call of God, Where art thou? Wheresoever thou shall be, or howsoever
found dead among those that live in pleasures, drowned and soakt in fleshly
lusts, or choacht in wordly cares; or quick from the dead, from that dispersion
and resolution to watery slime and mud, to earthly dust or aerie Atoms: All the
Mass and Collective body of mankind once made, and then at once remade by his
mighty Word, shall hear his almighty Word, that Voice and Trump of God, Return
you sons of men, Arise and come to Judgment. Let us in Gods name and fear do
so now. Arise, quicken our thoughts, prepare for (since prevent we cannot) that
last by considering of this first Judgment.

5. Wherein the parts are four; our two first parts, are the two Parties,
appearing in and at this Judgment. God the Judge, and man the Delinquent. Our
third particular, is the manner of the process Calling; The Lord God called
unto the man: And the last, is the matter of the Summons, Where art thou? which
in the literal sense is, Whether art thou fled? But in the Mystic, it bears a
kind of secret Increpation, and a touch of pity, Where art thou? The glory of
my Workmanship become the shame of all the Creatures? Into what a miserable
condition reduced, that thou art ashamed of thy self? Alas! Adam where art
thou? and before we finish our Observations on the Text, we may come to make
use of both these Interpretations.

6. The first part of this Judgment, is the two persons appearing: so I said,
there were two. But yet it is not so; The first person spoken of, is the Judge,
and he is present; The Lord is at hand. But the guilty sinner, he flies for it,
-- Et non est inventus. But it is not possible for him to escape, or lie hid;
the sin will find him out; and we must all appear. Rejoice O young man (says
Ecclesiastes) Eccle. 11. in the youth, -- in excess of Riot, Pomp, Rage, thou
can cover all under the fig leaves of youth; but know, that for all these
things, God will bring thee to Judgment, young and old, without difference;
every soul to answer for every thing done in every body. The Judge is of pure
and fiery eyes, sees down through darkness to our hearts and reins; no casting
of mists, no deluding of this Judge; and then no need of long proceedings,
frequent siftings, and tedions Cribrations of the cause; for all things are
naked and bare in his sight, all evident and clear before this Lord; for this
Lord is God, The Lord God is his name.

7. Now the names of God are referred to two heads. 1. Simple and absolute; or
2. In Relation to us. Of the first sort, Some respect his Essence or Nature, as
that name which we know not certainly how, but we are taught to pronounce
Jehovah. Some respect that which we call (but yet in tender sense dare scarce
call it so,) his Personality, as the names of Father, Son and Spirit: And some,
his Attributes Essential, as Just, Holy, etc. The second kind of relative
names, are such as King, Governor, Preserver, and this of Dominus here, the
Lord,

8. First for the Name, and so the Nature of God; it is an Ocean too immense
and boundless for our discovery; An Abyss for the sounding of our light and
frail reason to propound. And concerning this Title Lord, I will not enter
(though my Text lie near the Creation,) into that curious dispute which yet
amused Tertullian, and St. Austin afterward, whether this style then only and
properly began in the worlds beginning, and could not be attributed to God
before. Such speculation is but dry and useless stuff; I will rather tell you
what the School tells us of all Gods Names in relation, that is, such Names are
not really in God, but in the Creature. So as God is called Summum Bonum, not
because God cannot admit a composition of those two, or any pieces, but because
his Bonitas, as comprehensive of all other, and diffusive to all, so
supereminently above all; And because all that retains the name of Good, as
derivative from him; so in it self defective, and to us deficient in compare
with him, (says Aquinas,) and yet even in affecting and accepting such names,
God delivers himself to us in a gracious way of endearment. For where men
aspire to Honor, and ascend to titular additions therefore that the swelling
vapor of a Longa Pagina (as he calls it,) may lift them like a Pageant high in
the air, and haled from the community of baser earth, God in a wonderful
descending still vouchsafes rather to honor his servants and Clients by
sometimes assuming names of particular and individual reference, as the God of
Abrabam, the fear of Isaac; sometimes of general appliance to all the Israel of
God, as is the large extended and branching Tree, the spreading Sun in an
Expansion, Dilatation, Emanation, Communication, Consolation to all his
servants in this full and cheerful name of Dominus, the Lord.

9. Which name in the strict and proper acceptance (they say,) can belong of
right to none but God, by reason it includes these two conditions. First. He
that is exactly Dominus, may at his pleasure use the thing whereof he is Lord;
enlarge, diminish, change, annihilate, that is, as far as the nature of the
thing will bear; And who is so supreme on earth? Secondly, The absolute Lord
stands in need of nothing, but is endued with a proper innate and
self-sufficiency; Aad who can boast himself to be so absolute? Vnxi te in
Regem, -- and in caput, are notes of humane eminence in the Old, and as plain
is that of (...) in the New: One from Samuels testimony, a Seer and a chief
Prophet of God; and the other from St. Peter, a prime Apostle, both instructed
in the Will of the Lord here: And yet no Saul, nor Roman Emperor, nor any
supreme Head and Governor on earth since those times can ever say, and say
truly, so much as to the foot of his body Politic, I have no need of you; much
less then can the feet or legs, the sides or arms, or bulk of the body, though
never so big, say to the head, (mistaking it for a Perruke,) say, We have no
need of thee.

10. It was (as is imaginable) for this Energie in the restrained sense of the
word, that the Septuagint everywhere render Jehovah by (...), the Lord; and
some such reverence to the name made Augustus, (sure) so respective and nice,
as not to endure it; and Suetonius reproves Domitian of incredible arrogance,
for not disclaiming that usual acclamation in the Amphitheatre of
Dominofoeliciter: Well might his Poet then recant, and repent his Inscription
of Dominus Deusque noster. And yet we know what he that sits in that Emperors
Throne, the triple miter'd man of sin, or if not so, yet surely sinful man
does dully and damnably retain, and blushes not to this day to wear, and hear
from his Poets and Parasites in Print of Dominus Deus noster, our Lord God the
Pope. And yet for the term of Dominus alone, as in our language, it is cheap
enough: The words Lord and Sir being very near allied in sense; so in the
Latin now, and all those crumbs and drops of Spanish, French, Italian
Eloquence, into which the Latin is broken and dissolved, it signifies no more,
it confers no more in usual phrase. And in the very Greek of the New Testament,
so near Augustus days, it is evident enough that their (...) was but
equivalent to our Sir; for it is observed that Mary Magdaleus gives it there to
our blessed Savior, and at the same time envies it not, but affords her (...)
Sir to the very Gardener.

11. But a more useful Note from both these Names together, we may make out of
St. Bernards rule, Omne nomen Dei in Scripturis, etc. Every Name of God in
Scripture sounds of Mercy or of Justice; and both these are in this
judicatorie, to show that Adam had now provoked not only a glorious God, holy
and just, but his Lord Gracious and full of kindness to him: This raises the
wind into a foul storm; swells a brook of disobedience to a Sea, when man the
masterpiece, the favorite, turns against his God that had made him a kind of
under-god, given him dominion too. For the Habendum enters with a Dominamini.
It was my Lord Adam from the beginning; a Lord Lieutenant under the Lord of
Hosts in three great Counties, of the earth, and air, and Seas, and of all
things therein, with power of life and death. Ungrateful man to make offense
against his maked the creature rise against his Crea^our that raised him from
the dust, sustained, planted, pleasur'd him with infinite varieties of sure and
^al favors. This on the Remorse was it that cut David to the heart: Against
thee O Lord, against thee have I ^inned, and done this evil in thy sight: No
wonder if traitorous man on this recognition of the Judge offended, hid
himself, and sought for shelter among the trees, and even there remained
startling and umbragious, being chased away by the fiery indignation of a
powerful God; especially with this co-consideration that his treason had been
committed against a Lord so gracious; But whether this Gracious and great Lord
God was the second Person, the Lord of Glory our blessed Redeemer Christ Jesus
(as some will have it conceivd both of this and other apparitions in the old
Testament) I stay not to determine, nor to enquire. But thus far only this Note
will easily fall upon, and into our consciences, if we resist not, if we
despite not the Spirit of this Grace. Namely, that we should bear an infinite
derestation to sin, which procured at first, and has that malignant properte
intrinsic and everlasting in all successive sin and sinners, to provoke still
the anger and offense of a most gracious Lord; and if so, then to think further
of that infinite Grace, and Love, and goodness, which even after sin committed
could procure that Lord to compassion, and could draw so deep a descent of
Mercy, as to submit himself to his most bitter Passion; whereby he gives every
wounded soul a clear assurance in an open pardon sealed in his own blood; and
also in this very Name leaves an Intimation, that all our disobedience, all our
foul, and many, and weighty sins, fall yet within the measure and compass, and
cannot sink us past or beneath the mercies of a gracious Lord God. And
therefore we to raise our souls upon this double Name, as on a pair of
powerful wings, oversoaring despair, and flying up into his bosom who is our
hope and life, our dread and Love: our Judge indeed, but yet our Advocate, that
calls to us, Come to me; and whose blood cries for us; and we therefore to cry
to him with that Disciple newly awakened to that frightfull, and that
delightful double sight at once, both of his sin and his salvation in Christ;
which made him so resolutely and so cheerfully take and wreath these Names
together with M^us in the appliance, Dominus, Deus meus: my Lord and my God,

12. This instruction I know, and so you will apprehend it, fits far better
with the ^exts of the new, and yet is no stranger in the old Testament. For
even Isay and Mala^hy, in their clear and frequent forementions of our Lord,
retain as well the Relishes of Evangelists, as Prophets; and David openly sings
and plays him on his Harp, as Evidently, as Elegantly: Nay, not so veiled in
Moses, but that this very place of Genesis, so early in the worlds infancy
reveals (some think) the very person, sure we are the Office of our Lord and
Savior: whose after-manifestation and coming to destroy the works the Devil
had made, is promised within six verses, and called a bruising of the Serpents
head.

13. But let us pursue this same consideration another way; that a gracious and
so a glorious Lord and God is offended, and by sin drawn to an opposition, to
an enmity with his beloved creature man. The vileness of sin is many ways
discovered in the language of the Holy Ghost: It is to a main height of
expression, when God descends to so low a comparison, as that in Amos, I am
pressed under your sins, as a Care is pressed under many sheafs. My Rebellion, my
stubbornness is a dangerous sin done against my Prince, or Pastor, or Parents.
And my violences, my cruelties are heavy sins, because in them I oppress my
brother, as a good man, it may be better in his eye that made us both, then my
self. But did I ever understand till now, that I may oppress him that is
optimus maximus, my God also? Is it not enough to weary men (says the Prophet)
but shall I dare to vex and weary my God also? and afflict and grieve my
gracious Lord and his Holy Spirit. No wonder we find David complaining, My sins
are a sore burden too heavy for me to bear, when David's Lord tunes his voice to
the same key, Your sins are a sore burden, too heavy for me to hear. Do thou
not see O vain man by this, the vileness, the odiousness of thy sin, which
makes him impotent that is Omnipotent? As also in that term of Abomination; How
frequent is the use thereof in holy Scripture, to cause us to write this lesson
into all our souls from thence? Nothing makes us so ugly spectacles to that
Lord our God as sin, which causes him to turn his face away in displeasure, not
able to abide us in his sight, nay forced to deny his own workmanship, Depart,
I know you not; thus making him ignorant that is Omniscient. And yet above, and
beyond, and beneath all these we may collect the height, and breadth, and depth
of a sinners dangerous and fearful condition by those speeches of anger and
provocation. The wrath of a King is as Messengers of death, the Wise man tells
us, and he that provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul. What is it
when we provoke the holy one of Israel to anger? O Lord, rebuke me not in thy
anger: if in that mood I be called into Judgment, O Lord, who is able to abide
it? And this is doubtless one of the depths of Satan, one of his main aims in
provoking us to sin, that thereby God being provoked to anger, may declare
himself our enemy: What shall we then say, Men and Brethren? What will we then
do? May we not then say justly, that other Lords have unjustly reigned over us?
Infoelix Lolium, and steriles dominantur, -- our base and barren lusts and
pleasures have indeed justly by Gods permission, and by way of punishment had
dominion over us, by our willing submission of our souls to their sway and
tyranny: And will we still do so, continue in sin, still make a mock of gross
and grievous sins, never startle, or admit the least umbrage of remorse at open
blasphemies, and often Adulteries, drunkennesses? Are not such men's Souls and
Bodies, States and Children in a fearful manner engaged to the wrath of God,
which they hourly provoke by these abominations? Alas! poor wretched man or
woman, however titled. Preacher or Hearer, Lawyer or Courtier, Lord or Lady,
every wickedness, every known sin I dwell and delight in, and resolve on, is
not only a touching pitch, whence inevitable defilement, nor a carrying fire in
my bosom, impossible to escape detriment, but is an opposition, a rebellious
outstanding and sleighting of my God; enmity: for the wrath of God is
manifoldly proclaimed from Heaven, and Wisdom cries it in the streets; Gods
Declaration we are not ignorant of; and dare we then despise? If I be a Lord,
where is my fear? What earthly Monarch, the anointed of the Lord (unless
super-anointed with the spirit of patience and meekness above mortals,) can
endure his lawful Commands to be vilified? And can we look for less then
sudden execution of that wrath which is drawn out, and ready to fall on
sinners, and has been the sinners case from the beginning? Adam was our first
Father that found it so, and we his sinful issue, on whom the ends of the
world are come, do, and ever shall find it so till the consummation; for the
perpetuating of this proceeding in God is made manifest by that of the Apostle,
where he shows us plainly, and as if he saw the arrow falling, or the lightning
blaze of Gods revengesull fire seizsing on, and cingeing the sinners hairie
scalp that goes on still in his wickedness; For such things sake, (says he,)
look about you, -- Behold the wrath of God comes upon the Children of
disobedience.

14. Methinks I see some Bravo now, some scornful fool (as Solomen blazons the
witless and wilful sinners coat,) turn his half-face, and flearing and
swearing, urge me with a Why Sir? Is God so dreadful an enemy? Yes; even thou
shall find, and believe him so at last, if not too late! Thou that in youth,
and in thy strength and wealth art loath to believe him so these seven years
yet. For observe in God those two properties which make an enemy formidable. 1.
Power unlimited, carries not the third part of the world, (as he said of
Scipio,) on his neck, but holds up, or casts down all at will and pleasure,
ruling over all, as Almighty, does what he will in the Armies of Heaven; and
him that walks in pride, he is able to abase on earth, blasting beauty, and
youth, and strength, and riches, and wit, and all thy growing hopes and
fortunes with the very breath of his displeasure. And sure this very first
consideration of Gods infinite Power will shudder every mere humane, make every
undevilisht bosom tremble. It was a King that said it, and a man after Gods own
heart, and no doubt felt it in his own heart, Stand in aw, and sin not; In aw?
Of whom shall Lords and Kings stand in aw? of him that is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; The Lord God; I say unto you, Fear him; Fear him that is able to
destroy Dominion and Regality, able to reverse all victories, confound all
earthly glory with disgrace, and compound all worldly honor with the dust, that
is the Lord God here in my Text. Set not light by him that is able to hurt or
help, was Ethick advice of the Ethnic Preacher, Aristotle; but it was a divine
sentence in the lips of the King before, the royal Preacher to Gods own darling
people Israel, Contend not with one stronger then thou. And the famous Preacher
of the Gospel to the Gentiles, St. Paul opens all sinners eyes and ears to
apprehend this ensuing danger in that applicatory question, Do we provoke the
Lord to jealonsie, to anger? Are we stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10.22. Tush, this
is needless now, says my Gallant; Who knows not this? stronger then God? Who
ever opened his mouth to say so? But yet there is an intestine, there is a
visceral Blasphemy, as well as oral, and as ill every whit. The fool that says
in his heart, There is no God, or else a blind, a drowsy, or an impotent God,
either he cannot, or he will not regard; all such secret thoughts are as open
Blasphemies, though not so infectious. And therefore I beseech thee, whoever
thou art, for Gods sake, if not for thy own souls sake, to take notice, and to
beware; For do not thou conceive that every hard hearted, every unrelenting
soul feels some such susurration in the secret and silence of her own Closet
and Cloister, some such carnal inspiration, while she resolves not to repent,
but to continue in known sins? and says in effect, I have heard much of Gods
Power, and the Preacher would make me belive that the Word of God is a Wisdom
divine, and Gods heavenly Power to my salvation; But sure I find that Word (let
them read it, preach, urge it never so forcibly,) is yet too weak, and all
their ghostly Councils and Exhortations of no value: I am sure, I never yet
found them prevalent with me, but that I am able, during the very Sermon-time
to sleep; and find that I am not only proof against all their persuasions, but
persuaded that neither this man, though well voyc'd, nor that, though cried up
for a powerful Speaker, nor the whole Tribe indeed, shall ever be able to
prevail over me. It Is true indeed that God only can break in upon man's soul,
and the Word we preach, which is but improperly called his Word, and is so no
surther then we are careful to separate the precious Truth of Heaven from
earthly inventions or conjunctions. Yet take heed of despising the meanest
Instrument that God sends upon this Embassy, and resolve that all Resolvings
against the charming Power of Gods, are from the suggestion of the foul spirit.
And if any of this audience should be infected, I say, if this should be so,
though (Beloved in Christ Jesus,) this ought not so to be; and though I fully
hope for better things of you; yet for fear it may be so, by reason of our
common frailty; and if this qualification of Omnipotency in God shake us
nothing, yet let this that follows; try to disimprove and prevent, or infeeble
all the Charms of the Serpent, and dismantle all the strong holds and sorts of
Satan in our hearts which would put us on Gods Comminatory Morieris; That there
is a second property in God (I might na^^ (...) more,) which makes an enemy
terrible, and that is, The affection of Hate. My enemies are many and mighty,
(says David) and yet we do not hear the worst, and they hear a tyrannous
hatred against me; there is the bottom! And though such an hate in God is not,
nor ever can be toward man, or any other creature; for he hates nothing that
he has made: yet sin is a thing that he never made; a thing begot betwixt the
devil and our own corruption, and that the Lord is said to hate with a perfect
hatred; and it must be so, for the righteous Lord love: Righteousness with a
perfect love; and this hate in perfection spreads to the whole Tribe of sinners
for sins sake, All the Workers of Iniquity; and while they live in their sin it
mars and makes odious their most exquisite Actions. The predominant venom of
sin turns the nature of their best performances, and makes the most acceptable
Sacrifice abominable; Their very prayers shall be turned into sin: And when
they are dead, as their names rot and corrupt the very Air, so their souls are
sent to endure those exquisite torments prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
I have done with the first.

15. OUR second part, is, the second Party appearing in this Judgment, Man,
the Delinquent. I told you God was an Ocean souldless, fathomless; and when I
find St. John telling me that Christ who is God, need not that any man should
tell him what is in man, for he knew; it leaves a little of the knowledge of
man behind it namely this, That man is a thing not, or not well known to any
but God; not to another, not to himself. And when I hear his servants Job and
David put that Query, What is man? they both put it to God himself to answer;
and in those very answers which they make by Gods own inspirations, we find and
know still that man cannot be found and known, and that there are corners and
Incognita's in this Microcosm, that are not laid out fully in any Chart, but
left only to the discovery of him that is the searcher of hearts. But yet for
our present purpose and sudden apprehension of man, I will turn you but to two
books, if I do that; (for there is much reason, I Will be brief, if for nothing
else, yet a little to quit and recompense my former being too long;) And the
first book shall be this of the Creation, this very book of Genesis, and but
one place in the book, Chapter 2. verse 7. The Lord God formed man of the dust
of the ground, and breathed into him, into his Nostrils the breath of life, and
man became a living foul. Soire (we say) is per causas, and here they are; at
least here we may ground our selves upon the groundwork of all that is in our
bodies. All that gentle, noble, royal blood in men's veins, and all the matter
of the Merchants, of the Divines, of the Counselors, or Courtiers, or
States-mens very brains, all our pride and honor; if we be proud of any
materials in blood, or brain, or face, or hand, or foot, we may soon find all
our pride and honor in the dust, with a double mention and Inculcatiou of Dust,
and dust upon all mankind. God at first beats down all Supremacies still
amongst men in compare with God; all right or wrong Honorable; and so all right
or wrong Reverend too. Here we have ventured at this instant to make an
Assembly of our selves in the presence of God, and in the Courts of his own
house, male and female, with differing faces, differing outsides too, or
clothed in Purple and fine linen, with hanging on of Gold or costly Array, or
clad in skins of beasts over our own hides, and with girdles of skins, as John
the Baptist, but yet with far more differing insides, full of youthful or
wanton fires some, and some with fierce and cruel, or treacherous and bloody
thoughts; some perchance willing Hearers, and some glad only to be here at this
time, if for nothing else, yet out of an hope to catch something from the
Preacher, if he should be so silly as to flow into distempered and partial
Invectives, and anon sad to find their malice deluded; Nay, we may well suppose
that some Papist may drop in upon us now, or Separatist (at other times) afford
his company, and sneak into the Church to hear what News, and then hit his very
heart against this supposition. But I will enlarge my self in a comprehensive
Note for all this Audience, whatsoere we are, what use soever ye mean to make
of the Preacher and the Sermon, being both plain and homely stuff, and will
serve perchance at dinner to fill out discourse, and help to hold comparisons:
However God deprehend us now, or apply himself to us here, or we to him, and
his Vicegerent, in our affections or intentions good or bad: Once, however we
differ, yet one primordial and final sentence is past upon us all; one Law
gone out and over all mankind, that arrests, and enwraps, takes in all (Prince
and people) and lays up all together; Dust thou art (be sure) and (as sure) to
dust thou shall return: Every son of man like the first from the earth earthy.
A good touch this is by the way to humble us even in our most exalted
imaginations.

16. And though we hearken to the rest of man's Description with more alacrity,
which tells us so man became a living soul; yet if thou do not become that
soul, but spoiled it in the wearing; nay, if that soul serve thee only for salt
to keep thy flesh from putrefaction, if that soul become not a new soul; though
man be a living soul, yet better he had had neither soul nor life, unless the
new man, the second Adam the Lord from heaven heavenly, become the life of thy
soul, and thou lead a new life, by the power of the Son of God; if the
quickening Grace of his mighty Spirit, if the same hand of the Lord God here
that formed, do not reform thee. We talk of Reformation, and Reformation in
State and Church: I am not able to look to those things of my self, but I am
able by Gods gracious assistance to look to this reformation of my self. And
certainly as families make towns; and they make Commonwealths and Churches: so
private and particular persons are the roots and springs of all, and their
several Reformations are the roots and springs of all Reformation too. But yet
as in Reforming States. I doubt not but Statesmen, and the most stately of them
had need to be instant in prayer to God; or else without his blessing all may
prove but a shock and conflict of wits: nay worse (for Bella, horrida Bella may
ensue) except he bless, unless the Lord God keep us, Builders and Watchmen
shall do all in vain: So is it manifest in the reforming of our souls; for we
are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works, Ephesians. 2.10. And this
discerning the work of God in his own breast, is that other book to which I
would refer man for discovery of himself. The book of conscience it is which
lies open, and lays man open to himself; if he read there and find digitum
Dei, the Handwriting of God both of Law and Gospel in his heart, ingrav'd in
that Table, then it is another, a second book of Genesis: (...), a new
beginning of new Light struck up, and a new Birth of a new world of Beauty, and
harmony struck from his old chaos of corrupt Nature, and a new Testament,
(...), The book of his Regeneration, Gods spirit bearing witness with his
spirit, that he is the child of God, and a Volume, a tome, a piece of Gods
works; nay, (...), Ephesians. 2, 10. A Poem, a masterpiece of Gods own workmanship in
Christ Jesus, Reformed, reviewed, viewed, and corrected by the Author, and
purged from infinite errors; and is in Lucem editus, Reprinted and comes forth
into the Light multo auctior and locupletior, that is, Emendatior, in this new
and second Edition. But how shall I know this? Indeed that Question is turned
into a tormenting scruple by some evil Informers; but the knowledge is easy to
them that will observe the alteration. Even as we know an A B C from a
Testament by the contents and augmentation: And even as certainly, and as
sensibly as I find my self past Genesis when I am in Exodus. For this; Genesis
does ever resolve into an Exodus, that is a going out of Egypt in a
Deliverance evidenced to his soul from the thraldom of sin, and tyranny of his
own corruptions, by Gods mighty hand and outstretched arm, and a Passover by
the Lambs blood sprinkled, and flesh eaten with the sour herbs of Repentance,
and a leaving behind him, those rocky dangers and roaring wilds of sin, and sea
of vanity, from whence when he looks back, he stands still, and beholding the
Salvation of the Lord, he fears the Lord and believes the Lord, as it is in Exodus
14. ult. and sings that song of Moses and the children of Israel, Exodus 15. The
Lord is my strength, the Lord is become my salvation; who is like unto thee O
Lord, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders! If now we should
proceed from hence to fall upon the Redargution of such as mind no part of this
Learning, and hating to be reformed, are loath to look into these books, I
should show my self unmindfull of this presence, and too far stretch my abusing
of a Royal patience; reserving therefore what may make up another exercise, I
conclude with prayer.

S. D. G.

THE SECOND SERMON ON THIS TEXT AT COURT.
GEN 3.9. The Lord God called unto the man; and said, Adam, where art thou?
1. IN the first opening of this Scripture, which is an Introduction to Gods
judicial Proceeding against Man after his sin, and so the first Book-case that
ever was recorded; and being a loading case, should therefore premonish all the
sons of Adans to prevent a Second by a timely consideration of this first
Judgment, I made four parts; the two first, are the two parties appearing in
this Judicature; God the Judge, and Man the Delinquent: The other two, are the
manner of the Process by way of calling, and the matter of the Summons, Where
art thou? Of which the sense is double, by way of Question first, and then in a
way of Commiseration.

2. Concerning the first particular, and the Judges names of Lord and God, I
spoke fully the last time, and of the dangerous nature of sin which provokes so
great, and then so gracious a Lord God to indignation, to hate, and then to
punishment. Finding this boundless Ocean of God, his Names and Nature too
profound, we came to a discovery of Man, our second Particular; and observing
how hard it is for man to search into himself, for the advancement of every
man's learning in this difficult point I pointed you to two books: the first,
this book of Genesis, and therein Principally the fourth Chapter, verse 7.
wherein is laid down by God such a description of man as will let us easily
discern our wretched and earthly materials; which to reform, I told you of the
other book, the book of Conscience, wherein as in a Glass, a man man view
himself, and see of what fashion he is; that is, whether yet abiding in
Genesis, or be past over into an Exodus, and escaped in some good measure the
corruptions which be in nature and in the world through Lusts. And now it is
fit we fulfill what was promised of ^nnexing hereunto a Redargution of such
proud or dull people as seem to scorn the Perusal of these two volumes full of
heavenly Instruction, but specially abhor to look into the last; and therefore
my Reproof shall chiefly intend and pitch upon that part of their Delinquency.

3. Two sorts of men then there are both ignorant and arrogant that reject this
book of Conscience as Apocryphal, nor endure thereby to be put to their
Purgation, to their Clergy where the Versicle is both Greck and Latin, Heathen
and Christian too, (...), and Miserere mei too; both irksom and unpleasant
Doctrines to them. The first of these is the Painted Pharisee, who thinks
himself, and thinks he is scarce to thank God, and thanks himself that he is
not like other men: but one per se that can predestinate, elect, call,
justify, sanctify and glorify himself; for he can view and review, and
discover and relate at pleasure those Records above, and find or set down there
his own certain, and it may be the name of a special friend of his too (if he
think fit,) in that book of life above, without searching those rouls above, or
examining the book of his own life. For as we have Mushrum Preachers, Lecturing
before reading, and a birth before conception, miraculous Fellows: (And I would
that were the worst, would it were but froth and vanity, and a tedious nothing,
and that they did not conceive mischief, and bring forth sedition;) So their
Disciples, or rather their Patrons and Matrons too, can make sure work of their
salvation without working it out with fear and trembling, and are pefect in
Heavens way by a directory of their own private spirit, without book. The
second is the mere worldling, Filius terrae, earth-born and bred, that comes up
like a vernal flower in green and yellow; a kind of Narcissus, and like him
becomes his own glass and book; There he studies, and pores, and doats day and
night, and esteems himself a rare piece, because fairly bound up in Velome with
silk strings, painted, and gilded, and embost with his Arms, and Empress
engraven, and printed cum priviligio in a large Folio, -- Stultitiam patiuntur
opes; But Quid intus? He that runs may read him through; In the very
Frontispice and Title Page in capital Letters, stand Caro, and Carrion, and
Carcass, -- and -- nothing else, but a few scatterred Principles and
Conclusions of flesh and blood: Or, if Homo be there, it is sunk beneath his
species, and drowned in Animals -- in malis; not beset with, or set on by, but
set in evil, -- in maligno positus; and it is a Permalignancy, like a complete
Armor, from the Crown of the head, says I saiah, to the sole of his foot. It
is not quartering, nor a Party per pale, but his whole Scutcheon is una litera,
Coat and Crest, and Supporters and all. He walks with a stiff neck, (says the
Scripture) and strengthens himself in his wickedness, and makes his boast that
he can and will do mischief; and yet this wretched thing will brag of Descent,
and coming in with Conquerors and Kings. Alas! Where art thou O vain man? Here
I am sure both he and we were once in Massa corrupta; Our prime Ancestor (you
see,) a Rebel, and the next of our kin, -- Illud quod dicere nolo; we can get
no Credit by naming him. And then in this miserable condition, if he be a King
on earth, never so highly born, unless he be born again, he can never enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless washed and made Kings and Priests in his
blood, and restored in that second Adam. The mere natural man may derive
himself from Belus; but Gods calls every such man a son of Belial; and his
condition is Bellual, nay worse then that of the brute beast, though he be a
man still; And though this may anger and offend him to be told thus barely of
it; yet such a man (but I shall hope there is no such man here) must know that
if he remain in that mind still unappall'd, insensible, and therefore careless
to prevent the wrath to come, that he has divested man, or lost at least all
excellency above beast, though he be yet a seeming man, and a seemly, and an
handsome man, a proper valiant brave gentleman, or a curious dainty man, never
so great, so noble a man, and take in all that can be in a man. For wretched
man his Ancestor is here cited in that nature, and deprehended in that notion
of a man. Adam (you see here,) though foully bruised inwardy, is still a man
after his sin, though now made of good evil, and miserable of happy. Sin
destroys not humane nature in the act or habit, but in the harmony. The Order,
and Beauty, and Excellency of our nature (like a Clock that's broken,) is lost,
defaced and ruined. What a silliness is it then to argue sin as merely nothing,
and make a mock of all reproof, because it introduces no decay, no sensible
alteration in the body? And yet some acts of some kind of wickedness are
forcible even to thy corporal destruction, and thou may come to mourn at the
end when thou have consumed thy flesh and thy body, that very body of thine
which thou love better then any body, better then thy own immortal soul.
There is such a Text as applies it self to thee (perhaps,) in a literal sense;
and if not to thee, there be too many able to comment upon it, and he is blessed
that is not conscious now, or whose body will not call upon him ere long, and
repeat this part of the Sermon in his own wosull experience. But be it granted,
(as it must,) that sin is an insensible aversion from God, rather then a
sensible apprehension of loss, or pain, or change in nature; yet we know it is
held a dangerous Symptom in a sick man's state if he be senseless, and when he
lies for dead perceives not his infirmity: so it is to be heart-sick of sin, a
captive taken, and no feeling of his sickness, nor descerning of his own
thraldom. What is then to be done? but to take up our book of conscience, and
read, and find there our distemper, especially by applying it, and comparing it
with the book of Gods declared Will, find our Errata, and labor to an amendment
of life; for to such is that sharp but sweet voice of the Spirit directed, O
consider you that forget God and your selves; and again, Arise thou that
sleep, stand up from the dead. And since sin and our humane nature are from
the beginning, so, not only concorpora^e, but friendly and familiar, and so
agreeable each with other; learn not to rest content in our pure, that is our
impure Naturals; for they are styled the Press money to Impiety by St. Ambrose,
even these which we style commonly admirable natural parts, if unsanctified,
lest that name of a Natural, or what is worse of a mere carnal man stick so
close unto us, that great, or rich, or high shall only serve to skrew it
faster, or spread it further to our Reproach. Labor to divest this old and
earthly Adam, the former Leven of corruption; learn to purge away, to cast from
us in an holy scorn those rags; (for if our Righteousness be a stained Cloth,
what is our unrighteousness?) And learn and labor to give all diligence to
enrobe our selves in the raiment of our elder brother, the Second Adam, whose
odor may make us acceptable to our heavenly Father; This is that Pia morositas,
that Sacra fames, in the proper sense that holy hunger, and honing and whyning;
that pure perverseness of the soul, when like earthly minds in point of food, or
garments, or building they can never leave, but take up daily new desires. We
are displeased from time to time with our present weak condition, and desirous
to increase in Grace, and grow up from one measure of perfection to another,
cleansing our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfecting
holiness in the fear of the Lord.

4. But this will never be done by any voice of Reason, any moral swasion, or
any perusing the History of the Bible, (say some what they please,) together
with the best and ablest Expositor; no, nor by the Ordinance of God in the
Ministry of man; if we rely only upon that, be the man never so wise, never so
eloquent, learned, mighty, (and which is the best mighty,) mighty in the
Scriptores; 'Paul was learned and laborious above them all, and a
wise-master-builder; and Apollos had the striking and powerful way of Preaching
textual Divinity; yet we know it is not ascribable to the planting of the one,
or watering of the other, -- No, -- Magister intus docet is St Austins
assertion; and here it is the Lord God that speaks unto the heart: So it is
said, The Lord opened the heart of Lydia to attend to those things which Paul
preached. Isaiah may lift up a loud and shril voice like a Trumpet; and John the
Baptist may monrn and cry in the wilderness, nay our Savior himself in his
Ministry (and he spoke so as never man spoke,) was unbelieved by some, and
mocked by other. It is only the inward voice of the holy Ghost which like a
mighty rushing wind falls, and fills, and shakes the place and person where it
comes; and that voice can break the Cedars of Lebanus; subdue all hearts, and
bring all high exalted thoughts down to the obedience of Christ Jesus our Lord.
Against the power of Nature infecting, God uses the secret instilment and
inspiration of his Grace; and against the calls of Satan and this present evil
world, man has no sure help of himself or others, but to hearken to, and obey
the call of God; and thither we are come; that is our third part; The Citation,
or the manner of Gods proceeding here with man by calling, The Lord God called
unto the man.

5. Wherein our first care and disquisition must be to know what is meant: For
some have thought this was only some diffusion, some scattering of the rays of
Gods glory appearing in the Garden; and others interpret this of the secret
conviction of Adams conscience: both which may be true, but not warrantable,
nor to be fixed upon for expositions, because these leave us unsatisfied: For
God appears, where ^e calls not; and for that of the Delinquents soul being
troubled and affrighted, it was doubtless so: yet the holy Ghost would never
(we should think) have delivered over to Posterity the first man's Plea in
words, had it only been a passage of his thoughts: most probable therefore is
their opinion of an humane shape, and certain assurance of an humane voice,
wherein the Lord God called unto Adam.

6. This also we rather embrace, for that in ver. 8. where was a sound of his
Voice before, but not so distinct; Confusior primus sonus, (ut lex) sed nunc
instat Deus ad premendam conscientiam, is Calvin's Note. The first sound was nor
so distinct (says he) nor so loud; but like as the Trumpet of the Law began
low at first; but now he presses the offenders conscience; where first for Gods
cause, that is for Gods Glory, let me crave again this advertency in your
discerning, what it is that calls us from sin. The same Spirit that began in
the Creation, Revisits his own work, and excels himself in thy Recreation. It
was God which called Abraham out of VR, which signifies a fire or light: and
then brought him to a sweeter, clearer fire, and better and purer Light, even
that Light which was both revealed to the Gentiles after, and remained the
glory of his people Israel; All the Israel of God (united) both Jews and
Grecians, bond or free; on whom nor circumcision, nor uncircumcision was
regardable. For those are nothing (says the Apostle) what then is something?
Nay, what is it then that is all things? This only, To become a new creature;
wherewith shall a young man, that is the sot, the Prodigal in the Parable, that
has wasted all his stock, and is mad, out of his right mind; how shall this
man that is troubled with the Scotomy and Vertigo, a youthful wildness and
unstayedness in his brains, how shall he recover, come to himself again, and
from his blinded and distempered flight, find the way of Returning to her
heavenly Father? This is hard, but may be effected by taking heed according to
thy Word. There is a power in Nature, but the wisdom of God shining in his Word
by the joint operation of his Spirit (for these two ever work together) is a
power indeed, mighty in operation, to cast down the strong holds of Satan. Not
as it is the Ministry of men (though the Dispensation be ours) no not all those
Clarious of his holy Prophets that spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost;
to which we do well to attend (says St. Peter) as a more safe Word, and as to
a Light shining in a dark place, till the day dawn, till God send the
marvailous light of his Gospel. And then it is not in the Instruments; Not in
John greater then a Prophet, and a stout and plain deliverer of the Truth; and
not a Reed shaken with the wind, and bending his Doctrines to humor his
variously inclined Audiences. Nor in Paul thas was Os orbi sufficiens (as that
Golden-mouthed father calls that blessed Apostle.) And all his Successors in
any part of the world must know, that their Voices are but still and soft
Music, and a sound qui aures percutit -- reaching only to the ear. But the
inward Minister (of whom we heard before) instructs the heart. It Is Gods Ephata
that can do that. That alone can call from the sleep and death of sin, and from
the grave of corruption. Qui dixit sine me non potestis cogitare been, multo
magis dixit sine me non potestis credere. To believe is a greater work, and of
greater Grace and Power then to conceive a good thought. Yet both those rich
streams run from one and the same Fountain.

7. But this Impotency will not be believed to press and lie on all mankind.
How gladly would some men find out some way in themselves, whereby they might
be less beholden to the Grace of God I Ungracious to God for his Grace: and
would gladly forget, or fain to forget that God so incessantly remembers men
with his preventing, exciting, with his inchoative, and concomitant, and
subsequent, and persevering Graces; Graces of all sorts and all seasons. Bold
and presumptuous men that purposely neglect to magnify the operations of Gods
Graces on them, because they would derive the Magnificat and Benidictus on
themselves, and so sacrifice to their own nets, not looking up to the prime and
constant mover of all, not regarding the strong God of their Salvation. There
is indeed a Rate and a Sect of men, who will perchance be content that God
shall be kind and gracious to some feeble ones, that stand in need of his
assistance. Sick and weak people may need the Physic of that Heavenly Doctor.
But not such able men, such Saints and perfectists as they; men that are wholly
taken up with the admiration of themselves, and their own purity. Who yet must
know that if they have been kept from falling into gross sins, and are
therefore apt to deride mine or any other man's weaknesses who have been and do
confess as much, frequently overtaken and overcome, yet it is still the same
gracious hand that has done the several cures on both. That God whose Grace
was all the while a preservative to them, was to me and him that slipped a
Restorative. Where is boasting then? it is, or it ought to be excluded and
exploded out of all Christian books, and out of all sober and religious brains
and hearts. Be not high-minded but fear, is a Canon that uo wise man will cry
down, lest he fall with it. For simply in the state of nature, both he and I
were even; that is, even able to do nothing as of our selves; So far from being
sure of Gods Election, that we were not yet under this Grace of Vocation; nor
Law, nor Gospel-calling, and so without Christ, and so without God in the
world. Therefore here the exhortation is to be renewed of calling upon God for
this call; and crying ardently unto the Throne of Grace, that so we may obtain
Grace to help us in time of need; and that is at all times, while we bear about
flesh and blood wherein dwells corruption.

8. Secondly, Take notice of the mercy enlarged in this double call of God, and
this extension of the Voice; as in that to his Spouse, Return O Shullamire,
Return, Return! and that convincing Interrogatory, Why will you die? As I live
(says the Lord) I would not the death of him that dies. And this course we
find God ever took, sending his Prophets, rising up early with many sweet
invitements, O come and taste how gracious the Lord is. Come and drink of the
waters of his Mercy freely: And when those Prophets had spent their strength,
stretched out their hands in vain, and had their cries returned in Reproiches,
and their reward was nothing but stones and persecutions, then rose the Baptist
with a new cry, -- who was more then a Prophee, then any son of man before
him, respecting the excellency of his Office in the present assignation of the
Messiab, and exhibiting the long longed for Lamb of God to take away the sins
of the world. He redoubled his cry in the wilderness of Repent; and reason,
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; so at hand, that he could indigitate him
that was, and is the King of Heaven, with his Ecce Agnus 'Dei, Behold him that
is come to call sinners to Repentance and Remission, that has brought
abundance of Grace and Truth, no more in Promise or Prophecy, but in Act and
personal performance: and yet this John the Baptist you know how rewarded; they
extingnished this burning and shining Lamp in a base Report of a Demoniack; and
no wonder; for in the fullness of time he sent his Son, the Son of God himself
for us men, and for our salvation, came down from Heaven, the high Priest of
our profession, made man, and made a Minister (of that Profession which was
never more despicable then now, unless it be in a few Peplicolaes of our own,
or fugitives from the Roman Church.) And did not he find (as we must on his
experiment and Prediction expect) a stony-hearted and stony-handed generation?
though all his Errand was but a woing Embasie from Heaven, and an unfeigned
hearty Invitation, Come unto me all that be weary for refreshing, and if my
Word will not pass, my Blood shall witness and confirm it under seal. And last,
A Race of Evangelists and Teachers in his name beseeching men to be reconciled
unto God, and which in despite of the worlds base usage he will continue to
the end of the world.

9. Thirdly, Observe the Progress and Degrees of sin; Adams heart possessed,
deafs his ear; Satan's Policy having obtained the inmost Fort, he salls to
fortify in outworks, whereof the ear is of prime Regard, (...), the Gate of
Learning, the Inlet to all discourse of Reason and Religion: We therefore in
Wisdom ought to labor to prepossess this gate of our enemy, else Christ may
stand, and knoch, and call, and we reply, (if at all we do it) with -- vix
audivi Domine, by reason Satan hindered us by prevention, and holds the Fort
against Christ by prescription. We therefore as for spiritual eye-salves to
resort to him that calls us to that Mercate; Buy of me the best Collyrium; so
far Aures perforatae, which is the Mark of Christ's sheep, ears set open and
attentive to his Word, that is, ears to hear him, and his true Wisdom, pure and
peaceable, and not the susurrations, not those subtle whispers of the Serpent,
who is the Charmer now, though he charm never so fleshly, never so worldly
wisely with his Eritis sicut Dii, as to the first Adam here, or omnia dabo, all
these will I give thee, as to the second Adam: For if we be not thus cautelous,
we shall incur his high displeasure; that God that made, and still searches the
heart, abhors it from his heart, if the devil be lodged there; for through the
narrow straiteness of of one ear, these two, Christ and Satan will never agree
to pass; and if Satan possess it wholly, Alas! Adam then, Where art thou?

10. That Is our fourth and last particulat in this perusal of the literal
sense, the matter of the Summons, Vbi tu? Where art thou? Was God ignorant of
his abode? No, but desirous to bring man to confession, and so to draw the
corruption of his heart through his mouth. Confession of sin a prime and noble
part of our divine service, but how extremely neglected! My son, give Glory to
God, (says Joshuah to Achan,) How? by confession: Beloved in our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, Give Glory to God in the congregation of your
fellow servants; Give Glory to this Lord of all Lords, and shun not, scorn not
that early, that glorious piece of Adoration, and thereby this very day of God
to call for his consession. Observr and learn this god like lenity, a soft and
dilatory proceeding to judge thy brother: Do not be hasly through wrath, for
the wrath of man fulfils not the Righteousness of God; nor through bitter envy,
to which all mankind is prone; The spirit of man lusts after envy, and that
accursed poisonous vulture finding no outward glory, wealth or place, (the
usual food it feeds upon,) will quarrel, rather then miss a prey, upon the very
Grace, and meekness, and innocence of onr blessed Savior himself; For Pilate
knew (says the Gospel,) that for envy they had delivered him unto the
Judgment. Lastly, Advise with that Apostle, who himself had been too sierce;
Brethren, (says he,) if any man be fallen (and any man may take a fall, since
the fall of the first Man; specially those that are set in high and slippery
places, if the Tempter cry (...), -- every man is not so wise, as ever more to
abhor that suggestion,) in that case of falling by insirmity, Restore such an
one, (says the Apostle;) or if that may not be, yet judge such a one in the
spirit of Meekness; Why? Behold thy own face in that Glass, acknowledge thy own
frailty, knowing our selves, (even the best of us,) lest we also be tempted. Be
just then O man! It is with an Emphasis Thou, O man that judge another! But
be not too just, for in cool and calm proceedings man is like his God. Shall he
delay, and shall we be too rash and eager? Is not Gods Word to be believed? or
his example unworthy our imitation?

11. The Lord God called unto the Man: where our next note is, that sin makes a
separation, sends us like the Prodigal into a strange Courtry, far from our
heavenly Father. Every act of wickedness is a departing from God, -- Non
pedibus corporis, sed animi affectibus; It disacquaints us first, and then
grows and gathers to a disaffection. If in that state we draw near to God with
our eyes and lips, our hearts are far from him. If we speak to God in that
state, we do but flatter with our tongue, and deceive him (if we could) with
our double heart. Alas! How comes this strangeness betwixt God and our souls?
It is not long of him; He is immutable. Men that are highly exalted, make their
own alterations causes of strangness to others; and that pride is worthily
plagued oftentimes among all Tribes, even our own, in the evidence and eyes of
men. But God that is very high exalted, he that is higher then the highest,
that sits upon an Arch and Throne erected over all their heads, and wears a
Crown of immortality and Glory immarcescible, the great Bishop of all our
souls, the only Potentate comes after us, and calls and cries to seck and to
save us wandering sheep, the most dangerous straglers that would lose our selves
in endless Labyrinths, and never seek the Shepherd.

12. Last of all, There is an Emphasis in Thou, Vbi tu? No man loves to be the
second person, no man loves to be spoken to; not thus to be questioned. This
opens the head-spring of all humane misery, Lord, is it I? Reviling one
another, Tush, that's nothing, robbing, spoiling, grinding one another in
pieces. Let the question be put as it is here, Where art thou? you know what
was answered, Lord is it I? and to this very hour among all the variety of
Sects and Divisions (as many as there be,) all deem the fault, every one ready
to excuse themselves; Lord is it I? as the very devilish Traitor himself, the
child of perdition had learnt this lesson from Adam to hide his sin. But the
heathen will teach us to reduce our wandering censoriousness, and to look into
our self-guiltiness; Quae in alto quaeris intus in visceribus haerent. Thou O
man says the Apostle, that condemnest another, do the same things thy self,
or if not the self same, as bad, or worse. Thou abhorrest a sin, it may be some
sin thou do not practice, some sin will not yield thee any profit, or no
surther profit; some sin will do thee no pleasure now. Thou abhorrest Idols, or
thou do not commit Adultery, but thou committest Sacrilege. Is there not a
Vbi tu for thee? Will there not be a calling to Judgment one day for that? and
then where art thou? And so against all fig leaves, against all pretenses, and
excuses, here is nothing in this Vbi, in this place, but bare and naked Tu. Thou
may condemn the Serpents envy, and thy wive, solicitation; thou may as
well lay thy gluttony unto the Cook, or to thy friend inviting thee. God
singles out his Dear, and shoots this ungaged arrow deep into our several
breasts: but yet such wounds from his hand are better then the kisses of an
enemy. All flattering, all false inflations of the Serpent will but make us
Pharisees, With Lord, I am not like other men. But such a touch of this would
take out that venom, make us all strike on our proper bosoms, and every man
answer God, Where art thou? with Lord, Here I am! But Lord be merciful to me a
sinner; and so Lord be merciful to us all miserable sinners. Be merciful O
Lord to us, not for ours, but for his sake who was made sin for us; the second
Adam that bore all our sins in his body on the Tree, even Jesns Christ the
Righteons, to whom, etc.

S. D. G.

THE THIRD SERMON ON THIS TEXT.
GEN 3.9. The Lord God called unto the man; and said, Adam, where art thou?
THIS is now the third Entrance on this Entrance of Gods Judgment upon man
after his Lapse, which is the first of all the three pieces of Divinity. And
this Third, this our new consideration of this Judgment, and Gods Method in
proceeding, may open by his assistance another door of utterance; and so we may
make another and another Method of proceeding with this, or any other Text of
Scripture. For as there is little reason for that Painter who uses to inscribe
his pieces, to bind all other Workmen to his device: So though it is
impossible for any man dividing the Truth aright, and speaking out of the pure
Word of God things consentaneous thereunto for instruction of Gods people, to
avoid Doctrine, or for any but grraceless Hearers not to suffer the Word of
Exhortation, of Reproof, of Consolation, to have a gracious use in their hearts
and hands; (for Religion should be hearted first, and handed after,) in their
Understanding first, and then in their Life and Conversation: Yet I never found
in the Sermons of the Lord Jesus himself, nor in those of his Apostles, nor in
their Successors, the Primitive Fathers of the first wellformed Churches, nor
in those of the now deformed Church of Rome, nor in those of the first Reformed
Churches, that they confined themselves, much less bound over all others, on
pain of sin or absurdity, to one, and such only form and way of Teaching, which
beside the violence offered to men's spirits, is (to my Understanding,) a kind
of Restraint put upon the free Spirit of that God, which works all in all, yet
deals by a diversity of gifts, and distributes in variety of those gifts to
every man's necessity and Capacity. So that in this for the Divine, that rule of
the Moralist will hold, Nullius addictus, etc. tied to none, nor ever to a man's
own Method; witness this attempt of mine in this farther process upon this
very Text, as it includes a Judgment, and the Method of that Judgment. These
are now our two, and all our parts.

1. For the first, When the story has told us of Man and Woman's Disobedience,
it shows us after their sin, their shame; for that is the first born issue of
sin. Now they saw and knew themselves every way, outwardly and inwardly, in
bodies and souls, naked, despoiled and destitute. They run from God, and would
hide themselves then both from him and themselves. Arguments ever of guilty
minds fore casting cruel things; and then enters the Text with Judgment; but
what is here begun, spreads as far as v. 20. before the sentence be ended.

2. Whence the point of Doctrine on easy Inference may be, that our Judgment
shall certainly overtake and come upon us. Has the Senate condemned me to die?
(says he,) Why so? Has Nature condemned them to die too? So has God called
me to sit and judge other men; perchance those other men might better sit upon
me, and peradventure they shall yet ere I die: If that be unexampled, it is not
impossible; but it is impossible to escape the Judgment of God; There is a
Prevision of that, and of the Conflagration, and of the Consternation which
shall be then: all as old as the visions of Daniel, chap. 9. verse 9. When the
Thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, -- A fiery stream
issued, and came forth before him; Thousands of thousands ministered unto him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; the Judgment was set,
and the Books were opened. And another vision of that, as new and as late as
the last piece of all Gods Revealed Will to men, in Rev. 20.11, 12, 13. verses.
I saw a white Throne, (says St. John,) and him that sat thereon, from whose
face the earth and the heaven fied away, and there was found no place for them;
and I saw the dead, small and great stand before God, and the books were
opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works: and the sea gave up his dead, and death and hell delivered up the
dead which were in them; and they were judged every man according to their
works. And these proofs, these large allegations from the old and new Testament
we may use instead of larger reasons; for if those reasons (men speak so much
of,) rise clearly from the fountain Truth of Gods eternal Word, they are worthy
of some higher, and nobler names then Reasons; but if not taken from clear
Scripture Grounds, or if they flow from other principles, then to the clearing
of divine Truth, what reasons are they? Two things only then I would gladly
print on every soul, (and from this double vision which opens and closes up
this Instruction,) 1. Put you first in mind of St. Paul's Caveat, Romans 14.10.
where the Doctrine is not to judge, Not to set at naught our Brother; and this
is made the reason, We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and
every one of us give account of himself to God. 2. The other is St. Judes
Induction, remembering us of Gods constant course preceding in destruction of
the unbelievers among his own people; in reserving the lapsed Angels to
everlasting chains under darkness to the Judgment of the great day; in Sodom
and Gomorrha suffering the vengeance of temporal and eternal sire; and
concludes with the Prophecy as old as Enoch, the seventh from Adam, (our exampe
here,) which so early gave the world warning and witness of this Lords coming
to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly of all
their ungodly deeds, and of all their (...), their rough and hard speeches
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him: So that as David in the 19.
Psalm confounds the Atheists denying the Glory of God by a declaration of the
Heavens, and confirmed by the firmament under Gods own hand, and utters it by
the speech and voice of day and night; all which speak all languages, and as
the blessed Apostle applies that to the preaching of the Gospel, Romans 10. The
sound whereof went into all the earth, and to the ends of the world; and then
asks the question, Did not Israel know? so I may apply all those passages in
Scripture concerning Gods coming in flaming fire to rende Vengeance, to all
that are, or mean to be of the Israel of God, Have we not known that which was
fore-known so many ages since in the famous confession of the Heathen, --
Affore Tempus, quo mare, quo tellus -- ardeat? so abundantly testimonied by the
Prophets, by our Savior and the Apostles, That as the flood of water was to
rince the old world, so all the corruptions of the New, shall again be purged
in streams of purifying fire, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2 Pet. ult. and that none of all the
corrupt mass of mankind shall avoid that trial. Is there not fair warning, a
fair Intimation here for all the branches by Gods striking at the root, and by
his Inquisition made against the first Offender that ever was? The Lord God
called unto the man, etc.

3. And here we might infer that useful part of Sermons in uses, of which the
chief are still but two; reducible they are all to two heads, Timor and Amor;
1. Fear, Come then and I will teach you the fear of the Lord: Come, and by this
coming of the Lord, learn, and by this calling on the first, Let us all at last
learn to call one upon another, but most of all upon our own souls, to stand in
aw of this Judge of all the world: as for man, we understand his Power is lined
and chalkt out, and we know what is his ultima linea. But there is a line yet
more ultimate, that reaches down to the infernal pit, and to the second death.
Fear him that is able to cast both body and soul into fire unquenchable; Before
whose Judgment Seat no Proxy is admitted; from whose just Doom, no Bribe, no
Lords Letter, no Kings intercession can deliver us. 2. And then Amor too not to
be forgotten for all this; For, for all this executing of Judgment, for all
this erecting a Judgment Seat in Paradise against the first sinners there; yet
even there and then was laid the foundation of a Mercy-seat in Christ. The
woman's seed was promised then, which was sent in sulness of time to deliver us
from that wrath to come. And therefore can there be a greater Impulsive or
Incentive to man to love the Lord? No, says the Apostle, He that considers
this, and loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maraxatha,
accursed till that coming of the Lord in a second Judgment.

4. Thus far our first part, The Judgment, with the Doctrine, and the uses
upon that, to show, that as I will not be bound to follow, so will I never
abhor even that easy Method of making Sermons. Our second and last part of
the Text in this last dividing of it, which is the Method of this Judgment,
which we shall look upon by your patience in a double respect; one to the
delinquent Adam, and another to God the Judge.

5. First for the man, He is here brought first into question, God calls first
to him, and not to the Serpent, or to the woman. And in such occasional
observations as this, that clearing and light which the soul receives in apt
solutions, when she doubts, or is in darkness, may most properly be called the
rendering of a reason. It is not requisi^e, it is impossible sometimes to reason
upon some points of manifest Doctrine, unless we mean to obscure them under a
pretense of giving light, as to tell why God is just, or why merciful. The
Mercy of God in the first act, is his inclination; in the second, it is the
exhibition of Mercy to us. No reason of the first at all, and of the second no
reason at all but the first. But where the thing we teach, may fall under
question, there it is a sweet and delightful thing to man's understanding to
receive satisfaction; such at least, as if it do not fill up all Scruple in us,
may yet in the things of God possess our souls with a moderate and reverend
acquiescence. As in this case of Adams, the reason is afforded, why he comes
first to the bar. First the Serpent was now incorrigible, and had no share in
this gracious Call, which was ad Correctionem, non ad ruiram. And then in
compare with the woman, he was the greater sinner, first as a man, and then as
her Husband, In use, it is nor sex, nor person, but sin, the Lowdness of that
which calls and cries for this calling to Judgment. And even here, the last in
offending may be as bad as the first, or worse. Jacobs other sons inexcusable,
because they came afterward, and on more advantage to the slaughter of the
Sechemites. Greatness then or Superiority is no bar to this Inquest; Jeroboam
is branded for making Israel to sin; so Adam for pertaking wilfully in the sin
of Eve. If David sin with Bathsheba, the Prophet of God is sent to him with a
special Writ; and it not mistaken; it was no false arrest; Thou art the man.
Nay, our persons and high places are motives to Judgments, which like rains,
sall most on hills and eminent places.

6. Secondly, Respecting the other party who is offended; God is Judge himself;
so is he ever in all acts of true Judgment, though done by Delegates; but here
is an act immediate, The Lord God in his own person. It is not ever so; for
observe, that as God here in the first foundation of mankind judges the first
Monarch; so in that first foundation of his people under Kings, he judges Saul
for inobedience like another Alam; and David too for murder like another Cain.
The remarkable difference of the process is: Here he does it by himself; To
Adam he comes calling, Vbi es? and to Cain, Genesis 4 9. Vbi est Abel? But to the
two Kings he sends two of his Ministers, two of his Prophets, Samuel and
Nathan. Why this different addressing of the Judgment? Was it the foulness of
the offense? Saul's first seems a grosser disobedience then Adams: Regardless of
Gods express prohibition, he reserves Agag, and the fattest and best of the
spoils; as Adam took the fruit forbidden, and then iterates his offense in
offering Sacrifice, intruding on the sacred function, which never King could
violate without exemplary punishment: As Jeroboam and Vzziah stand for proofs
in Chronicles; and then David's sin seems souler then Cains; Adulterating Vriahs
wife, making him drunk, and then contriving so to murder him, though it drew on
the slaughter of many of his own Soldiers, and Gods servants, and occasioned
the enemy, the uncircumcised enemy to triumph in their bloods. A sin doubtless
most horrible; and as the Schoolmen thwack and throng into Adam sin, almost
all kind of wickednesses, as Pride, Gluttony, etc. so is this of David's a
Rapsody and Fardel horribly complicated and enwrapped with other sins. And the
wonder is enlarged in the greatness of these royal persons, to whom God could
have addressed Angels, as he might in Adams cause, for he had those winged
Pursivants even then; as we read he did by a destructive execution of the
Assyrians in many thousands by one Angel. 2 Reg. 19 35. And as he did even to
David, punishing his other sin of Pride by the sword of a destroying Angel in 2 Samuel 24.

7. For Resolution of this we learn first from some Interpreters, that this was
done with this difference, because there those Kings offenses were manifest,
and had witnesses enough; These Delinquents sinning the fruit, think to escape
under the leaves, as if God could mistake them for trees. To teach Rulers in
such cases that Rule of Joh, in searching out the matter diligently: When Herod
feared the ruin of his Kingdom by an Hebrew Infant, he enquired diligently of
the Wise men all that could inform him for prevention. So all wise and just
Judges both Sovereign and Dependant ought to be curious, and not to cast to
non-regardance the search and trial of gross Offenders. For as on the one side
no such acceptable sacrifice to God, and Angels, and good men, as the blood af
a bloody Murderer, or such like Monster; No such golden world as where great
and grievous sinners are shel'd and disheltered from out their trees and
fig leaves, all presumptions in wealth or power: So on the other side, The Lord
beholds all Iniquity and wrongful dealing, when by clear evidence of naked
Truth, as in the example here, men are careless in judging or punishing their
brethren. For if to accuse be enough, you know who said, none could be innocent.

8. Which sad and serious Jndagation of the Truth, and Execution of Judgment
and Justice in inferior Courts would be a blessed sight; where too commonly men
cry that the Rod of coertion is turned into a devouring Serpent, or made an
angle-rod to fish for silver in the deep purse of a muddy sinner, where the
gallant guilt-head or soul Porcpisce, and all above his size shall easily break
the line, or be let go; but the poor Pilcher is fetched up with a vengeance,
though his greatest fault (perchance) be but Faut d'argent. But these are
things like his Aruspices, ever complained of, and evermore retained; and I do
but only call upon them in my passage, being upon a point of Judgment here,
which is executed immediately by the Almighty himself, to teach all Judges and
Rulers (some think,) at least in some crimes a personal Inspection. Solomon to
that purpose has a speech of Kings sitting in the Throne of Justice, and
chasing away all iniquity with their eyes. And as we read of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.8. In Jerusalem he set of the Levites, and of the 'Priests, and of
the chief fathers of Israel; For what? For the Judgment of the Lord and for
Controversies: This was a Commission; Yes, it was so to Priests and Levites,
and chief Fathers of Israel. This was a standing Court of Justice in Jerusalem:
But the King himself in person at the fourth verse goes through the people from
Bersheba to mount Ephraim, -- and sets Judges in all the fenced Cities; and
there he gives them a charge, a Caveat, with an Enim, -- Take heed what you do,
for you judge not for man, but for God, verse 6.

9. Again, For Gods referring some to his Ministers of Justice, and proceeding
to immediate judging others, another reason is given, or another instruction is
gained, (which is all one,) namely this, That if we can evade or elude humane
Tribunals, yet none should be so shameless as to hope avoidance of him who is
Supernus Inspector; that holy One in his Watchtower above: which Lucretius
that looked into the book of nature, marked in the usual break of too great
Greatness, -- Res abdita quaedam; some hidden thing there was, so he styles the
divine Peovidence, -- which did -- Proculcare, -- still kick down the highest
things, -- Et sibi Ludibrio habere, -- seemed to take a pleasure in so doing.
And in the book of Scripture we find what desolation God threatns often, and often
seems delighted to bring upon the high ones of the world, in bringing them low.
So he seems to triumph over the Amorite, whose height was as the Cedars: yet I
destroyed (says he,) his friut from above, and his root from beneath. So he
does menance Edom, though high-roosted and nested among the stars, yet even
thence will I fetch thee down, says the Lord, Jer. 49.16. These high ones may
escape all Power on earth, but yet become the quarrie of him that is higher
then the highest. So the Hern and Vulture outflying both Falcon and gree-falcon
are by the Sacre seized on in an instant, which fowl (as the name imports,) is
made by all a Symbol and Hieroglyphick of the Deity, which in sharpest
Judgments comes horribly and speedily upon wicked Governors in high places;
which little of this Method in Gods proceeding, may help us much against
distrust in Gods Providence, or fretting our souls too far against the
Execution of his Justice.

10. Thus far upon these words in a review, as they deliver us this Text taken
in those two parts, Of Judgment, and the Method of that Judgment. Now we
shall further make good our former Assertion that every part of Holy Scripture
sets open to several Expositors or Preachers, several doors of utterance. Be
pleased in this last passage over the words to recall that which in the first
Sermon I called the Mystic sense of Gods question here, that is, (for so I
find it opened,) Where is thy former Happiness? To what a miserable state art
thou now by thy sin reduced? How has thy fall bruised the Seal, and defaced
that glorious Image I erected in thee? Alas! Adam where art thou? From which
passionate Increpation and Rebuke mixed with a gracious Bemoaning of Man's Fall,
diverse doctrinal Points might be raised, (as the term is,) if a man should
raise (as some do,) such things as would sleep and be quiet, or lie for dead,
if no such Raisers and Wresters of a Text would force them up. That only I
intend, (and yet will crave leave a little to insist upon,) which that question
seems to others of sound Judgment to imply, and is no coacted, no violent
expression, namely the Misery and desolation of Adam, and consequently of all
his Race by disobedience, -- Quanta de spe, -- but here is more, -- Quanta de
re decidit?

11. First then his condition in general, notice calls to mind that Gourd of
Jonas, now green and flourishing, and anon blasted and eaten down by that --
Rerum destructrix, that corroding blind worm of disobedience. And as on Jonas
it brought the Tempest, and the Whale, and confounded all his joys in the
Gourd after; so here it was the confusion, the dispersion and dissipation of
all that beauteous flock of Graces in our first Parents bosoms, and their
exclusion from the pleasures of the Terrestrial, and danger of Deprivation o^
celestial Paradise.

12. In which consideration, Let us first discipher as we may the sin, and take
then an account (as we are able,) of the loss. As for their sin, we find the
Schoolmen anxious and perplexed (as indeed a little thing will trouble them,)
to what species, to what head to refer it.

13. Disobedience, That's the Ocean, or the sink rather, into which all sin
runs. Though in special distribution Perjury is rankt under Sacrilege, as
Usurpation under this General of Theft, and so of other sins marching under
several Banners; yet all is Disobedience: and all Disobedience rises from that
cursed root of Covetousness; That is an inordinate Desire and Affectation of
things prohibited by the Law of God. And apparently this offense of our
Delinquents here issued from that wild and insatiat desire: But yet even that
Desire, that evil Covetise, arises and springs from another, and a deeper root,
and that is Pride; Initium omnis peccati Superbia, Ecclus. 10.14. And the Devil
that had tried it so himself, knew that was the way to lift up man's heart
against his Maker, by an Infusion and Inflation of becoming like God. Harkening
after false Riches, and Ambition of false knowledge, beggered us all, and left
us all in Ignorance and Darkness, till a new Light and Dayspring from on high
do visit us, till that (...) do reddert diem, -- rise in our hearts, and
reimplenish us from his fullness, in whom all knowledge, and all the Treasures
of Wisdom are both hidden, and as far as they can concern us, are also made
manifest.

14. This for the sin; Now secondly what the losses are, -- Non mihi si centum:
and again, -- Quis talia fando? For alas! Besides those natural Endowments and
Abiliaments, Life of the body to be perpetuated as the Angels, and that plenary
knowledge arguable from man's imposing apt names on all the Creatures, and Gods
framing of man then in perfection of all things by man acquirable, there was a
supernatural Influx of divine Faith in admirable clearness, both of the Object
and the internal Power, with lucide Notions of the Trinity, and of the then
future Incarnation too, (as some great Wits have imagined,) because the
adventurous and dazzling Schoolmen daring to fly at all, and to pry into the
secret Cabinet of Gods Council, have thought and taught, that if man had
persisted in his station of integrity, yet God would have dwelt in fullness in a
body of derivative clay, and have been manifest in the flesh, both to witness
his infinite Power therein, that being an act of incomprehensible greatness,
which in all the Fabrique of Heaven and Earth, and all their various furniture
to those great rooms, God had yet wrought no such piece as could demonstrate
it; and then also for the evidencing of his infinite Love unto that Creature
Man, to whom he desired to descend in a nearer Union then was testified by his
first inspiration. And even Saint Austin is of opinion, that God as now to
Angels, did then impart to Man the science of many things in simul, quae non
simul fiunt, in his eleventh book De Genesi ad Literam, cap. 13. But above all,
was the choicest Jewel of Original Justice, wherein rested the Image of God in
a special manner, mingled with a manifold lineage and a numerous brood of
excellencies; all adorning that soul which sat enthroned in the radiance
thereof without clouds of trouble or error in the pure contemplation of her
Creator; entirely holy yet, and bridled and becalmed in those we call the
Irascible and Concupiscible parts. All which was ruined by admitting Satan's
question first, which makes them here unable to sustain themselves, or endure
Gods question now, and occasioned all their Offspring, all th sons of men to
vex themselves with intricate, and thorny, and infinite questions, and drew on
man that description which every one finds true in his own trial, Animal
Aevibrevissimi and infinitae solicitudinis.

15. And now nothing hinders, no man can forbid us to call this opening of the
case (for so is a point of Divinity in our Profession, though the fee be not
ever after one,) a Doctrine, (if you please so to accept it from my mouth,)
which in effect, in the matter of this question, and in the present mystic
sense it bears, is so delivered from the mouth of God himself, and dropping so
as a Dew, as a balmy shower and celestial influence, will, if we open our
Bosoms, our Hearts, and Understandings, and Affections to receive and cherish
it with care and conscienscious Devotion, produce many useful flowers. But if
I should now adventure on a collection or distribution of those flowers, I
could not but extend your patience beyond the ordinary limits; and therefore
shall refer them to another opportunity, and now commend all we have heard thus
far to the Grace and Blessing of God in Christ Jesus, to whom, etc.

S. D. G.

THE FOURTH SERMON on this TEXT.
GENESIS 3.9. The Lord God called unto the man, and said, Adam, where art thou?
AT the first entrance on this Text I called it an Introduction to the judicial
proceeding of God against man after his sin; for after sin comes Judgment,
ever so aborigine; Adams case, the first book-case that ever was: And Judgment
says St. Peter, begins at the house: here is more, It begins at the Son of
God; so says St Luke expressly of Adam, which was the Son of God. An impudent
hope then for any son of man to look for impunity. Rather all must look in
several, one day to hear this call of God, Where art thou? Wheresoever thou
shall be, or howsoever found dead among those that live in pleasures, drowned
and soaked in fleshly lusts, or choakt in worldly cares, or quick from the dead
from that dispersion and resolution to watety slime and mud, to earthly dust or
aerie Atoms; All the mass and collective body of mankind once made, and then at
once remade by his Almighty Word, shall hear his Almighty Word, that Voice and
Trump of God, Return ye sont of men, Arise and come to Judgment. Let us do so,
Arise, quicken our thoughts, prepare for (since prevent we cannot,) that last
by considering of this first Judgment.

2. Wherein the parts (we made at first,) are four; The two first, the two
parties appearing in the Judgment, God the Judge, and Man the Delinquent; then
the manner of the process by way of calling; and last, the matter of the
process and summons, Where art thou? in literal sense, Whither fled? But in the
mystic caries a secret increpation and touch of pity, as if he had said, How
is man the glory of my works fallen to be the shame of all my creatures? And of
this sense I must entreat you to be mindful now in special, because now I
shall make special use of this sense only.

3, Both the parties, God and M^n, and how far the divine Nature is laid forth
in these names; and then how far we were enabled to take notice of man's
condition by the help of two books; this book of Genesis first, and then
another volum which we carry about us, the book of Conscience I have already
showed at large, as also what we are to think of, and what to learn both by the
manner and matter of this summons in literal sense: Of all which things I will
make no repetition, nor will I touch any more upon that review of the Text,
wherein I divided it into two parts only, namely a Judgment, and the method
of that Judgment; Nor of that Doctrine on easy inference and uses thence
deducible, That our Judgment shall certainly overtake and come upon us, to
cause us first to stand in aw, and not sin against God, and then yet to love
the Lord for beginning a foundation of a mercy-seat, (where he first erected
his Throne for Justice,) even in Paradise, in that promise of the woman's seed
to bruise the serpents head. Nor will I speak any further of the Method of
Gods proceeding, first calling to the man before the woman or the Serpent; Nor
of the different addressing of this Judgment against the first Monarch of
mankind, wherein he proceeds by himself immediately, and that Judgment
afterward against the two first Kings of his own people, wherein he does all
by Delegates, by sending his Prophets: of which diverse reasons are rendered by
Interpreters; But passing all over that has passed in several handlings of the
words, come we only to reflect on that which I called the mystic sense of the
last part, which is the question, Where art thou? that is, (for so I find it
opened,) Where is thy former happiness? To what a miserable state art thou now
by sin reduced? How has thy fall bruised the seal, and defaced that glorious
Image I created in thee? Alas! Adam where art thou? From which passionate
Increpation and Rebuke, mixed with a gracious bemoaning of man's fall, diverse
doctrinal points might be raised, (as the term is,) if a man should raise (as
some do,) such things as would sleep and be quiet, or lie for dead if no such
Raisers and Wresters would enforce them up. That I only intend, and yet will
crave leave to insist upon, is, what this question seems to others to imply,
and is no coacted, no violent expression, namely the mifery and desolation of
Adam, and consequently of all his race by Disobedience, -- Quanta de re decidit?

4. In which consideration, first the sin was disobedience from a double root
of evil; An inordinate Covetize of what God had prohibited, and pride of heart
to be as God, which was the fall both of man and devil. The losses by this fall
which dispersed the whole flock of divine Graces, were life of body to be
perpetuated as the Angels, plenary knowledge, with a supernatural influx of
divine Faith in admirable clearness, both of the object, and the internal
power; with lucide notions of the Trinity, and the then future incarnation: But
above all, that choicest Jewel of original Justice. And now the Doctrine from
this part of the Text in this sense opened, and dropping thus from the mouth of
God himself, will, (as an Influence celestial,) if we open our bosoms, our
hearts, and Understandings, and Affections to receive and cherish it with care
and conscientious Devotion, produce many useful flowers,

5. The first flower or use, (if so we will call it,) that is, the first good
way to take in appliance of this Truth, is to sit down like the mourning Levite
in the Psalm, by the waters of Babylon, and looking back, and remembering Sion,
reflecting on the pleasures of the first state in the Garden of Eden, turn
words to sighs, and melt our brains to tears in doleful recounting our lost
beatitude, and sight of our deplorable condition. Where first in stead of a
glorious, is inferred a sordid nakedness, with internal turpitude and privation
of all those excellencies: Rebellion in the flesh and appetite, drawing on
black guiltiness and Deformity, and a liableness to eternal damnation; all
sprung from that bitter root of Pride cloven into two; one explicit, of eating
the forbidden fruit; the other implicit, of unthankfulness to God, which was
doubtless their sin of omission; Ingratitude being the principle and primipile
of sin then, as it continues the core and bottom of all ill nature ever since.

6. Secondly, Weigh man's misery in that only term of Destitutus, the state of
dereliction, whereby the appetite becomes enormous, having now no guide, which
is a thing we are so far from missing or hating, that from our youth up, it is
fatally affected by us all, -- Tandem custode remoto; -- What then? why then
Cereus in vitium flecti, flexible and moldable into any form of vanity or
wickedness. For it is just so with all the children of Adam, as with a child
left of his Parents and Tutors to himself; which rooted inborn Pravity is bound
with Iron round, and close unto our souls, that even Gods own reborn sons and
daughters feel and bewail it in themselves. So far St. Paul will witness to the
whole world, and gives Glory to God in that woeful confession; O miserable man
that I am, who shall deliver me from that body of sin and death! And thither I
must not scorn tocome, and Thou and He, though thou upon the ground, or in a
Dungeon, and he as high as ever man was mounted on a Throne, or in a Palace. We
all, though admitted with open face to contemplate the joys of heaven in the
face of Jesus Christ, shining in a Gospel of Peace and Salvation; yet in our
selves with shame and confusion of face and spirit must pronounce that Woe, that
Vae misero mihi to every one of our selves single, and in a deep sense of our
own perverseness and infirmity, before we can come with comfort to take up that
following Antheme of our Apostle, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Let us then labor (beloved in our Lord and Savior,) to be truly humble in the
sense of this our Orphan, our relict condition; as also of the spreading venom
and malignity of original corruption. Nascimur and morimur, that is bad enough,
comes up, and is cut down like a flower; but this is worse, Nascimur and
inficimur, we cannot come up like a flower, which lifts his pure Crown into the
air, and rising through unclean earth, is not sullied, contracts, retains
nothing of the saeculency and dusty soil. No flower in all the garden of
mankind, but Jesus of Nazareth, but only that one Lilly among the Thorns, one
Rose of Sharon, one flower of Jesse, that was ever growing in God from all
Eternity, had a Proviso put in for him, that nor in birth, nor life, nor death
he should see, or know, or take any Corruption. But upon all mankind that is
merely so, the infection works, the infection of sin, as it is entered here in
Adam, so it went over all like a deluge: in as much as in one, all have sinned,
and all rise tainted with their Fathers leprosy, which is by some supposed to
be the meaning of that speech in St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.18. where he tells the
Saints, They are redeemed from the (...), vain conversation received by
tradition, or by traducement from your Fathers, and from this Great
grandfather of all those Fathers; from which taint nothing can purify our
souls but the precious incorruptible blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish. But of this the Apostle plentifully in that fifth Chapter to the
Romans, By one man's disobedience many were made sinners; but expressly, verse
12. By one man sin entered, and past over all. These two contemplations are
enough to break up the springhead of our tears, and with strong cries make us
declare and deplore our misery. But who believes our report, or who spends his
tears upon this subject? We find a profane Esau crying cut with a great and
exceeding bitter cry for the loss of a blessing in the things of this life,
Corn, and Wine, and Lordship, Genesis 27.34. And so I find even David werping and
crying for a wicked son: And the earth is full of such howling habitations for
earthly grievances. But who will follow the example of David? Psa. 51. Behold I
was shapen in iniquity; the warmth of my conception in the womb was sinful; O
purge me, wash me, create in me a clean heart: O God renew a right spirit in
me; who considers rightly the cursed radical contagion of our nature, which
strives even after the grafting into Christ, and receipt of the Grace of
sanctification in our spirit, and struggles for Dominion: That which we should
hourly watch, lest it prevail over us; that shrub and bramble which would top
or dwarf the Cedar of Gods Grace in us, and has force in our members to bring
forth fruit unto death, Romans 7.5. Such forcible entry makes this inborn
corruption, that like the strong man keeping possession, or as a Sheriff that
has Posse comitatus, and seises, and outs the owner, and bars him from the use
of his goods: Such rule this unruly wickedness keeps in our hearts, and such a
sway it bears, so that it is no longer I that do it, but sin (says the
Apostle,) that raigns in me, and makes me lose all power, and all good, even
Bonum possibilitatis, a loss irrecoverable, irremediable, and no cure for this
wound in nature. They talk of a natural Balsom in man's body for all bodily
diseases: But were it not for a spiritual bleeding balm from that anointed holy
Savior, were it not for that double spring of Grace and Blood derivable to us,
and to be let in upon us for the reviving and refreshing of our fainting souls,
what would become of our salvation? And though in that fountain set open for
Judah and for Jerusalem, for sin and for transgression, I may wash and be
cleansed from this leprosy: yet mark how that Gospel begins, both in the
language of the Baptist, and his Master afterward, Repent, -- and then the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand, then the Kingdom of heaven is within you, that
sweet sorrow of a contrite sinner, that useful pulp of those tears we fall at
the sight and feeling of our strong corruptions, is best to make conserve and
preserve of grace in our bearts, which God and his holy Angels beholding as it
is Vinum Angelorum, making them rejoice in Heaven, so himself will renew his
Miracle upon such souls, and turn that water into the wine of consolation.

Thirdly, After this mournful lecture of bemoaning our loss, and deprivation,
and depravation natural, Let me speak a word in season against that solemn sin
of Pride. Look to the rock from whence thou art hewn; Some boast of original
descendings from famous Ancestors, and yet too many sons are born in original
debt and diseases of their Parents, of whom they are so apt to brag. But it is
enough, and more for ever to strip all sorts of men out of all vain and mad
dressings and coverings of themselves under that misshapen and monstrous vice of
Arrogance that here they find. -- Illud quod dicere nolo. -- Quod dici no lunt,
and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli. That which men cannot endure to
hear or think upon, we are all loath to turn and look upon our Fathers
nakedness, not out of modesty, as Shem and Jophet, but because in height and
pomp, and in the vaniry of high-soaring imaginations we strive to forget both
God, and him, and our selves. It is therefore that God in this Text comes
still, and calls after us, and shows us both the Receipt and the Probatum, two
dusts; brings Adam in his hand, and presents every man to himself, as in a
general Glass of humane frailty. And this Vbi tu? is now no more a question,
but an Indicative and Demonstrative, an Adverbial and a Proverbial, a very
radical Primitive and Affirmative of Egomet with Tute, and Ille, Ipse, and
brings all to Idem in Adam here, and jumbles all the genders of mankind,
common, and doubtful, or epicoene, Sparrows and Eagles, and all sexes, and
professions and degrees of mankind, Princes and People; and calls in that voice
of the Psalm, O ye sons of men! How long will you love to belie your selves? --
Quid superbis? Why so goodly? O thou earth and ashes! Monstrons Incongruity to
behold servants in the saddle, (says Solomon,) and Princes to foot it by; but
an incomprehensible ugliness in the looks of a proud man, when we look up to
Heaven, and contemplate him that came down from Heaven for us men, came down
indeed stripped and empty of all his Glory. An incarnate, crucified, and humble
God; Will neither his main Precept, Learn of me; learn this above all thy
Learning: Nor his Example, Behold, I have given you an example: Will nothing
swage the swelling of thy proud stomach? Think yet there is no Grace but for
the humble: no sight of God and his Glory but for the meek. And if thou resist
that spirit of meekness which he shows thee in himself and in his anointed (who
if ever any mortal man is exhibted by God himself to all his people as a
Pattern of Patience and Humility) thou shall find a manifold sense in that
sentence already pronounced against thee; God resists the proud, that is,
justles him in, and out of his own way of Pride, Renders him in the very acts
and Elevations, in the hoisting and spreading of all his sails and wings, base,
and contemptible, and ridiculous. God permitting many proud men by way of
punishment to debauch themselves with other vices, which yet do spring from
thence; Resisting them in those very things wherein they please themselves, and
hope to purchase Reverence, while by a most unseemly superciliousness, by their
haughty eyelids, stiff necks, loud speeches, oaths, Clothes, Buildings, they
occasion the storks bill behind their backs, and expose themselves oft-times to
open affronts and derisions, and so are a kind of masculine brood of new Muses
to the small Poets and Wits of the time, and are many times justly made the
songs of drunkards. And lastly by approof of that in the Psalmists Aphorism,
Doubtless every man living in his best state is altogether vanity, making their
most stately and best Established their most hopeful and high-erected fortunes,
like Turnus his persidus ensis, or like blown glass, -- Cum splendet,
frangitur, in the stretch and wresting broken, in their very acme and
exaltation ruinous; and as smoke, when most supreme, then to nearest vanishing,
with a Sic transit; which is no new experiment: every age affording such
Coments and Meteors, exhaled and past their bounds when they have cracked a
while and blazed, fall or shoot, or are hurled down to their first original
drossiness; so becoming like the Historians Sword-chariots, to the World at
first a terror, and afterward a Scorn: Men we see literally fulfilling that
conclusive prediction, Man cannot abide in honor; which fatal frequent Event is
enough to make us imagine a Favorite to be an unlawful Calling, but that we
find exceptions to the contrary in Gods own book, where we have example of his
own rich friend Abraham, and of Moses, whom he honored as his familiar; and
John the Favorite of our gracious Savior. And in the Chronicles of former, and
for the Chronicles of succeeding times, we find, and look upon some, e meliore
luto, whose ardent and ethereal virtue preserves them in the love, and
preservation, and protection of the Almighty, as so many straight and noble
Palms under a royal Cedar, still fresh and unblasted, as far from
self-wickedness as others envy, which is a rare complexion in felicity.

There is a fourth use or extraction to be had out of this, by teaching us all
to turn upon our common adversary; I mean sin, that thus first threw the ball
of wildfire to the ruin of our Fathers house, and state, and race; this is
truly the noble science of defense, and the only bravery of resistance; Here
then learn to show mettle, courage, and spirit, and resolution. Alas! What a
wretched feable and squib valor is it for a man to contend in blood with him
that gives him then the lie, when he most deserves it? or speaks disgraceingly
of her to him who in his own conscience knows, he first and most has made her
liable to that reproach and dishonor, and yet this same man so rank a coward,
as he dare not enter the lifts, nor stand the Combat, and conflict with this
Adversary! No, no, my brother of the sword is foully mistaken in judging of true
courage, and must know that he is the poor unworthy, the only base and bafled
fellow, that scorns not to be a fellow, that weakly yields to be a servant, and
a Prisoner, and a voluntary slave to sin, his mortal enemy, and content to be
taken captive of the devil to do his will.

So in the point of Wisdom, and true prudential policy, (which we all affect,)
does it show vilely of? May it not stand with the temper of a right English
constitution, to submit to Covenants and Articles with that pernicious foe, who
by invasion seeks to enthral and trample on, and bereave us both of state and
liberty? What is it then to strike an everlasting league with sin, and so with
death and hell, (for sin is their Agent, their leiger Ambassador,) and not
rather conspire to draw up all our Auxiliary forces of rectified Reason, and
moral Precepts, but specially confiding in celestial aids of Angels, and
Influences of divine Grace and Assistance, to root out the body of sin and
death, root and branch; or as it is in Romans 6. with a Saltem, That at least sin
may no longer reign and have Dominion. Here every Christian Soldier, marching
under the Ensign of the Cross of Jesus, is to bid Defiance, and to run ad Arma,
those especially of Preces and Lachrymae: The weapons of this War-fare are
spiritual, but yet able through God to beat down the strongest holds of Satan;
And for this cause we should be watchful over sins advantages, of which I will
make my conclusion, and present a few, and such as I find here in this story,
and in this example.

1. First, The serpentine nature of sin is discovered. And all sins may say,
Documenta damus qua simus origin, from the devil in the Serpent they draw
their property of Insinuation. And yet to see, as the same Devil prevailed even
at Rome, to be worshipped in form of a Serpent, (you know the story of
Aesculapius,) and the notice of that too in the Apocrypha; The Dragon worshipped
at Babylon; So Epiphanius reckons up among his Heretics, those that worshipped
that very Serpent in Paradise, as the Author for sooth of Science. But as we
must all be cautelous of any such serpentine persuasions in the case of any
sin: and as all great ones are to eschew the danger of Flatterers, the worst of
all tame beasts: so a Caveat here will not be unseasonable against the Romish
Synagogue of a serpentine brood, -- Stillant in aure venenum, creep into
houses, and seduce silly women. Against such Serpents, bless God for Ibides,
Birds that can destroy that crawling generation by confounding Arguments from
the Truth of God; And learn even for that very cause, to think well of such at
least as either in the former Age of Reformation, or in this present time, from
Cathedral Prelacy, or other rule have stood up (next under God, and a gracious
Sovereign,) the Pen-champions and Defenders of the Faith, as well against that
brood, as the other dangerous extreme of Sectaries,

2, A second observation is the advantage gained by the Tempter in that way (as
we should think) of disadvantage in the harsh unplesant hissing of the Serpent.
We wonder at the She-wolves affecting the most ill favored Male, and bless our
selves to think, (as well we may,) that Witches should indent in blood, and
endure those horrid approaches which thrill our souls to imagine; And yet we
take no notice, that in every gross sin we are as gross and foul as they: For
instance, Do but weigh the madness of whoredom, -- He follows her as an Ox to
the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks for correction; As a Bird hastes to
the snare, till a dart strike through his liver, the seat of his lust, -- Is
not this man bewitched, drawn by the devil down to hell? so says Solomon, Her
feet go down to death, and her steps take hold on hell: And that the hiss of
such a Serpent should be acceptable music, is it not as strange as Eves
tentation here? Does not the Wisdom of God lead men to find this true in woeful
trial. confessed so, Prove. 5.12. He wonders how he was so bewitched, How have I
hated Instruction? and then mourning bewails the shame and lasting brand of
Infamy upon that sin. I was almost brought, into what? into all evil: And
where? In the midst of the Congregation, in the face of the world. But above
all, is that of the Apostle, which makes it more horrible then Witchcraft, or
their Converse with foul spirits; for he tells us, it is in mystic sense an
Abasing, a corrupting of the flesh and bones of Christ; Shall I take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? Is not he or she
worse then a Devil, would draw me to do that?

Thirdly, Sins advantage was on the woman's easiness to slight Gods
prohibition, where Satan's deadliest dart (as ever since we find it,) was thrown
upon the fear of God, which being in all good souls the beginning of all
Wisdom, he therefore strives to rob us of that Jewel, first to put out that
eye, and then Polyphemus-like we rome about in Darkness and Distemper. Let the
fear of the Lord then be the Levite in every private family, in every bosom,
not to be parted from it all the days of our lives. Believe the Lord, and love
not to try conclusions. The ambitious man knows by a thousand Trials in
others, how hard his condition is upon the wheel, how unsafe to tarry, and how
difficult to dislodge from his mountain-situation; and yet this Pill is
swallowed; This shirt of the soul must not off, till skin and all go with it.
So every lying Gthazi, every corrupt and bribing Courtier knows how uncurable a
plague will pursue him, and yet ventures for two talents, and two change of
Raiment. So to the Sacrilegious, may we not say, as the Prophet of Oppression,
Do not these Oppressors that suck the blood of Orphans, and rifle widows
houses, and they that like Bells Prists, eat up the house of God and all his
provision, and yet jest it away with the Apothegme of the wise Silver-smith,
Sirs, you know that by this Craft we have our livings, our livings indeed, of
which, some one man may be qualified, and dispensed with all in his own safe
conscience to hold twenty, marry they are impropriations, or rather
Sequestrations: And do not all these several Oppressors know the sentence of
God gone out against them? Do not they against their own conscience withold
the truth of God in unrighteousness? and yet they would have us say nothing, as
if we were bound to this immodest forbearance of pronouncing and denouncing
Gods Judgments, But the Word of God is not bound, says our Apostle: So let me
apply in a word to the Blasphemer, and the false Swearer; He hears indeed a
rumor from a Prophet, a great while ago, in another Country far of, of a roll
of plagues flying in the air, and entering into the Swearers house, and
destroying foundations; but he rowls in wealth and ease, and believes it not.
And these startlers at oaths, whose stomachs are so queasie, he has marked it,
(he can tell you,) that commonly they die Beggars.

I have but one advantage more of sin, in one word more to note unto you, of
which we yet may make our best advantage; it is not in, but will fairly comply
with the Text: It is Despair, which many times the Tempter begets upon
presumption; He makes them first presumptuous, and then desperate sinners. At
first it is, Rejoice O young man, What needst thou fear? at last, there is no
repenting now, perscelera; The safest way is to go through. But then against
this charm, remember thou the voice of thy Creator, As I live; and the voice of
thy Redeemer, As I was content to die, I would not have the death of a sinner.
Think of that second Adam, the Restorer of all our losses; and in the lowest of
thy declination to a desperate sadness, use this question here, Where art thou
man? Why art thou so heavy O my soul, so disquiet within me? Put thy trust in
God, I know in whom I believe, there is all I can hope for, wish for, above all
that I am able to ask or think. His blood shall wash away all my sins, though
scarlet bloody sins; His Robe is pure, and large, and odorous, I will put it
on, I will put him on, and then my soul, Where art thou? to what an height of
bravery, to what illustrious Enobling, to what a Royalty, to what a Crown and
Dignity, art thou advanet! and if our rising thoughts shall mount from hence,
and take their flight into the presence, and before the Throne of Grace and
Glory there, how might this consolation be up-heaped, and yet run over, and
exceed all humane apprehension ^ to which Glory, let us therefore pray him to
bring us, that has so dearly purchased the same for us, even Jesus Christ the
Righteous, to whom, etc.

S. D. G.

A Collection of several men's Discourses and Opinions concerning Duels: Ont of
the Spanish History transtated into French by Mayerne, this Discourse following
was excerpted, and thus englished.
IF of two evils, we must make choice of one, (as some men say in this case of
Duels is necessary,) the fashion of single Combats practiced by our Ancestors
will easily appear more tolerable then that in use at this day. For by the
former was discovered a kind of proof in things ambiguous, and in them the
Princes Pleasure, or his lawful Delegates was requisite, who first of all took
notice, whether the cause deserved to put two persons of honor or quality in
danger of life, who might better serve the public under their Sovereign, or
be useful in their proper families. If after mature deliberation, they judged
the matter must come to that trial and issue, it was with very great caution,
and manifold Ceremonies, to testify how careful men were in that age of men's
lives. There was Order taken for the equaling of the Combatants, to see that no
advantage was given in arms, or in the strength or furniture of their horses,
or otherwise. They were both deposed concerning wrong accusation of each other,
and that they came both freely for a good and just quarrel, and only for the
maintenance of their honor. The point and substance of which honor in those
days, was placed in the worship of God Almighty, allegiance to the King, and
service to those Lords, of whom they had dependencies; and in loyalty and truth
toward all men, courteous, peaceable, and modest among friends; feirce,
valiant, and full of courage against their enemy in war. And if upon this point
of honor, upon knowledge that any man had been falsely accused, offended, or
out-raged in word or deed, by advantage either of time, place, company,
inequality of Weapons, or Arms unlawful, or unusual, or otherwise had just
cause to complain, there was ready means for Redress of the injury, as the case
required; Order taken according to Law, or military custom, which would not
admit any Duel, saving only when there was no other Remedy; much lefs would
they suffer any Gentleman of honor to put himself upon an uncertain proof of
arms with any one convict of rash or manifest calumny. And then the fashion
was, that he that was vanquished, was esteemed culpable, and counted thenceforth
a Liar, and Slanderer; and if he had his life, yet he was ever punished with
some disgrace or degradation.

Besides, For the most part, the Combat was continued or ended at the
discretion of the Prince, or his Substitutes, which also did most commonly part
the Duellists, and not suffer them to proceed to the utterance, but pronounced
them both good and approved Cavaliers upon the place, which was a token of
their prudent affection to preserve noble spirits for better uses. But if any
were found of so proud and contumacious stomach, as having no power to procure
leave to fight, whether in place near adjacent or further remote where they
could obtain room and liberty to combat, they might never after return unto
their native home again, but were esteemed as Mutinous, in the condition of
Felons and Traitors to their Prince, unless they obtained Letters Patent of
abolishing their crime.

But amongst us all this is out of use; and the Procedure of our modern
Duellists far different. For if it chance that some light or ignorant young
fellow, do now give affront or offense unto another without cause, the point of
Honor forsooth obliges the Offender to make good his insolent deed; and he must
neither confess nor frame any excuse of his fault, for that is held a sign of
vanity and cowardice. And better it is to appear rash and proud, then abase
himself to a modesty, which among men of the sword is counted Pusillanimity.
Another resenting too deep what is but spoken by his friend in jest* or
freedom of language, which contains no real injury at all, will yet be so
transported, that no repair or satisfaction shall serve; and why? because he
stands upon the Punctilioes of Reputation. And a Gentleman must rather preserve
himself thus disdainfully and incompatibly, then use any such facility or
weakness as shall derogate from true Chivalrie. Nor can any former
conversation, or Amity restrain his fury, but fight he will; If it so happens
that the Prince or any grand Magistrate will intermedle, or enquire after their
quarrel; O then these Gallants are more fearful of such Judgment then of
Thunder: They avoid it by all means, and you must run after them, and they will
fight in private; whether the reason be, that they are ashamed to discover the
ground of their debate, which is oftentimes so feeble and impertinent, that
themselves know not how to speak of it without blushing; or whether the
headlong and unquenchable desire of shedding man's blood have prepossessed them
with an eager appetite of revenge, mingled with extreme haughtiness and folly.
Better it is (say they,) to show themselves indocible and rebellious, then to
submit to such a Discipline; for then every man would taunt them for want of
courage, and that their cowardice constrained them to shun the field: Hence
they grow upon the point of honor, to conclude that it belongs to no Prince by
Justice to limit their appointments. And that a Gentleman is to acknowledge no
other Equity or Law, but what the continued custom of Gallants has introduced,
which gives them authority to do any thing and suffer nothing; and by the sword
to maintain themselves in that privilege most unjustly and falsely usurpt,
which the manners of the age have set before them.

So that men in this age must pretend neither fear of God, nor King, nor royal
Edicts to the contrary, but upon the challenge readily present themselves in
the field, or else refusing be reputed for base Poultroons fallen from all
franchise and nobleness of mind, and from thence ever to be exposed to all
outrages of the Challenger at his will and pleasure. For the point of honor
teaches a man to choose rather the appellation of an Assasine, then to enter the
combat with any such as are bafled, and have refused to answer a Challenge.
And when these men meet upon the encounter of a self-chosen Duel, though but in
their shirts, yet must they run desperately and brutishly upon one another
swords, rather then turn aside from a thrust that presents it self, or to
rebate, and put it by with any care of ones own safety, and die rather then
show the least gesture or countenance of fearing death: so that the wonder is,
how this kind of Bravoes, (which seem born into the world for butcheries and
massacres, and either to kill or to be killed,) can yet when they go to the
wars, think it no abasement to cover themselves with strong armor, after the
example of the ancient Warriors. But yet behold a more refined and
quintessential point of Honor; for it is permitted to our Duellists, to invite
a second and a third, if so they please, which are all engaged and obliged to
fight it out to the last against an equal number chosen on the other part, and
so to kill those with whom they never had quarrel or debate; but on the
contrary are their own intimate friends, as it is often seen. This is forsooth
the law of Duel; and you must choose rather (says the point of Honor,) to
murder a dear friend, then refuse the request of a Cavalier that does you the
special favor and honor of being his Second in a quarrel, be it right or
wrong. This is counted a kind of lawful and honorable murder; and then you
are to account it upon the advantage more noble to kill your opposite outright,
then to give him his life, when he is at your mercy, unless peradventure he be
so base to beg it. So there is a double harvest of Renown to be reaped from
Duels; that is, either to murder a man, or else be able to vaunt that you gave
him his life. If the Vanquisher come off wounded, and die shortly after it, yet
he comforts himself in point of honor still, that he bath done himself reason
with his own sword, and that his Adversary is dead before him. But for any
remedy of their souls health, they conceive they have sufficiently provided, if
going to the combat with hearts full of rancorous hate and mortal despite to
their neighbor, possessed with aspirit of vengeance, mixed with a vain opinion of
their own excellency, dignity and valor, they throw themselves upon their
knees in some Church or Chapel, and pray to God with all their hearts, that he
will be pleased to give them the Grace to kill their enemy, or constrain him
to confess he holds his life from them: And if perchance they meet a Church-may
by the way that has any sense or conscience, and will take the pains by some
sacred Remonstrances to divert one of these fellows from their mischievous
Intent, he will answer him with a Tush, and tell him, Sir, you understand
nothing of the point of honor, or else depart in choler, or make a mock of his
good counsel. But alas! these men must needs be far from all that is sacred,
when we see they never consult so much as with any man of discretion that knows
what belongs to true honor and nobleness indeed. But they take all their
Instructions in this false point of honor from the suggestions of man's enemy
the devil, who being a Murderer from the beginning, delights evermore in
bloodshed and destruction. By his Instigation and leading on we see them go in
a gay Gallantry and Bravery to let out their unhappy fouls, being men for the
most part that have ever lived without God, or King, or Law, or Charity, and
strangers to all humane and civil society, placing all virtue in that mastiff
kind of valiant going on, which lewdly they miscal Courage, which is a thing
common to them with salvage beasts, and which yet they use on all occasions.

If ever there was any Barbarism equal to this since the foundation of the
world, let those judge that have but any spark of a rational soul within them;
or is there any thing amongst humane actions or devices more repugnant to the
Law of God, more absurd in nature, more dammageable to the Policies and
Governments of Commonwealths, more derogatory to Princes and Magistrates, and
in some more criminal, in relation to divine and humane Majesty, then these
modern Duels! and though some have been allowed in some case; by former
tolerations, yet out of all question, if we take them in the best Form that was
ever practiced, (unless against an open enemy provoking and challenging in the
open face of an Army,) (as the case of David against Goliath,) and they are but
the inventions of nations cruel and barbarous, that never knew true Justice or
Policy, much less Piety, least of all Christianity.

Thus far I gathered from that Spanish History.

Hear now a late Divine of our own, how roundly he damns this disorder, (D. D.)
It is an hard war (says he) that against sin, and which presses us all our
life long, and in it are no Emeriti, no discharge in that War-fare, and yet we
fight inhumane Duels, Vbi in rimur homicidae. Bernard. and he that is murdered,
dies a murderer too, because he would have been one, where Occisor lethaliter
peccat, and occisus aternaliter perit; He that comes alive out of the field,
comes a dead man, because he comes a deadly sinner, and the dead man go to
eternal death.

Sir Walter Rawliegh tells of Combats recorded in Scripture and History of
David and Goliath, and some of David's Worthies against Chalengers, twelve of
Juda against twelve Benjamites; among the Romans those of the three Horatii
against the three Albani Curiatii; Mr. Torquatus, and Val Corvinus against two
Gauls; and with us, Edmund Ironside against Canutus the Dane for the Kingdom.
In Edward the thirds time, thirty English against thirty Britains, whereof
Calverly and Knols were two. In Richard the seconds time, a Combat appointed
twixt Hertford and Mowbray, one fought by Ansley and Cotrington on accusation
of Treason, wherein Ansley was victorious. In accusation for Treason, or
according to the Laws of Normandy for murder, rape or burning of places, the
party overcome was to suffer death; but for trial of Right it was not so, nor
the Appellant or Defendant bound to personal trial, but might do it by their
Champions; and in this case the beaten party, or that yielded, lost only his
cause, and this was in Camp close.

These last ordinary in France, (till St. Lewis and Philip le Fair his
Grandson,) so that every Lord of the Fee, clerical or temporal, could grant it
in his Jurisdiction, and Kings and Lords made profit of it; for if a drawn
battle, both paid 2 s. 6 d. but if fought, the vanquished paid 112 s. thence
the Proverb of Bearn Law or Loray, Ou Le Battu Pay l'amende, (Sir W. Rawleigh
what follows.)

Of these Trials by battle, Ino Bishop of Chartres often complained, specially
against the Ecclesiastics ratifying such Challenges; but Lewis and Philip
retrencht that Power only to Kings. In those Challenges on Treason, Murder, or
any crime that was death by the Law, (and in none else,) the Rule held, Le
Defenseur estoit tenu de proposes ces defenses per une dementir; otherwise it
was concluded he did taisiblement confesser le crime. But after Francis the
first gave the Lie to Charles the fifth, Emperor, every petite companion in
France, in imitation made the Lie mortal, and bragged that the worst Gentleman
there was braver then the Emperor.

And from hence in our time, every man arrogates a Kingly liberty to offer,
accept and appoint personal Combats, and the giving the lie (which ought to be
the negation only in accusations for life,) is become the most fruitful root
of deadly quarrels. This is held a word so terrible, a wrong so unpardonable,
that no other recompense but blood. Whence we have derived an Art and
Philosophy of quarrel, with certain grounds and rules, from whence the point of
Honor, and the Dependencies are deduced, with many ridiculous and mystic
curiosities; as a blow with a Cane, relating to a slave, shall be more dishonor
then a sword, in reference to a soldier. Yet who would not make that exchange?

Examine this Lie with their condition, who are most tender in receiving it,
and present death on the swords point to the Giver; yet they use nothing more
in their conversation then speaking and swearing falsely; yea it is thereby that
they shift and shuffle in the world, and abuse it; for who more break faith and
word, and oath engaged to pay what they borrow? and being sued, are thereby
proved Liars upon Record; nay, in Complements, and vowing our services, what is
there but a courtly kind of lying? Your servant Sir; like the word Virtue in
the end of an Usurers obligation, in as full force without it; Vne march and
complot faite ensemble de se mocker, mentir, and piper les uns, les autres; yet
he that uses it not, is counted a Dulman, or Cynick. And yet further consider
we that he that gives another man the Lie, when it is manifest he has lied,
does him no wrong at all; nor ought to be more hainously taken, then to say, He
has broken Promise, or failed his Trust, which amounts to a lie. On the other
side, when I give another the lie, and know in my own conscience he has not
lied, I give the Lie to my self. And what cause have I, if I say, the Sun
shines, when it does shine, and another tells me it is a Lie, for it is
midnight, to persesecute such a one to death for making himself a foollish
Ruffin and Liar in his own knowledge! So that to give it in any case, (except
of Loyalty and Life) is frivolous and irrational.

Object. They object. These Discourses savor of Cowardice. I answer; It Is
true, if they call it Cowardice to fear God or hell, whereas the truly wise or
valiant knows there is nothing else to be feared. For against an enemies sword
we find 10000 seven-penny men waged at that price in the wars, that fear it as
little, perchance less, then any prosest sword-man in the world. Diligentissima
in tutela sui fortitudo; and it is (says Aristotle,) a mediocrity between
doubting and daring. Sicut non martyrem poena, so not fighting, but a good
cause declares the valiant man; In which whosoever shall resolvedly end his
life, resolvedly I mean in respect of the cause, to wit, in defense of his
Prince, Religion, or Country as he may justly be numbered among the Martyrs of
God; so may those that die with malicious hearts in private Combats or Duels be
called the Martyrs of the Devil. Neither indeed do we take our own Revenge, or
punish the Injuries offered us by the death of the injurious. For the true
conquest of revenge, is to give him, of whom he would be revenged, cause to
repent him; and we lay the Repentance of another man's blood upon our own
conscience, and drown our souls in the wounds of our enemies.

A second Objection or Demand will be: Do I condemn generous defense of Honor
pressed with Injury? I answer; No, if the Injury be violent; for the Law of
nature which is a branch of the eternal Law, and the Laws of all Christian
Kings and States do favor him that is assailed in the slaughter of the
assailant; but no Gentleman, on a Chartel, or Challenge being defied, is bound
to answer in point of Honor in a private combat, because (omitting the
greatest, which is the point of Religion,) the point of Law is directly
contrary, which has dominion over the point of Honor, which can judge it,
which can destroy it, except you will style those Arts honorable, where the
hangman gives the Garland. For the Laws of the Land having appointed the
Hangman to second the Conqueror, and the Laws of God appointed the Devil to
second the Conquered dying in malice, I say he is base, and also a fool that
accepts of any Chartel so accompanied.

A third Objection, How shall a noble or gentle man be repaired in Honor for
Infamy unsufferable? Answer. By the Court martial; For do we not in cases of
debts, goods, lands, and all things else submit (without disgrace) to law,
because it may be felony to take by violence that which is our own? And if
Honor be dearer then goods, or life it self, yet know what is true Honor; It is
the History or Fame following Acts of Virtue, or Acts of difficulty, and danger
for public good. He that in these fails by Cowardice or base affection, is
dishonored; but acting a private Combat for a private respect, and most
commonly a frivolous one, is no act of virtue, because contrary to Gods Law and
the Kings, nor difficult, (on even terms) nor for public good, but contrary.
For a man may be Felo de se, robbing so his King and Country: as for
contumelious words, if I cause my enemy to confess, be sorry, or make amends,
all these, or any are sufficient, and the dis-reputation is not mine, but his:
and for matter of Fact or Blows, etc. famous is that decision of the French
Marshals in the case of Monsieur de Plessis struck by a Baron, which was
awarded to kneel before Mr. Pl. in open Court sitting in his Chair, and to
tender him a sword and a cudgil, and Plessis to choose with which he would
strike, but he for gave him: and which of these two had the disgrace? If you
say the Barons Repentance was enforced, and so no dishonor to him, you may as
much allege for a thief confessing at the Gallows that his Repentance is
enforced too, and so all enforced repentance is inflicted upon us for something
done unworthy of a Gentleman or an honest man, and therefore the Court of
Chivalry most charitable; for the blood of men violently spilt, does not bring
forth honey bees, as that of Bulls does, which sting but the fingers or the face,
but it produces that monstrous beast, Revenge, which has devoured so many
noble personages of several nations, as there is nothing more lamentable, nor
more threatening the wrath of God upon supreme Governors then the permission;
therefore K. James extinguished those deadly Feuds in Scotland, and our Laws are
strong against Duellists in England.

My Additions follow in a Sermon to K. Charles. The Heathen could rouse his
friend with a Te moneo, ut omnem glotiam ad quam a pueritia infla^matus fuisti,
omni cura and industria consequare, magnitudinemque animi tui, qu am ego semper
sum admiratus, semperque amavi, ne unquam inflectas cu jusquam injuria. A
Christian virtue then should be e crassiore tela then for every fly to break.
It Is for weak and guilty minds to be troubled with injurious words; like our
Duellists preventing the day of Judgment, and calling their brother to account
for every idle word over night, by sending him the length of his sword. But I
desire to throw three or four cool words upon this ignis fatuus, a meteor that
has place only in a middle rank or region of mankind. For first, The whole
sky of women are clear against it; and among the males, all nobler spirits
fitted for Counsel, or Government, will learn to look down with scorn upon it:
Beggars and the poorer Tribes can live and die with a few brawls, or
broken-heads at most. The three professions are better taught, finding no
Aphorism or Law of God or man to defend it; and men of Trade and Corporations
understand not the word Pusiness in the quarrelling Dialect: so that fighting
is confined; it descends not usually beneath a serving-man, nor ascends above a
knight. And being thus comprest, the hope is, it will shortly vanish into
nothing, for it rises from that which is next to Nothing, Vanity, and Lies, and
Vapors, in Tap-houses and Taverns. And you shall observe such guests still more
tender of that dreadful word the Lie, on whom it falls in the nature of a true
jest; and such most enraged about Reputation, whom wise men know to have
little or no Reputation to lose. Briefly, What think these Gallants of the
Roman bravery and height of spirit? Can they show me from all that story a pair
of worthy Courages (out take the mercenary Fencers,) embrandled and enkindled
to go forth and fight a Duel for the Lie, or the son of a whore; or any such
poor froth as flies from men in wrath, or vexed with distemper in drink, or
play? But are we not Christians? a religion of meekness, that never occasions,
much less necessitatets any Disciple to a deed that must inevitably draw on, or
endanger his hanging or damning, or both. The Captain of which profession, the
Author and Finisher of our faith and salvation was consecrate through
sufferings, made himself of no reputation, and endured such contradiction of
sinners.

FINIS.

