A PACKET OF Popish Delusions, False Miracles, and Lying Wonders: Together
with Many Grand DIVISIONS Among PAPISTS: Far exceeding both in Quality and
Quantity those among Protestants: notwithstanding their seeming Unity. Exposed
to the Shame of POPERY.

Whereunto is added The Papists DISSENTIONS From the PROTESTANT: With ( That,
the Enemy so much glorys-in, viz.)

The Differences of the PROTESTANTS among themselves.

And, a fearful Caution to Apostatizing Protestants.

By MERCURIUS HIBERNICUS.

Sero, sed Serio. London, Printed by Tho. Dawks. 1681.

Popish DELUSIONS, and DIVISIONS.

Reader, This counterfeit deluding Devil (seemingly afraid of the Papists Holy
water) is the true Representative of all such as place a Holiness where GOD has
put none. See Delusion XX. page 20.

A Procession.
My name is Legion, for we are many. Mar. 5 9 a winged and horned devil is
chased by Roman Catholic priests with holy water, a canopy, crosses and a
banner.

The Collier (spoken of by Cardinal Hosius) represents, and speaks the very
Dialect of all ignorant Protestants as well as Papists, who are Debauchd in
their Lives and Conversation, as well Women as Men, that drink, swear,
forswear, curse, whore, and c. But as to an Eternal welfare of their souls are
idle* careless, indifferent, and therefore ignorant; fit to be deluded by a
blind, sottish Priest; thinking it enough to say, They believe as the Church
believe, or, words to that effect. See the Preface.

How do thou believ?


I believ as t. Church believes.


a winged and horned devil talks with a man.

TO The Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight. Lord Mayor OF LONDON: AND, One
of Its Representatives in this* Parliament.
AS Clouds are dispelled, when the Sun mounteth in its Vertical Luster and
Glory: so the noisome Mists of Vices, and vicious Varlets are dissipated, as
well by the bright beams of Virtue, shining forth in the Lives and Manners of
Good Magistrates, (such I take your Lordship, and some others to be) as by the
Sword of Justice it self; which, as you well know, is not to be born in vain,
but to be used with Legal and Regular Severity against Offenders, especially
incorrigible Ones. Now, What, or Who greater Offenders and Delinquents, nay,
Who can be reputed more destructive and pernicious Adversaries to any
Protestant State or Kingdom, than Blood-thirsty, murdering, Cityburning,
All-destroying, plotting Papists? What can we term the whole Rout of their
Clergy? especially their Jesuits (those Infernal Furies) less than the Common
Enemy of Mankind! for as much as they delight to prey upon all of their own
kind, that are not of their Execrable Religion! which yet, neither the Fiercest
Lions, Cruellest Tigers, Savage Bears, nor Ravening Wolves were ever guilty of:
for these State-Mountebanks are never idle, but always in action, and
perpetual Motion, to perpetrate the greatest Villainies and Mischiefs imaginable.

My Lord, your Care, Diligence and Vigilance, concerning such Persons and
Things, together with your prudent Conduct in matters of great Importance (by
which we enjoy good Order and Tranquillity) must needs be very acceptable to all
good People, as indeed they are, and will make you, deservedly, famous to
Posterity: And it is hoped, that your good Example may raise in your
Successors, a generous and candid Emulation, to tread the same Paths of Honor,
Justice and Prudence, by your Lordship so regularly tracktout for them. I say,
Justice, that true Child of Virtue, that Stay and Staff of Peace, that great
Maintainer of Honor, for, as Justitia* sine prudentia plurimum poterit, so,
Sine Justitia nihil valebit Prudentia: A worthy Apothegm, of thrice worthy
Cicero.

My Lord, If my Fancy deceive not my Judgment, I know not to whom I should with
more Reason make a special Dedication of such a Book as this, and at such a
Juncture of Time, than to the Prime Optimate of the Primest Protestant CITY in
the World, as LONDON is, and is acknowledged so to be, even by its most
implacable, irreconcilable, restless, sworn and instructed Enemies; who gnash
their Teeth, yea, pine away through mere Madness and Malice; not only to behold
such a glorious Resurrection from the Womb of Confusion, and late vast Heaps of
her own Rubbish and Ruins, but also the Detection of their (Still Continued)
PLOTS; wherein the great GOD is chiefly to be aspected and magnified!

The Several Popish Delusions and Divisions, displayed in this little Book are
not vulgarly known, I am certain; and therefore, I presume, will be the more
welcome to the Ignorant: which, though they will be no News to Your Lordship,
and others: yet, I humbly crave your Acceptance, and Patronage of this Work:
Which, I know, will find more Enemies than there are Words in it, as shall my
self, for exposing it, who cordially wish all Health, Happiness, Safety and
Prosperity to your Self, City and (Protestant) Citizens: to whose Service and
Defense of the Protestant Cause, I have with the same Ardency wholly devoted my
best Endeavors, and All that I am

October. 23: 1680. Mercurius Hibernicus.

To all Resolved Protestants.
HELL is broke loose, the Devil a Hunting rides,
With Troops of Jes'its, and great DONS besides,
To Proselite more Protestants; thereby
The rest to overthrow more easily:
New Projects are on Foot, and one is this,
(Whereof they have great Hopes they shall not miss)
viz. To stir up the Conformists against those
They Non-Conformists call: yea, unto Blows;
Which, God avert. I say, Rome's still at work,
Her numerous Agents, still among us lurk,
You know for what. It Is time then to be wise,
And learn who Friends are, and who Enemies:
And that, among your nearest Neighbors too,
For such, if Papists, can most Mischief you.
I have been threatened often with Destruction,
By Priests, and Kindred too, for my Religion,
Yea, pesecuted at Ten years of Age,
At last was forced to fly, to shun their Rage.
Again, in Seventy one, and Two and Three,
Some said, In Time, They Would take a Course with me:
But all their Threats (even since I was at School)
Could never quench my Zeal, nor Courage Cool
To the Protestant Cause: Therefore, my Friends,
I hope you will own me in such Noble Ends.
Yet, let me say, Though I am still obscure,
My Heart's on fire to burn the Romish WHORE.
'Bove all, to keep her from the British Strand:
And Crush her PIMPS already in the Land.
Courage in dreadful Times is rarely found,
I hope most of you with it do abound.
Here shall you see, ROME'S dark Idolatry,
And Image-VVorship laid before your Eye.
In Reading which, you cannot choose but Smile,
Although the POPE himself stood-by the while.
Here Papist against Papist shall you see,
And amongst themselves divided worse than we,
For all their seeming Uniformity,
Which, yet, they are forced to, by Rome's TYRANNY.
Accept this little Book, 'till others do
More lively paint their Mawmmetry to you.
Mercurius Hibernicus.

The Preface.
HAving lately seen a printed Paper concerning a pretended Miracle, wrought by
the Power of Almighty God (as the blasphemous, and monstrously impudent Authors
thereof affirm in Print) on the Saint of St. Omers, Edmund Gennings! in the
days of O. Elizabeth. The reading whereof, brought to my Remembrance, that I
had transcribed several such like Tales, False Miracles, and Lying Wonders, out
of an old Book in Kent, only for Diversion sake: Being in themselves so
ridiculous, so absurd and impossible: (yet, believed for Undoubted Truths by
the blind Papists) and therefore, think it not unseasonable, at this time, to
present them to public View, very few of them being known to most men: Not
doubting, but the simplest Protestant, as well as the intelligent, will not
only laugh at them, but utterly scorn and detest them, and the, now, Promoters
of them, as mere Cheats, Juggles, and Delusisions; by which they may see and
judge, how miserable not only Kent, (for what I have writ, is only of some
places, in that one County) but other Shires and Counties of England, were
deluded by the fly Inventions, Magic Arts and Impostures of the JESUITS,
Priests, Monks, Friars, and c. whilst POPERY reigned here, to the great
Dishonor of GOD, and the Woeful Seduction, and consequently the Eternal
Destruction of Milions of credulous Papists, with whom, even to this very day,
the words and persuasions of one blind Priest, was and is of more Force and
Authority than the whole Scriptures. For, they are bound, and that under great
Penalties to believe every thing, or any thing whatever, be it never so absurd
and false, for an undoubted Verity, that either the Pope or his Clegy shall
teach, impose or command: And amongst the rest, any false Miracle: and indeed,
they shall not need take any great Pains in persuading their blind People to a
Belief; for they are naturally prone to imbibe any Absurdity, and swallow down
any Morsel be it never so pestiferous, false, vain, destructive or tragical:
yea, to the murdering of their dearest and nearest Relations: by which we may
learn, That there is no obliging a Papist, no, not by the greatest Kindness,
and Courtesy imaginable; for, if he will be true to the Dictates and Principles
of his own Religion, he must seek and endeavor the Utter Ruin of Protestants,
yea, though they should have saved him from the Gallows!

O! Sirs, Who would be of so black a Society? of so bloody a Religion? who but
the worst of men, Whoremongers, Idolaters, Tracebreakers, Sots, Idiots or
Madmen would subject the Faculties of their Souls, and Senses of their Bodies,
to the imperious Wills and Pleasure of every proud Prelate and blind Curate?
But the Papists do so: Erge.

I shall conclude my Preface with the Story of a great Popish Doctor, Cardinal
Hosius, who thereby gives you to understand what kind of Believers the BULK of
Papists are.

The Devil (says he) appearing to a Collier, asked him, What Religion he was
of, and, How he believed? The Collier answered I believe as the Church
believes. And, How does the Church believe? (quoth the Devil) Why (said the
Collier) The Church believes as I believe, and* I believe as the Church
believes. And this was all he could say. And so it is All that most of the
Papists can say for themselves; so ignorant are they, who must, and do believe
their Ghostly DADS more than their own Eyes. For, if the Pope, or their
Confessors say, That White is Black, or Black is White, they will believe it, or,
That Good is Evil, or Evil, Good, Isa. 5. 20. they will swear* it, and be ready to
stab any man that shall contradict or seem to doubt it, yea, or but ask a
Question about it, for Conscience sake: As some have been served in Spain. Thus
do the Blind lead the Blind, till they both fall into the Ditch of Destruction.
Matt 15, 14.

Now, I shall proceed to my purpose, and it matters not if I begin with Thomas
Becket, sometimes Arch-Flamin of Canterbury, Arch-Traytor to his Prince ( Hen.
II.) Arch-Enemy to his Country, and Arch-Friend or grand Vassal to his Unholy
Holiness the POPE.

A PAQUET OF POPISH DELUSIONS, False MIRACLES and Lying WONDERS, Published to
the Shame of POPERY.
Delusion I.
THIS Man, of whom we are going to speak, was in few years after he was made
Archbishop of Canterbury, grown to that height of Pride and Ambition; and to
that degree of Insolence; and into such high Favor with the Pope; that he
began not only to slight, and domineer over his Fellow-bishops, but also the
prime Nobility and Gentry of the whole Kingdom; and not these only but the King
himself, Henry II. whom he had often nosed with most malepert and saucy
Language, and proud behavior: yea, so imperious was he grown that he suffered
(or rather created a kind of necessity for it) the King twice in one day to
hold his Stirrup in Normandy: Until at last, he was grown so intolerable in
his Deport, in so much that the King could no longer brook him. Many times
would he lament his own sad Condition, because he was forced to bear with his
Pride and Arrogance, for fear of the Pope. And whilst he was considering what
to do with him; Four of his Gentlemen, knowing his mind, and the justness of
the thing, resolved to revenge his quarrel, and do that with their own Swords,
which the Pope would not give way to be done by the Sword of Justice: And
thereupon soon after slew the Traitor in Christ's Church in Canterbury.

No sooner heard the Pope of the Death of this his great Champion, but he
canonized him for a shining Saint in Heaven: and sent the Deed-doers with his
black Curse down to the Pit of Hell, as he thought.

And, as soon as Stephen Langton, (his fourth Successor) had made a Golden
Shrine for his body, and commanded the annual day of his death to be kept holy:
not only the common People, but Princes, Nobles and Bishops, not only of this,
but other Kingdoms, resorted in Pilgrimage to his Tomb, in the same Church
wherein he was done to Death; and flocked to his shrine for Remission of Sins:
Insomuch, that multitudes thronged to see, touch, yea to kiss even the vilest
parts of his Body or Relict: Whereby the Church became so rich in Offerings of
Silver, Gold, Jewels, etc. that it far exceeded the Kings Treasury: Every Monk
and Friar sounding forth the Praises, and reporting the Miracles, and Pardons
of that blessed Martyr, as they styled him; (but surely it is not the death,
but the Cause that maker a Martyr) so that the name of poor CHRIST was now
quite forgotten, and the Cathedral commonly called St. Thomas's Church of
Canterbury.

It would be too teadious to write of the stately Churches, Chapels and
Oratories built and dedicated to his Name, and of the blasphemous Hymns and
Collects invented by Monks, etc. for his honor and Service.

The Monks of St. Augustines in Canterbury perceiving how little their old
Relics were esteemed in comparison of Thomas Beckets, they by the Craft of
their Abbot, got some part of his Blood, and one part of the Crown of his head,
the Report whereof brought no small Credit and Profit to their Monastery: and
tho many thousands went a whoring e'n to this as well as the other Monastery:
yet it appeared in the end, that there was no part of Becket brought thither,
as it was made manifest especially (in the time of King Henry VIII) by that
Worthy Peer Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, and others who were Commissioned for
defacing Beckets shrine, and found all parts of his body entire and complete,
so that the blinded People in this one matter were doubly deceived and deluded:
1. In going to worship him or any part of him at all. 2. In worshipping that
which was not there, but only made to believe so, by the crafty and seducing
Monks.

Now, amongst the many Miracles that the miserable deluded Papists will needs
have been wrought by this proud Prelate; these following are some, if any are
so mad as to believe them.

1. That his Palace at Otford wanting a good Spring of Water, he struck his
Pastoral staff into the ground, and, that immediately Water gushed out in
abundance (as Moses did) and there runs to this day; which was called St.
Thomas's Well.

2. That, being at his Devotion in his Park, he was much disturbed by a
Nightingale that sung in a bush hard by him; and therefore, by the Virtue of
his Holiness, he enjoined that from thenceforward no such Bird should presume
to sing thereabouts: and no more there did, say Papists, when the contrary is,
and was then manifest to all the Neighborhood.

3. That the Blacksmith of the said Town of Otford having pricked his horse,
Becket enacted again by the Authority of his Holiness, That no Smith should
thrive in the Parish ever after: Cujus contrarium verum.

4. That, Lewis the French King coming into England to visit King Henry, and in
his Return would needs Visit St. Thomas of Canterbury, and, after great Offers
at his Tomb, asked and also obtained of the holy Saint, That neither he in his
Passage, nor any other for the future, should suffer shipwreck betwixt Dover
and Whitsand: so that it seems Becket granted a Petition after his Death. Who
can forbear laughing at these and such like Tales? However, God showed his
Displeasure against him, and all Canterbury, perhaps for his sake, for in the
very first year of his Prelacy, the whole City was consumed with fire.

Delusion II.
BEsides Saint Becket, there was another popish Saintling in great Veneration
at Otford (in Saxon Ottanford) his name was Bartholomew, this Higler provided
the Parish Priest with as much Poultry as he and his Friends were able to
devour; for he was much frequented by all the Neighbor Parishioners, for a
most rare and singular property which he professed.

For the Manner was, That, if any woman with Child desired to bring forth a
Son, she should offer to this St. Bartholomew a Cock-chicken: and if she would
have a Daughter, then she should present him an Hen: so that through the fraud
of this Fox, viz. Priest, the Country People, as wise as Capons, were many
years together robbed of their Cocks and Hens: even till the days of Henry
VIII. who understanding the Cheat, commanded the Idol to be taken down.

Delusion III.
BEda (whose writing are stuffed with old Wives tales) informs us, that upon a
time, a great part of the City of Canterbury being on fire, That the then
Archbishop, viz. Melitus commanded, that they should bear him against the
greatest fury thereof; and that whereas before it could not be quenched by the
great labor of the People, yet at his only presence, together with Holy Water,
the fire immediately went out, It Is wonder why Becket did not the same in his
time, but perhaps he was in a journey, as Elijah said of Balaam, No Protestant
has reason to believe this, nor any such Tales, at which so many learned
Papists laugh in their sleeves. The mentioning of Holy Water brings to my
Memory this Passage concerning it:

A Protestant Boy (very well known to me) put a pretty Trick upon a Priest, and
all his blind Congregation: Thus, in the Morning, a little before Mass-time,
the Boy observing where the Priest had set his pot of Holy Water, takes the
pot, pours out all the Holy water, and pisses in it, so sets it in its place
again: soon after the Priest takes the pot, and all besprinkles the people with
the Piss, and they very reverently b^w down to it, and perceiving that the
Water would not hold out to bles^ ^^em all, they thrust forward striving who
should come nearest the P^t, for fear they should go away unblessed. But the
Priest knowing he had filled the pot, was greatly amazed to see it all gone so
soon; and thereupon, smelling to the Bottle, crossed (not blessed) himself:
and, to satisfy his blind People (who were as much amazed as himself) he told
them, That, no doubt but some Saint or Angel had got away the rest! And they
without any hesitation believed him. But in a year or two, the Business came
all out, and they with their Priest were well laughed at by the Protestants.
However they threatened the Boy with Destruction, as the Priest did with
Damnation; so that for this and other matters, done and said against Popery, he
was forced to fly his Country, and live incognito, as he does to this day.

Delusion IV.
MAny Miracles are said to be wrought by Saint Augustine the first Bishop of
Canterbury, and by many styled the English Apostle; and no doubt were as true
as the rest: I shall not blot Paper with any of them, save this one, viz. When
the Danes had plundered the City from end to end, ( as the Papists long to
serve London). Yet Saint Augustines Monks and Monastery were never touched! and
why? Because that when a Dane had taken hold of his Cloak wherewith his Tomb
was covered; it stuck so fast to his Fingers, that by no means possible he
could loosen it, till he came and yielded himself to the Monks and confessed
his fault.

But, either this Cloak (says my Author) was weaved ex auro Tholosano, or,
which I rather believe) this Canterbury-tale was forged Arabula Romano.

Delusion V.
NOT far from Hyde in Kent, there was a Popish Synagogue, styled St. Nicholas
Chapel: to this Saint, the Friars attributed Power over the Winds and Waves of
the Sea; yea, that with his own Beck he could appease them, and preserve from
Wrack and Drowning, as many as called upon his Name (but they must withal
offer largely to his Picture.) And this was confidently believed by the
Idolatrous people, as well seamen as others. If any Fisherman upon that coast
had escaped a storm, then should St. Nicholas have not only all the thanks for
that Deliverance, but some of the best fishes for an offering. But if any
suffered Wreck (as many did) the Priest to save the Repute of the Saint, would
say, It was because they offered too niggardly, etc.

There was the like Cheat at Wind-Chelsey, in which place was the Picture of
St. Leonard holding a Vane, or Weathercock in his hand, which was movable at
the pleasure of any that would turn it to what point of the Compass best fitted
the Return of the Husband or other Friend whom they expected from beyond Sea.
After that done, and large offering made (for without offering these Idols
would be idle) they promised themselves the desired Wind, but whether it fell
out right or wrong the Priests got well by it.

Delusion VI.
THis that I am now upon, as it is one of the longest Stories, so, in my
Judgment, it is one of the most notorious E^usio^s of all the rest, or at least
equal to the blackest of them: f^r, it was devised and carried on with such
wonderful craft and Secresy, That not only the Vulgar, but the whole Gentry and
Nobility of both Sexes, and many men of the greatest Learning and Judgment were
for a time bewitched, and strangely and strongly possessed with false
apprehensions of the Truth thereof; and many of them Protestants too* In
relation whereof I shall for the most part, deliver it in my Authors own words.



About East^r, in the 7 year of Hen. 8. An* Do* 1525* it happened that a
certain Maid named Elizabeth Barton (by the Papists called the Holy Maid of
Kent) was afflicted with a strange Disease resembling the Convulsion fits (for
many times she seemed to be dead) and after she had thus continued by fits,
some 7 months, in one of her fits: she asked if the child was dead? (for her
Masters child lay desperately sick in the Cradle) 'twas answered, No: It shall
die anon, said she, and so it did, for every body expected it, whether she had
said it or not.

But this saving of hers concerning the Child's death, was by several (ignorant
of the child's dying Condition at the same instant) blazed about for a wonder,
and she termed no less than a Prophetess.

After this, in sundry other Fits (though she seemed to be dead) she told of
diverse things done at the Church, and other places where she was not present.
She spoke of Heaven, Hell and Purgatory; and of the Joys, and Sorrows that
several Souls departed suffered there. She preaed much against the Corruption
of Manners, and evil Living. She exhorted to hearing the Mass, Auricular
Confession, Adoration and Prayer to Saints and our Lady. In short, she made, in
all points, Confession of the Popish Religion.

And among other things, this was much in her mouth, viz. She would go home;
and yet she never stirred from the Place she lay. Whereupon (being in her Fits)
one asked her, Where that Home was? She answered, Where she heard and saw the
Joys of Heaven; where St. Michael weighed Souls; where St. Peter carried the
Keys, and where she herself had the Company of our Lady of Courtop-street;
and, had heartily besought her to heal her disease: who also had commanded her,
to offer her a Taper in her Chapel there: And to declare boldly to all
Christian People, That our La^y of Courtop-street (a Town near the Borders of
Rumny-marsh) had revived her from the very point of death, and, that her
pleasure was, That it should be rung for a Miracle. which her Master (Mr. Cob
of Aldington) hearing, said, That there were no Bells in that Chapel: whereto
she said nothing. But the voice (or Devil) that spoke in her proceeded, saying,
Our Lady will show more Miracles there shortly; for, if any depart this life
suddenly, or in deadly Sin, if he be vowed to our Lady heartily, he shall be
restored to life again to receive shr^f^ and housel, i. e. be confessed, and have
the Sacrament given: and after to leav^ this World with Gods blessing. Besides
this, She told them what meat the Monk, or Hermet of our Ladies Chapel of
Courtopstreet had for his supper; whereat (says her popish Scribe) the hearers
marvelled greatly.

And, from that time forward, she resolved with herself to go to Courtop street
(not far off) and there pray, and offer to our Lady, which she did accordingly;
and was there delayed of her Cure for a season (and that was till her dying
day, for she was never cured) but yet in the mean time put in assured hope
thereof.

During these Matters, the Fame of this marvelous Maiden spread abroad so, that
it came to the ears of Wareham Archbishop of Canterbury: who sent to her Dr.
Bocking, Barnes and Hadley, three Monks, Father Jews and his Fellow: his
Official, and the Parson of Aldington: with Commission to examine the whole
matter.

These men, finding her every way a true Child of the Church of Rome: not only
waded no further in detecting of so great a Fraud; but gave favorable
Countenance, and joined with her in setting forth the same. So, that at her
next Journey to our Lady of Courtop-street, she entered the Chapel with Ave
Regina Caelorum, in prick song, accompanied with these Commissioners, many
Ladys, Gentlemen, Gentlewomen of the best degree, with three thousand of the
Vulgar besides. Being in the Chapel, she immediately fell into a wonderful
Passion before the Image, as if she had the Falling Sickness (like Mahomet.) in
which she uttered sundry m^trical and rhyming Speeches, tending to the Worship
of the Lady of Courtop-street (as she called her:) whose Chapel there she
wished to be better maintained, and to be furnished with a daily singing
priest: neither did she forget herself, for she said, It was our Ladies
pleasure, That she should be put into some Nunnery. Whereupon the Arch Bishop*
ordered her to that of S. Sepulchers in Canterbury* where she was still
afflicted with her former Disease for all her promised Cure.

Whiles she resided here, and continued her accustomed working of Miracles,
(but what they were, none can tell) having often communication with our Lady of
Courtopstreet, (as she said) who also ceased not to show herself mighty in
operation there, for she lighted Candles without fire, restore* the sick to
perfect health, and raised the dead to life, if you will believe it.

Thus was Elizabeth Barton advanced, from the Condition of a poor servant, to
the State of a glorious Nunn, the Hermit or Monk of Courtopstreet enriched by
daily offering; Saint Sepulchers honored with the presence of the Holy Maid of
Kent, God blasphemed, and the blessed Virgin abused, the silly People miserably
mocked: the Bishops, Priests and Monks in the mean time with closed eyes
winking, and the Devil with open mouth laughing at it. And thus the matter
stood for sundry years: till the Question was moved about the Kings Divorce:

Whereupon this holy Wench (not contenting her self within her former bounds of
Hypocrisy) began to meddle in that Matter: and feigned, That it was revealed to
her, That if the King would be divorced from Queen Katherine, he should not be
King one month after, (though after the Divorce he lived prosperously many
years.)

Upon which, her doings were once again examined by faithful men; and in the
end, her dissimulation was laid open; her Accessaries the Monks etc. were
detected, the deluded people well satisfied; the grand Deceivers Worthily
executed: and the Pope and the Devil, their Master quite and clean confounded.
For E. Barton, her self confessed the whole Cheat to the Lords of the Privy
Counci^: Whereof you may see more in the 12 Chapter of the Statute in the 25
year of Henry 8. And most of them, which have been Sainted by Popes, for these
1000 years (I believe) are little better than this She-Impostor. O what a shame
is this one Story to Popery, if Papists had any shame in them.

Delusion VII.
OF Saint Eanswid (so called) daughter of Eadbald King of Kent, many lying
Wonders are reported, viz. That she lengthned the great Beam of a building
three Foot, when the Carpenters (mistaking their Measure) had made it so much
too short. That in the Might of her holiness she brought Water, over hills and
rocks against Nature, to her Pryory a mile off. That she forbad certain
ravenous Birds the Country, which before did much harm. That she restored the
blind; Cast out Devils; and healed all Infirmities. I believe this to be as
true, as that Ed. Gennings his Thumb came off with the touch of a Pope-holy
Sister.

Madam Eanswide, for these her stupendous Miracles was after her death, by the
Policy of Popish Priests, and folly of Common People, honored for a Saint. And
it is no Wonder, for it was, and is still, usual with the whole Rabble of Romish
Clergy, not only to magnify their Benefactors of all sorts, but even to Deify
them, especially such as were of noble Extraction: Knowing hereby many great
Benefits accrewed: as, 1. By that means they assured to themselves many great
Personages, as Kings and Princes. 2. They drew by their Example infinite
numbers of the common sort after them. 3. They adventure the more Boldly (under
those honorable and glorious Names and Titles) to publish their false Miracle,
the more strongly to delude. And this was the Reason that Sexburg in Shepy.
Mildred in Thanet. Etheldred at Ely* Edith at Wilton, and this our Eanswid at
Folkston: and sundry other idle Gossips of Royal blood, in this and other
Nations were sainted by the Pope. Hence was it also, that Edgar, Ethelwold,
Dunstane the Juggler, and many others were shrined here on Earth, and then to
sit among the Saints in Heaven. If this Eanswide had such Power from above,
then why did she not preserve her Pryory from the Fury of H. 8. in whose days
all her pretended Miracles were openly derided.

Delusion VIII.
SWithin was Sainted by the Man of Rome, for making a Basket of broken Eggs
whole, if you will believe the blind Papists, who swear it with as much
Confidence as if they had seen it done: tho it is many hundred of years since
Swithin was in orb nostro. And all these Legends were divised to bring Credit
and Profit to the Romish Church: whereat even little Children laugh in Scorn*
And in good Truth, most Papists have as much reason to curse their own Plot and
Plotters as we have; and wish it had never been: for hereby they have set so
many Protestant Pens on Work to lay open the falsness, bloodiness,
execrableness, ridiculousness and absurdness of their popish Religion to the
world: which otherwise had been snent. For, before, People had a pretty good
Opinion of the Papists; and would speak favorably of them: yea, and many of
their Religion too: but now, they both hate them, and their Religion, for the
means aforesaid: so that the more they stir, the more they stink in Peoples
nostrils. I say again, That their hellish PLOT, which intended the utter
Destruction of the Protestant Cause, seems to me rather an Advantage to it.
Yea, though thousands of Protestants should fall by the hands of Papists: which
yet would but confirm and illustrate that divine and glorious Apothegm, or
Motto of the true Church, viz. Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae, i. e. The
Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. And I must affirm, That in
sanguine Sanctorum Ecclesiae Papisticorum primatiam obtinuit, i. e. The Popish
Church obtained the Primacy by shedding the blood of Saints.

Delusion IX.
STrange things ae told us of St. Mildred (Lady Abbess of Minster-Abby in the
Isle of Thanet) no matter whether they be true or no; but the Papists will
swear it. This Saint (say they) was so mightily desended with divine Power,
that lying in an hot Oven three hours together, suffered no harm. That she was
of such virtue, That coming out of France, the very stone, on which she first
stepped to land, received the Impression of her foot, and retaind it for ever;
having besides this property, that if it were removed never so far from its
place, it would in short time return of it self without hand. Also, that she
being at her devotions, the Devil put out her Candle, which an Angel lighted
for her again. Who but Reprobates cannot see, that the Delusions and
Abominations of Mystical Babylon ( Rome) far exceed those of literal Babylon.

Delusion X.
I know not whether this I am now upon may be called a Miracle or no, but I am
sure it is one of the lowdest Lies that ever came out of the mouth of a Bishop;
and in good Truth I can scarce write for laughing at it. For, Henry Bp. of
Rochester, in the Reign of Henry III. K. of England, mounting the Pulpit at
Sittingbourn, and as he was in the midst of his Preachment, he on a sudden
broke forth into a great Ecstasy of Joy, as one that had bin wrapped into the
third Heaven; and said, Rejoice in the Lord, my Brethren all; and, Knowye
assuredly, That now of late in one day, there departed out of Purgatory,
Richard, sometime King of England, Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury,
and a Chaplain of his, to go to the Divine Majesty; and on that day there
issued no more but them three out of that place of Pain. Fear not to give full
and assured Credit to these my Words: for this thing has been now the third
time revealed to me, and another man (in terra incognita) and that so plainly,
as from my own mind, all suspicion of doubt is far removed. No doubt but this
was as true, as that the Cow eat Tom Thumb, and sent him alive once more into
the World* You may see with what wholesome Cates Prelates used to feed the
People: And if the Bishops, the great Torches gave such a dim Light, what could
be expected from rush* Candles, their blind Curates, and other filly sir- John's.

Concerning Purgatory, Virgil will show you what agreement there is between the
Old Romans and the New Romanists, in these Verses, 1. 6. Aenead.

Quin and supremo cum lumine vita relinquit,
Non tamen omne malum miseris, nec funditus omnes,
Corporeae excedunt pestes, penitusque necesse est
Multa diu concreta, modis inolescere miris.
Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt. Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos, aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni:
Quisque suos patimur Manes: exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium, and pauci laeta arva tenemus:
Donec longa dies, persecto temporis orb,
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
Aetherium sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.
Thus Paraphrased.
Moreover, when their end of Life, and light do them forsake,
Yet can they not their sins nor sorrows all (poor Souls!) off shake,
Nor all Contagions fleshly from them voids, but must of need,
Much things congendred long, by wondrous means at last out-spread,
Therefore they plagued are, and for their former faults and sins,
Their sundry pains they bide: some high in air do hang on pins:
Some fleeting are in Floods, and deep in gulfs themselves they tire,
'Till sins away are washed, or cleaensed clean with purging fire,
Each one of us our Penance here abide, that sent we be
To Paradise at last: we few these fields of joy do see.
Till compass long of time, by perfect course has purged quite,
Our former clodedred spots, and pure has left our ghostly sprite,
And senses pure of Soul, and simple sparks of heavenly light*
Now, if this Bishops Poetry may be allowed for Divinity, then we may not only
affirm, That Virgil's Aeniedes, but Homer's Iliads, Ovid's Fasts, and Lucians
Dialogues also may be made Canonical.

All the Scriptures that the Papists bring to prove a Purgatory (which yet is
no Canonical Scripture) is out of Maccabes 2. 12. You see how hard they are put
to it, that they must fly to the Apocrypha for help; though all the World of
knowing Christians in all Ages, to this day, have utterly rejected the
Authority thereof, in comparison of the Old and New Testament, because not
penned by the Holy Ghost. And wherein (as I could prove) are not only flat
Contradictions, but some Lies.

Delusion XI.
THE Image of Edith, the Daughter of King Edgar, was much frequented in the
Church yard at Kemsing, for preservation of Corn from Blassing, Mildew, etc.

The manner of which Idolatry was this. The blind Farmer or Yeoman was to bring
about a Bushel of Corn to the Church, and after Prayers made, offered it to the
Image of the Saint. Of this offering the Priest used to take nine Parts for
himself (for to be sure he would gain by the Bargain) the residue (perhaps 2 or
3 handful) he would besprinkle with holy Water, and then mutter over a few
Words of Conjuration, which done he dedicated it to the Image, and so delivered
it to the Fool that brought it; who went away with full persuasion That if he
mingled that hallowed handful with all his Seed-corn, it would preserve it not
only from harm, but caused it to prosper and grow most abundantly.

Terentius Varro notes of the Old Romans, that amongst infinite others, they
had one God in great Veneration, called Robigus, to whom they used to sacrifice
for preservation of their Corn; so that Robigus of the Old Romans, and Edith of
the New Romanists, were both worshipped for the same end* And they not only
agreed in this, but in the Properties of their Gods, in the manner and
multitude of their Sacrifices, in the times and forms of their Solemnities, in
the Report of their al se and seigned Miracles: and almost in the whole Heap
and Dunghill of their filthy Superstitions and Idolatries.

Plautus, though an heathen Poet indeed, yet in this more heavenly than any
Papist, gives all men this following Counsel, thereby intimating, that they
should worship but one God, Vnus dum tibi propitius est Jupiter, tu hosce
minutos deos flocci feceris, i. e. Whilst Jupiter is thy friend, set not a
straw by all the Petty Gods.

Delusion XII. XIII.
EAdred, a blind Abbot, did wonderfully magnify him they cal-St. Edward, or
Edward the Confessor, because he so much magnified the Monkish manner of
living. Therefore the said Abbot most impudently affirms, That the same King,
while he heard Mass at Westminster, saw between the Priests hands, Christ
blessing him with his Fingers. That at another Mass, He saw the 7 Sleepers at
Ephesus turn themselves, after they had slept 70 years on the other. Also, That
St. John Baptist sent the same St. Edward (can any King be a Saint!) a gold
Ring from Jerusalem, which he himself had sometime given to a poor man that
asked alms of him in the name of S. John.

I believe S. John Baptist is as much belyed and abused in this kind, as any
Saint whatever, and by none more than by the Papists in Ireland, for in the
County of East Mead at (or very near) Dunsaney, there is a Well dedicated to
his Name, of which many hyperbolical Tales are reported, and all the Cures done
there (as they say, there have been many) are wholly attributed to St. John by
the blind people, thereby giving to the Creature, the glory due to the Creator.
Possibly some may have sound good in going to that Well, in some ailments (as
they may at other Wells both in Ireland, England, etc.) but it is by the only
Power of God who has put Virtue in that, and other waters; and not in the
least by any operation or Mediation of St. John, or any other Saint, as the
Papists dream.

Here take another strange Tale reported of a Gentleman that sometime lived
hard by the same Well. His name was Waren or Waring, commonly styled Waring of
the Well. This person would needs v. sit the holy Lard (so called*) And when he
arrived there, or thereabouts, one day passing a River, his pilgrims staff by
chance slipped out of his hand into the River, and by the violence of the Stream
was carried quite away, to the great grief of our Pilgrim, because the staff
had been hallowed, and had a Crucifix and other knacks upon it. But behold!
what strange luck this man had: For, at his return home, or, before it, (for I
have almost forgot the story) his staff was found at the Well aforesaid, about
3000 miles distance from the River where it gave him the Slip. I have heard
this hotly affirmed by several Priests and Friars for a most certain Truth: and
the return of the Staff they ascribe to St. John B. If this and the rest be not
lies, then the Devil never told any: But indeed, I have known this, and many
other pretended Mirac^es laughed at by several lay-Papists, as mere Fictions.

Delusion XIII.
WIlliam the Monk of Malmesbury, writing of Alpheus or Alphegus sometime Bishop
of Canterbury (whom he and his fellow-Monks will needs have styled a Saint)
affirms, That a dead stick being (after his Death) anointed with his blood,
suddenly waxed green again: and (like Aarons rod, Number. 17. 8.) began to blossom
the next day.

No doubt, but this is as true, as that the heathen Goddess, Dea feronia (as
pope like Poets fable) caused an whole Wood that was on fire, to wax green
again: Of whom Virgil says, Et viridi gaudens feronia luco.

Delusion XIV.
AShurst, in that point of Kent bordering upon Sussex and Sarry, though now a
poor small Village, yet in old time most famous for the sake of a Rood, which
had such a rare property, that multitudes of people came hundreds of mile to
adore it.

For the Popish Clergy blazed about (and the common people believed any thing
they said, tho never so ridiculous or absurd.) That the Rood, or Crucifix) of
this Church, did by certain Increments continually wax and grow, as well in the
bush of hair (or Periwig) that it had on its head as also in the length and
stature of the Members, and body it self. By which Invention it came to pass,
that the Parish Priest (before scarce able to subsist, his Incoms were so
small) did not only live most splendidly, but also hoordid up much money:
Whilst, he and his reverend Brethren, laughed in their Sleeves, at the blinded
people*

Delusion XV. XVI.
OF Justus, a quandam Bishop of Rochester, the Monks report this for a great
Miracle: That when his Body, many years after Burial, was to be removed to
Canterbury, it yielded a most sweet and pleasant smell to all that were
present: which thing, how strange it was, when he had been before his Interment
embalmed with most precious and odoriferous Spices; Let any man judge, that
has not resolved to believe all manner of Delusions.

But I have not done with Rochester, having another Saint and his Miracles to
tell you of. The Monastery of this City being erected by Gundulphus their
Bishop, having with its Monks suffered many Miseries, 1. as being twice burned
in less Compass than one hundred years. 2. Through the great Contentions
arising betwixt them and their Bp. Gilbert Glanvile (who always hated Monks)
in so much that he in great displeasure bereaved them, not only of their goods,
Ornaments and Writings, but also of a great part of their Lands, Possessions
and Privileges: and they (turmoil'd themselves in suit to the Pope, for
remedy, and for their Charges) were driven to coin their Silver shrine of
Paulinus into ready Money; which Act of theirs wholly took away the Estimation
of their Church, and that reverence which the blind People before showed their
Saint Paulinus: To these Calamities were added other great Losses sustained
through the Wars of King John, who in his Siege against the Castle of
Rochester, so spoiled this Church and Priory that he left them not so much as
one poor Pix to stand upon their Altar.

Therefore, it was now high time to devise some way whereby the Priory might
be, if not altogether restored to its former splendour, yet at least, somewhat
relieved from this present penury and abjection.

To bring this about, the crafty Monks, had by degrees drawn the silly people
to think very reverendly of one William, that lay buried in the Church: and
knowing by Experience, that there was no one way in the world so conducible to
their profit, as the advancement of a Pilgrimage* therefore they procured of
the Pope, the canonization of the said William: with Indulgence to all such as
would offer at his Tomb.

But to the end that it may appear to what hard shift for a Saint these
popelings were driven, and how easy the wretched people were then deluded, you
shall hear what great man this Saint William of Rochester was.

Indeed, he was a Scotchman, born at Saint-Johnstown, a Baker by Trade, in
(blind) zeal so fervent, That he vowed to visit the Holy land (as they call it)
and in his way passed through Rochester, where having a while refreshed himself,
he marched toward Canterbury; but he had not gone far from Rochester, but
either his servant (or some high way men) robbed him both of his Life and
Money: and because he dyed in so holy a purpose of mind (forsooth) the Monks
conveyed him to St. Andrews, laid him in the quire; and was promoted by the
Pope (as you heard) from a poor Baker, to a blessed Martyr: and wrought
Miracles as fast as Bell (in the Apocrypha) eat Mutton. However, it is certain,
that mad Folks offered liberally to him, even till the days of Hen. 8.

Delusion XVII, XVIII.
SEEing Stroud is so near, let us pass over the Bridge, and hear what was done
there to St. Thomas Beckets horse, and how he was revenged on the Deed-doers.
The Story is this,

St. Thomas (says Polidore Virgil, the Popes Sycophant, and gatherer of his
Peter Pence in England) being hated of the King, ( Hen. 2.) and commonly
neglected and despised; that when, one time, he hapn'd to pass through Stroud,
either some of the Inhabitants, or one Robert Brock of Canterbury, cut off the
tail of Beckots horse, for which act it so hapen'd (by the will of God, says
Polidore) that all the posterity of them that had played that naughty prank,
were born with tails, even as bruit beasts are. And this is the very Reason,
that as Kentish men are in meriment called Kentish long-tails, at home; so all
Englishmen in foreign parts are flouted, especially by the Vulgar, who have bin
made believe by their Clergy, that the English were Monsters, and have tails by
nature. Hence it is, that the Dutch call them STARTS. But no people d^d believe
it so much as the Spaniard (those ancient and most inverterate Enemies of
England) tho at last they became of another mind: for King James having sent an
Ambassador into Spain, with an attendance of many brave Gentlemen, the
Spaniards very earnestly minded and viewed them whether they had tails or no,
but finding they had none, and the Report to be false, they railed at their
Clergy, who had told it for a certain truth.

Such another like Story is reported of St. Augustine the English Apostle, and
Beckets Predecessor; who (as the same Author says) when fish-tails were
despitefully thrown at him by some in Dorset-shire (at Miglington says Hector
Boethius) the meek Prelate grew thereat into such a Fary, that He called upon
God for Revenge, who forthwith heard him, and struck them with Tails for their
Punishment.

He that believes this or any of the rest, I am sure did never rightly believed
in God.

Before I proceed any further in these lying Wonders, Let me, for Diversion
sake, and to make my Reader a little sport, give you an account of a Religious
Skirmish, between the Monks of Rochester, and the brethren of Stroud Hospital.
The said Monks, by reason of a great Drought, agreed among themselves to make a
solemn Procession from their own house through the City, and so to Friendsbury,
on the other side the Water, of a special intent and purpose to pray to God for
Rain: and because the day of this their appointed Journey happened to be very
boisterous and windy, the which would not only have blown out their Lights, and
tossed their Banners, but have stopped the mouths of their singing men, and
toiled them in their heavy and masking attire; they desired license of the
Master of Stroud-hospital, to pass through the Orchard of his House, whereby
they might both ease themselves, and save the glory of their Show.

The Master easily assented to their Request, but acquainted not his brethren
with it: who, so soon as they heard of it, called to mind that their Hospital
was founded by Gilbert Glanvile, sometime Bishop of Rochester, between whom and
the Predecessors of these Monks there had been great heats for the Erection of
the same. Therefore, fearing that the Monks, pretending a Procession, intended
to attempt somewhat against the^r Privileges, they resolved with all might and
main to resist them. And for that purpose (unknown to their Master) they
furnished themselves, and others that assisted them, with Bats, Clubs and
Coulstaves, and so laid in Ambush for the Monks coming into their Orchard, who
little dreamed what was preparing for them.

It was not long, but the Monks (having made all things ready) approached in
their Battle array, with their Banners displayed, and so (thinking no harm at
all) entered the hospital boldly, through which they passed into the Orchard,
merrily chanting their Latin Letany: but when the Brethren and their
Auxiliaries espied them within their danger, they rushed out of their lurking
holes, ran upon them, and made it rain such a shour of Bats and Clubs upon the
Monks Copes, Cowls, and Crowns, that for a while the miserable men knew not
which way to turn them.

After they had a little recollected their wits (of which, through mere
amazement they had been a while bereaved) and making Virtue of the Necessity,
and the best shift they could for themselves: Some tra^rsing their ground,
declined many blows, yet now and then bore off with head and shoulders; others
used the staves of their Crosses, behaving themselves like pretty men: some
made pikes of their Bannerpoles; others closing with their adversaries, wrested
their weapons out of their hands: among the rest, one (saving his Charity) laid
load on a married Priest, absolving him a Culpa, but not a Poena: another drove
one of the brethren into a ditch: a third, as big as any Bull of Bas^an, ran at
the back door of the Orchard so vehemently with his head and shoulders, that he
bore it clear down before him, and so both escaped himself, and made way for
his fellows, who with all possible speed conveyed themselves out of the
Precincts of the Hospital: and then, shaking their ears, they fell afresh to
their Orgia, I would say, to their O^^sons.

After this Storm was blown (or rather born) over, I do not wonder if the Monks
never sought to carry their Procession through Stroud-Hospital, to avoid the
wind; for indeed it could not likely blow more boisterous out of any quarter.
And thus, out of this tragical history, arose t^^ byword of Frindsbury Bats.
And although there was none s^ain in this holy War, yet I make no doubt but that
they were so well dressed, that they had cause to remember it many years after.

H^wever, the Brethren of the hospital, for Penance of their fault, were
enjoined every (...) Monday to come into R^chester in way of Procession with
their Crabs: for this their offense (it seems) was never to be forgiven, whilst
the Monks remained. I doubt some of these Monks had forgot to carry their Agnus
Dei's about them, which, as the blind Papists believe, will defend a man from
all Enemies, even from the Devil himself: but this Legend is like the rest, and
can be disproved in many Papists in Ireland, etc. and more lately in Flanders,
where thousands were found dead with their Agnus Dei's about them. And a
certain great Papist being to pass near the Enemies Garrison, his Confessor
asked him, if he had his Agnus Dei with him? he answered, No. O, by any means
(said the Priest) Take it with you, or you will come to some harm: so he took
it, but before he had gone six miles he was killed and stripped of all. Here you
see what Virtue was in the Agnus Dei.

When I was a Boy, I had a longing desire to know what an Agnus D^i was,
because Papists youths my School fellows kept such stir about them, as if no
Angel could guard a man better (as they said, their Priest told them.) At last
I got a little Child into a corner, and opened his Agnus Dei which hung about
his neck in a little silver case, shaped lik^ a heart* and found nothing in it,
but one grain of wheat wrapped in a (...) Cotton, which had been hallowed by the
Priest: but, if the true Agnus Dei had not defended me, I had been mortally
chastised for this, and other things, as burning Beads, etc.

It is impossible to write in what Veneration they have Saints Relics, and
how many they have, as pieces of old hats, caps, gloves, shoes, boots, cords,
garters, sho-stings, coats, cloaks, points, laces, sculs and other pieces, bits
and fragments of their Bodies. Bishop Beck^ts shoe was kept at Harbledown near
Canterbur^, i^ an Hospital standing near the road, Where an old D^tard offered
it to kiss, to all Passengers, after they had been first besprinkled with
Holy Water.

It is also as lamentable to think what Confidence they put in Images, which
this one Story following may serve to evince, if there were no more (as there
are thousands) which some in London can testify to their Shame. For, some Town
or City in Flanders (as I take it) being b^sieged, and fiercely assaulted by
the Enemy without; in so much that all the people were in a terrible fright:
which one of their Priests, or some other popish Votary perceiving, he got all
the Keys of the City Gates, and in all haste put them into the hands of an
Image there, which was the Patroness of the Town: which having done, Now ( said
he) there is no fear, for, I Will warrant you, she will defend the City from the
Enemy, (or w^rds to that effect) and yet the place was taken presently after.
And for all this, and a Thousand other Delusions, the blind and bewitched
people are still mad upon their Idols (Jer. 50. 38.)

It is no marvel indeed, that they who rely so much upon Images, should so
little hope and confide in the true God. Nay, the Papists, (yea, and many
papistical Protestants too) affirm, That no man can be sure of Gods favor in
this life: and their Tridentine Council has so defined: which Position is
directly contrary to these Scriptures, (and which are too divine for those
Terrae fi^ii' s once to mention with their polluted lips.) Romans 8. 15, 16, 17.
Gal. 4. 6, 7. 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Rev. 2. 17* Joh. 14. 22, 23, 26.

Delusion XIX.
PRoceed we now to the pop^sh Synagogue at Swanscomb, which was much haunted
till Henry the VIII time: for, to the Image of St. Hildeferth such ran as were
distracted, for restitution of their Wits, as fast as men were wont to sail to
Anticyra, for Helleborus.

This Cure was performed here, by close keeping, good diet, and other fit
means, not only not strange, or miraculous, but mere natural, common and
ordinary. And therefore, as on the one side, they might truly be thought mad
men that frequented this Pilgrimage: so on the other side, St. Hildeferth, of
all the Saints that I know, might best be spared: Seeing the keeper of Bediam
works mightily in the same kind of Miracles. However, if any happened to be
cured, St. Hildeferth and his Image had all the praise, and the Priest all the
profit. Thus the blind lead the blind into the Pit of Destruction, Mat. 15. 14.

Delusion XX.
YOU have here in this S^^s^qu^nt Narration, an Account of the great and
wonderful V^^t^es of Holy Water: especially in frighting away the Devil, though
he came to your bedside, or wherever you are, by night or by day: yea, if you
do but show him the Holy water pot it self (if we believe Papists) he dares not
come near it for his ears, but will pull in his horns, and sneak away; and glad
to escape so too.

At a place called Motinden, there was a Den of Crossed Thieves, or (if you
will) A Neast of Crutched Fr^e^s: of whose manner of Processioning some aged
People in the beginning of King James's Reign did Reader, This Devil completely
represents Strange, Cellier, the Compendium' s Aut^^r, and all other that
reproach the Protestant Religion, and seem to put a Virtue upon the Popish.

well remember: for yearly upon Trinity Sunday (so called) the Friars of the
aforesaid place, did use to muster themselves in a most solemn manner and
pompous Procession: Wherein, although there wanted neither Cope, nor Canopy, Cross
nor Candlestick, Flag nor Banner, Light nor Incense, Piping nor Chaunting,
neither yet any delightful glittering, that might with the gay glory thereof
amaze the silly People, and ravish them (as it were) into a certain popish
Heaven: yea, to the end that this their Pageant might be the more plausible (in
that it had something peculiar to it self) their manner was to make the Devil
himself an Actor with them.

For, as they passed along in this gorgeous Array, they used to have somebody
dressed up like a Devil, who should offer to invade or set upon the Company,
and as though he would take the holy Cross from them: then out steped some bold
fellow appointed for the purp^se, with the holywater-pot in his hand, and with
all his might flings holy water at him; at which this Counterfeit Devil must
fearfully start back f^r doubt of scalding, and tho many times he grind, and
made as if he would fly in their Faces, yet might he never durst be so bold
indeed, as to approach, or come within the fall of any one drop of the holy
water.

And thus (forsooth) the Virtue of Holy Water in putting the Devil to slight,
was confirmed at Motinden by a demonstrative Argument: Which, if it be so, then
greatly was the Apostle Paul deceived, Ephesians chap. 6. where he would have
us arm our selves Cap a Pe from the assaults of the Devil: for alas, what
needed he to recite Sword, Shield, Helmet, and so many other parts of Defensive
and Offensive Furniture, when the Holy Water stick alone would have served the
turn! or at least, what meant he to omit it, being a thing so serviceable, and
easily provided? But we must give these blind Popelings leave (after their
wonted manner) to s^t the Ho^y Ghost to School. And yet, by the way, I must
tell them, That they cannot Leonem larva terrere, scare a Lion with a Vizard.
It is not their Aqua lustralis, which they have fetched from Apollo's Pot, and
not from the Fountain of God's Word, that can make that roaring Lion fly in
good earnest: nay, rather let them beware this his Stratagem, and consider,
That even in worldly Warfare, (...) are never in more danger of the Enemy than
when he feigneth to fly from them.

But Majora canamus! Often, in Ireland, have I seen Papists go round the Verg^^
of their Cornfieldsd, and all to besp^inkle them with their Holy Water, to
preserve it (as they thought) from lightning and blasting; and all to no
purpose, for, I have observed, That when they forbore their Holy Water, their
Corn has rather done better than when they besprinkled it. They use the same
Vanity in great thunder and Lightning, for then they will besprinkle their
Sheep, Cows, Horses, and all persons present; and every womankind is to
courtsey, and every mankind to pull ^ff his hat and bow, when the water is
flung at them, which, if any refuse to do, (as Protestants have) they shall be
sure to be turned out of doors, or have a sound cuff on the ear (or worse) as I
have had several. Yea many strokes, stripes, and cruel whippings even at 7, 8,
9 and ten years of age, because I would not go to Mass (unknown to my Father)
or bow to an Image: and for the same, my flesh has bin cut or lanced with
Pen-knives, at the age above mentioned: so that at last, I was forced to fly
for my life; and for that cause chiefly have I lived as a wandering Pilgrim in
obscurity, many years: in which time, I have endured a thousand Miseries, which
are the dire Concomitants of a voluntary Banishment: for they murdered my
Brother, poisoned my Father, plundered and burnt his house and threatened me
with death, whereupon I fled the Country.

Delusion XXI.
TWO young Gentlemen of Royal Extraction, and own Brothers, having been
murdered at a place called Eastry: the Archbishop of Canterbury, by any means,
would needs have them buried at Christ-Church in that City, intending to have
them sainted: whereupon he knew would undoubtedly follow, Pilgrimages, and
Offerings, to the enriching of himself, and the Monks there (such was the
madness of People in those days) but mark the ill luck he had in this his
pious intention (pious Fraud, I should say) for (says the Tale-wright) when
the Hearse was ready, it would not be moved by any force toward that Church:
as truly (says one) as the Cross of Waltham, with twelve oxen, and so many
kine, could not be stirred any other way, but toward the place appointed: or,
as the Image of Berecynthia, which the Romans had brought out of Asia, could
not be removed till the Vestal Virgin Claudia, had set her hand to it: but, to
the premises.

Hereupon the Company assayed to convey it to S. Augustins: but all in vain: at
the last, they agreed to have it to the Monastery of Watrine, and then
(forsooth) it passed as lightly, as if nothing had been wit^ in it.

What horse would not break his Bridle (as we say) at the hearing of this
Prodigious Lie? or, who can forbear ^aughing, at this, and other such devised
Vanities? which, yet the blind Papists think a deadly sin to question the truth
of, especially when attested by a Monkish Authority, as this is, as well as all
the rest. But these things were foretold by an unerring Author, ^ Thessalonians. 2. For
the Mystery of Iniquity does already work. 7. And then shall that wicked one be
revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of ^is Coming, 8. even him whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders 9. and with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness, in them that perish; because they
received not the [love] of the Truth, that they may be saved 10. And for [this]
cause (mark) GOD shall send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a
Lie 11: That they all might be Damned, who believe not the Truth, but had
pleasure in Unrighteousness 12. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
lattter times, some shall depart from the Faith (mark) giving heed to seducing
Spirits, and Doctine of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, having their
Conscience seared with a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4. 12. Now as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these (Papists) resist the Truth, men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the Faith: But they shall proceed no further, for their
Folly shall be manifest to all men (to all true Protestants) as theirs also was
2 Timothy 3. 8, 9.

I make not doubt, but there are others besides the Papists, concerned in these
Scriptures, eve^ in England at this very day: for Antichrist is come forth into
the World in several shapes: there are not only Wolves in Sheeps-clothi^g, but
Foxes also in Lambskin. And no marvel, for Satan himself is even now these
present times, transformed into an Angel of Light (2 Cor. 11. 14.) in so much
that if it were possible they should deceive the very Elect, Matthew. 24. 24. But
many thousands have been and shall be deceived, and are, even now, now, every
day; though they do not see it, because they do not believe, nor worship God
aright, etc.

Delusion XXII.
IT happened that the dead Corpse of a man (lost through Shipwreck belike) was cast
on land in the Par^sh of Chatham, and being there taken up, was by some
charitable people committed to honest ^urial in their Church and, which was no
sooner done, but our Lady of Chatham (as they styled her, for her Image there
was highly reverenced) finding herself offended therewith, arose by night
(says the Fable-Forger) and went in person to the Parish Clark's house, making
a noise at's window, awaked him; he, at the first, demanded somewhat roughly
(for it seems he was in a profound sleep) Who was there? but, when he
understood by her answer, that she was the Lady of Chatham, he changed his
note, and most mildly asked the Cause of her good Ladyships coming: she told
him, That there was lately buried near to the place where she was worshipped, a
sinful Person, which so offended her eye with his ghastly grinning, That unless
he were removed, she could not but (to the great grief of all good people)
withdraw her self from that place, and cease her wonted working Miracles among
them: And therefore she willed him to go with her, to the end that, by his
help, she might take him up, and throw him again into the Water.

The Clark obeyed, arose, and waited on her toward the Church: but the good
Lady (says the Reporter) not wonted to walk, waxed weary, and therefore was
enforced, for very want of breath, to sit down in a Bush by the way, and there
to rest her; and this Place (forsooth) as also the whole Track of their
Journey, remained ever after, a green path.

Now, after a while, they go forward again, and coming to the Churchyard,
dug up the Body, and carried it to the waterside where it was first found.

This done, the Lady Shrunk again into her Shrine, and the Clark peak'd home to
patch up his his broken Sleep: but the Corpse again floated up and down the
River, as it did before, which they of Gillingham perceiving, it was once more
taken up, and buried in their Church yard. But see what followed upon it! for
not only the Rood of Gillingham (say they) that a while before was busy in
working Miracles, was now deprived of all his former virtue, but also the very
Earth and place where this Carcass was laid, did continually sink downwards.

This Tale, received by Tradition from the Elders, was (long since) commonly
reported, and faithfully believed of the Vulgar sort: for what Absurdity is
that they will not credit!

But here (says my Author) if I might make bold to add to this Fable, I would
tell you, That I think the Moral and Meaning of the Tale to be none other, but
that this Fabulator, being either the Farmer, Priest or owner of the Offerings,
given to the Lady of Chatham, and envying the Common Haunt and Pilgrimage to
the Rood of Gillingham (lately erected to his loss) devised this Apparition for
the Advancement of the first, and defacing of the second.

If that Age had been as prudent in trying Spirits, as it was prone to believe
Delusions, it should have found, That our Ladies path (aforesaid) was some such
green trace of grass, as we daily see in the fields, proceeding indeed from a
natural Cause; though by old wives, and superstitious people, reckoned to be
the dancing places of Night-spirits, which they call Fairies. And that this
sinking of the Earth, was nothing else but a false filled Pit, of the Clarks
own digging. Since then, the whole Religion of Papistry it self, is Theomachia,
and nothing else, and that is, A resisting of God: Who but the Worst of the
worst of Mankind, blind Sots, Atheists, Ruffians, Ranters, Robbers, Rogues,
Whores, and Theives will own Popery, or dare hope to have it introduced either
by Fawns or Frowns.

Delusion XXIII.
COME we next to Boxly Abbey, which I had almost forgot, but by no means would
so do, lest the Favorers of false Religion might rejoice at the Omission, and
the Followers of God's Truth justly cry out upon me; because much of their
popish Mysteries, prestigious jugglings, and deluding Practices are inveloped
in this one Story: and with which I resolve to conclude, not for want of
matter, but because I think the aforementioned Relations sufficient (if there
were nothing else) to detect and evince the salsness, baseness and odiousness
of the Romish Religion.

In the days of Q. Elizabeth it was fresh in the minds of both Protestants and
Papists, and shall (I doubt not) to the profit of the one, be continued in
perpetual Memory to all Posterity) by what Mystical Imposture, Fraud, Juggling,
and Legerdemain the silly People were seduced by the crafty Foxes of this Abbey.
The manner whereof I will sed down in such sort only, as the same was sometime
by themselves published in print, (for their Estimation and Credit, as they
thought:) but, say I, to their own everlasting Reproach, Shame and Confusion.

It chanced on a time, That an English Carpenter was taken Prisoner in the Wars
betwixt England and France, who (wanting otherwise to pay for his Ransom)
thought with himself, having leisure enough, to devise some curious piece of
work to make Money thereof, and therefore, getting together fit Matter, he
compacted of Wood, Wire, Paste, and Paper, a Rood of such exquisite Art and
Excellency, that it it not only matched in Comeliness, and due proportion of
Parts, the best of the Common sort, but in strange Motion, Variety of Gesture,
and nimbleness of joints, passed all other that before had been seen; for it
could bow down, and lift up it self: Shake and stir the hands and feet, nod the
head, roll the eyes, wag the chaps: bend the brows, etc. so that now it needed
not Prometheus fire to make it a lively man* but only the help of the eovetous
Priests of Baal, or the Aid of some crafty College of Monks to deify, and make
it pass for a very God.

This done, he made a Shift for his Liberty, came into England on purpose to
utter his Merchandise; and laid the Image upon the back of a poor Jade he drove
before him.

Now, when he was come as far as Rochester, he stepped into an Alehouse to drink,
suffering his horse to go forward alone: he was no sooner out of his Masters
sight, but missing the straight Western Road, which his Master intended to have
gone, and turning South, trotted away toward Boxly; and being driven, as it
were, by some divine Fury, never ceased till he came to the Abbey door, which he
so beat and bounced at with his heels, that diverse of the Monks hearing the
noise, came to the place to know the matter, and wondering at the strangeness of
the thing, called the Abbot and his convent to behold it.

These Monks seeing the horse so earnest, and discerning what he had on his
back, for doubt of deadly Impiety, opened the door, which they had no sooner
done, but the horse rushed in, and ran in great haste to a pillar (which was
the very place where this Image was afterward advanced) and there stopped
himself and stood still.

Now while those D^sciples of Antichrist, the Monks, were busy in taking off
the Load, in comes the Carpenter, who by great inquiry had followed, and
challenged his own: But the Monks, loath to loose so beneficial a Stray, at
first made some Denial: but at last, being assured that he was the very
Proprietor, they granted him leave to take it with him: Whereupon the Carpenter
takes his horse by the head, to lead him out of the Abbey, but he would not
stir, then he strikes him, but the Jade was so resty, and fast nailed, that he
would not once remove from the Pillar; at last, he takes off the Image,
thinking to have carried it out by it self, and then lead his horse after it;
but that also cleaved so fast to the ground, that notwithstanding all that ever
he could do, it would not be moved one inch (says the popish Author) cretense
mendacium; so that in the end, partly through weariness, and by persuasion of
the Monks, who were all in love with the Picture, and made him believe, That it
was by God himself (blasphemous Wretches) destinate to their house: he was
contented for a piece of Money, to leave the Image behind him: which the Monks
christened, The Rood of Grace.

Thus you see the Generation of the great God of Boxly, comparable to the
Creation of that beastly Idol of Lampsacus, of which the Poet says,

-- Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
Cum faber incertus scamnum, facerente Priapum,
Maluit esse Deum, etc.
-- A Log unmeet for use,
Till Carver doubting with himself
were best make Pr^apus,
Or else a Bench? resolved at last
to make a God of me:
Thenceforth a God I am, of Bird
and Thieves most dread, you see.
This of the Poet agrees with the Prophet Isaiah, viz. The Carpenter
stretches out his rule, he marks it out with a line, he fitteth it with
planes, and he marketh it out with a Compass, he makes it after the figure of
a man, according to the Beauty of a man, that it may remain in the house: He
beweth him down Cedars, and takes the Cypress and the Oak, -- He burns part
thereof in the fire, etc. and the residue thereof he makes a God, even a
graven Image, he falls down to it, and worshippeth it, and prays unto it,
and says, Deliver me, for thou art my god, Isa, 44. 12, 17. Again, They lavish
Gold out of the Bag, and weigh Silver in the Balance, and hire a Gold smith,
and he makes it a God, they fall down, yea, they woship, they bear him upon
their shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his place, and he stand^th, from
his place shall he not remove, yea, one shall cry unto him, yet can he not
answer, nor save him out of his Trouble, Isa. 46. 6, 7.

And all this contrary to the express Command of God. Thou shall not make to
thy self any Graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the Earth, thou shall not
bow down thy self to them, nor worship them, Ex. 20. 3, 4, 5. so then, it is
very plain, that in the multitude of gods, and in the manner of Woship, the
Papists may well be compared with the old Heathens, si^h they follow their
rules, and examples, and not the Rule of Gods word. And therefore they may be
said to be the People of his Curse; for it is written (and I am sure it points
at them as much as any) Cursed be the man that makes (or causes to be made)
any graven, or molten Image, an abomination to the Lord, the work of the hand
of the Crafts man, and puts it in a secret place, and all the People shall
say, Amen. Deuteronomy. 27. 15.

But the Papists do not only worship Images in secret Places, but in public
also; whereby they openly declare themselves to be the very Enemies of Christ,
and the real Friends and Followers of Antichrist? for do they not receive, and
carry about them his mark, not only privately in their right hand, but also
most conspicuously in their Forehead: ergo. Rev. 13. 16. 17.

Now let us return to Boxley, from whence we have a little digressed.

It cannot be fully declared how lewdly the Monks of that place, to their own
enriching, and robbing of the blind people, abused this their wooden God, after
they had thus gotten him: and which, by the just Judgment of the true God, was
by that worthy Patriot, and zealous Protestant, the Lord Cromwell, and pious
Cranmer, pulled down, as well as the Abbey, and the Monks quite dispersed, in
the Reign of Hen. 8. And the whole Cheat laid open.

But now, if I should thus leave Boxley, the Papists would laugh in their
sleeves at my remisness; for indeed the Cream of the Jest, (as we say) and the
grand Cheats and Jugglings are still behind, and therefore I pray attend; for I
doubt not but to make you smile, before I have done.

You must know, That besides this ( ungracious) Rood of Grace, as the Monks
styled it, they had also another Image, which was much (...) in the same Place,
called St. Rumbald, or, as others, St. Grumbald; ^^^refore, I must spend a
little time in the Detection thereof, as well for that it was as very a
Delusion as the former; as also for that the use of them both was so linked
together, that the one cannot well be understood without the other.

And this was the Manner.
If you intended to have any benefit by the Rood of Grace, so called, You must
first be shriven, of one of the Monks, i. e. you must confess all you sins to
him, and be forgiven: then by lifting at the Image of St. Grumbal, you must
make Proof whether you were in clean life, or no: i. e. if you had not left
some sins unconfessed: and, if you were in clean life, then was your way
prepared, and your Offering accepted of the Rood: if not, then you must be
confessed anew, for it was to be supposed that you had concealed somewhat from
your Ghostly DAD, and therefore, not yet worthy to be admitted Ad sacra
Eleusina.

Now, that you may know how this Examination was to be made, you must
understand that this Grumbal, or Rumbal, was a pretty. Saintling, or the
Picture of a Boy-saint of Stone, standing in the same Abbey; of it self short,
and not seeming to be heavy: but for as much as it was wrought out of a huge
weighty stone, (being the base thereof) it was hardly to be lifted by the
strongest man that was; nevertheless (such was the crafty Conveyance) that by
the help of an Engine, fixed to the back thereof, it was easily raised up with
the foot of him that was the Keeper, and therefore of no moment at all in the
hands of such as offered largely; and contrariwise, by the means of a pin
running into a Post (which that Religious Impostor standing out of sight, could
put in and pull out at pleasure:) to such as offered faintly, it was so fast and
unmovable, that no force of hand could stir it, insomuch as many times it
caused much saughter, to behold a great Lubber lifting at that in vain, which a
little Boy or Wench had easily taken up before him, because they offered more
frankly than he did.

I omit how many chaste Virgins and married Wives went often a way with blushing
Faces, leaving (without cause) in the minds of the lookers on, great suspicion
of unclean Life, and wanton behavior; for fear of which scandalous note, women
(of all others) stretchd their Purse-strings, and sought, by liberal Offerings
to make St. Crumbals man their good friend and favourer, by which, Whores also
came off with as much credit as honest Women. O! The Deceits of Popery!

But mark, (I beseech you) their Monkish craft and policy in picking peoples
Purses, (for it was no better.) It was in vain (as the Monks persuaded) to
presume to the Rood without shrift; yea, and Money lost there also, if you
offered before you were in clean Life: as they call it: and therefore the
matter was so ordered, that without trebble Offerings, viz. first, to the
Confessor; secondly, to St. Grumbal; thirdly, to the Rood of Grace; the
Pilgrims could not assure themselves of any good gained by all their cost and
labor. I cannot conjecture (says my Author) what Reason moved them to make
this St. Rumwald (or Grumbal) the Touchstone of clean Life and Innocence,
unless it be upon occasion of a Miracle that he did, in making two Priests (
now look for a whisker) to lift a great stone easily, which before, diverse
Lay-persons (that is, profane, as they will have it) could not stir with all
their strength: which thing (as also his Life and Death) to the end that the
Tale shall want no part of due Credit, I will briefly recite, as in the Work
(called Nova Legenda Angliae) John Capgrave has Reported.

A Pagan Prince of Northumberland, had married a Christian Woman, (if a Papist
be a Christian) Daughter to the King of Mercia, or Mid-England, wh^ by no means
would bed with her Husband, till he left his Idol^^ry (and took up another as
had) and become a Christian: at last he co^sents, and she grows big with Child,
and as they were in their journey; to visit her Father, she unexspectedly falls
in labor, and as soon as ever the Child was born (being a Son) he cried out
with a loud voice, three several times, Christianus sum, and c. I am a
Christian, I am a Christian, I am a Christian; and so made profession of his
Faith, desired to be Baptized, and with his Finger directed the standers by, to
fetch him a great hollow stone which he would have for his Font.

Hereupon sundry of the Kings Servants, assayed to have brought the Some, but
it was so far above their strength, that they could not once move it: which,
when Rumbaldus perceived, he commanded the two Priests, (his appointed
Godfathers) to go and bring i^, which (says the Legend) they did forthwith
most easily (by virtue of their Holiness forsooth) this done, he was Baptized,
and within three days after his Spirit departed out of his Body, and was by the
hand of Angels conveyed to Heaven: But before his Translation, he discoursed
cunningly (as St. Anthonies Pigg no doubt) of sundry Popish Mysteryes, and
bequeathed his Body to remain one year at Sutton, two at Brackley, and for ever
at Buckingham.

Statius P^pinius a Poet, that lived in the Reign of Domitian, whether he were
a Pagan or a Christian, I know not; however, more Christian than any Papist,
whom he seems to Reprove, and point at as well as Heathen Idolaters, in this
following Verse. Lib. 12. Thebais.

Nulla autem effigies, nulli commissa metall^
Forma Dei, mentis habitare and pector a gaudet.
Gods form by Pictures cannot be expressed,
He loves to dwell within the Heart and Breast.
Here you have had ( Reader) above twenty Popish Delusions, False Miracles, and
Lying Wonders laid open, and that but in some places of one County; by which
you may guess what was in the rest of England; nay, in all Europe, whose
Superstitions and Idolatries were infinite, whereby the blind People of those
dark Times were most miserably, nay willingly fooled, couzened and cheated of
their Monys, Houses, Lands, etc. (and of their Wits too) and also abused,
blinded, deluded and ruined in their Eternal Estates. And all the Premises are
still carried on, by the Twelve grand Disciples of Antichrist: and they are
Popes Cardina's, P^triarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials,
Abbots, Cannons, Monks, Friars, Jesuits.

These last, being the very Life and Soul, the preserver, maintainer, upholder
and protector; yea, the very Chariots and Horsemen of the POPE, and the great
Bulwark of Papistry; that he sespecially) could better be without his right
Eye, or his right Hand, than without them: for, they are indeed his right Hand,
his Battle-Axes, his Rock, his Refuge, his Achitophel, his Tower, and (under
his Lord Lucifer) his grand Fulcrum, or prop and stay: for I am almost
confident, were it not for that Politic Order, there had been no Pope at this
day; or if there were, it had been only in titulo, not in exercito. But one
chief reason of the continuance of both, is the Sins of all the Species of
Protestants, in General: together with the Impurities in Doctrine, or Errors in
Judgment and Discipline, amongst others of them: (from whence sprang all our
dire Divisions and Dissentions) I shall name none, the sound Christian knows
who, which, and what I mean.

Now, forasmuch as the whole World of Papists, are already acquainted with all
the Differences and Dissentions that are amongst Protestants; I shall therefore
make the ignorant Protestants (the Learned sort knowing it without me)
acquainted with a few of the Divisions and Dissentions amongst even the grand
Papists: for-all their seeming Unity: I say a few, for it is impossible to
recite the one half of what I have read and heard, (to say nothing of what
others know) and if I could, yet I have not room enough, for I resolved when I
began this Work not to exceed my bounds, of so many sheets of Paper: Therefore
I must perforce omit two thirds of what might be exposed. Popish DIVISIONS. OR,
Their Dissentions amongst themselves, Even in Fundamental Points.
Wherein you will find Pope against Pope, Council against Council, Cardinal
against Cardinal, Bishop against Bishop, Priest against Priest, Jesuit against
Jesuit, etc.

I. Division.
BEllarminus and others affirm ( l. 1. de cler. cap. 19.) that Clergymen ought
not to Marry; but their Cannon Law tells us, They may, did. 56. cap. where it
is thus written, Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in sums pontifices supra
legantur esse promoti, etc. when therefore we read, that they were promoted to
the Popedom, who were the Sons of Priests, we must not understand them to be
Bastards, but born in lawful wedlock: which Marriages were lawful for Priests,
before the Pope: and they are held to be lawful in the Eastern Churches to this
day. So that Papists will affirm any thing, though against their own Laws, and
the Laws of God, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3 and in the said Cannons you shall find, That
many Popes that there were Priests Sons, as, Felix, Deusdedit, Agapitus,
Bonifacius, Sylverius* etc. Here have you some Popes and their Clergy and
Cannons for Priests Marriage: and other very hot against them! Why then, O ye
Papists, do you tell us of our Divisions? when ye your selves are more divided,
even in Fundamentals.

II. Division.
NAvarrus, That great popish Canonist, says, That Men are bound to confess
only their great and Mortal Sins; and, that a man may confess some and conceal
others. Whose words are these; Hoc Preceptum non includit Venialia, etiamsi
mixta sunt mortalibus* Quibus consequens est posse quem si velit, confesso uno
peceato veniali, alterum tacere. This Precept (says he) does not include
Venial Sins, though they are mingled with mortal Sins. Whereupon it follows,
That the Penitents may (if they will) confess one Venial and conceal another.
(Vide Navar. c. 21. n. 34 in Enchir.) So by this Doctrine, any Papist may
dissemble in Confession, deceive the priest, and yet not sin at all.

But Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, is against him, in these words, Omne peccatum
pro quanto est offensa Dei, and contra legem ejus aternam, est d^ sua
ca^ditione and indignitate mortiferum, etc. every sin, in that it is a^ Offense
against God, and his eternal Law, is mortal of its own condition and
indignity, according to the rigor of Justice, and divider^ us from the life of
Glory. The Reason is, because God may justly punish every offense as well with
eternal as temporal Death, therefore every si^ is mortal of its own Nature. The
assumption is deduced from this, for that no (such) punishment is so evil as
the Offense, because every punishment and death it self ought to be endured,
rather than the least sin committed: Grant the contrary, sin shall b^ lawful,
o^ be no sin at all. Vide Gerson. de vita Spirituali. lect. 1. pa^^. 3. circa
medium. Thus Gersonus, whose judgment in this particular all sound Protestents
assent to.

Concerning Venial Sins, I have heard my self, not many years since several
Papists hold with Navarre, and others with Gerson: pray tell me now, what
gr^ater Division can there be among Protestants than this? nay, among the sound
ones there is not the least difference about this, for they all agree, that the
least Sin, of its own nature, incurrs Damnation. Then cease boasting of your
unity, O ye Papists, since ye are (...) divided among your selves than the bulk
of Protestants know of* who are also as ignorant of Divisions amongst the P^pe^
themselves* as Pope Stephen against Formosus, and Pope Romanus against Stephen,
and S^rg^us the III. pe^secutes the very name of (...), w^os^ Body after
buried, he commanded to be taken up and B^h^^ded; be^ides many other Popes
which have been miserably divided concerning which, read Platina and Caranza in
summa Council. fol. 354. and 355. Dive^s other Popes have come to that Dignity
some by the Sword, some by private Murder, and some by Magic Art: as
Christopher I. Boniface VII. Sylvester II: Damasus II* etc. I shall conclude
this, with the Epitaph of Pope Benedict the XII* made by one of his own Clergy,
by which you may see* what kind of men most of them were.

Hic scitus est Nero, laicis mors viper a clero,
D^vius a vero, cupa repleta mero.
That is,
Here Is Nero laid, to Laymen was a Death*
To Clergymen a Viper void of Faith.
His Heart a wanderer from all Truth Divine,
His Head a Cup filled up with strongest Wine.
Platina calls Pope John the XVIII* a Thief, a Robber: and Caranza (in summo
conciliorum fol. 369.) that great Thomist, thus painteth Boniface VIII.

Intravit ut Vulpes, regnavit ut Lupus, mortus est ut Canis, i. e. He entered as
a Fox, He reigned as a Woof, He dyed as a Dog.

III. Division.
THe Pope, Cardinals and Jesuits affirms, that Infidels, are not bound to
their Auricular Confession: But Angelus, Richardus, and Gabriel hold the
contrary. See Jos. Engles. in 4. S. ar. 2. de confess.

Now concerning Auricular Confession, papists differ among themselves; and that
it was never commanded by Christ nor his Apostles, as their own Doctors out of
their own Canon Law testify; of which thus writes Sylvester Prieras. de
confess. secundo. par. 4. Vtrum ad Confessionem teneamur divino jure vel humano?
etc It is demanded says he, whether we are bound to this Confession, by the
Law of God or man? I say, that the Canonists hold, that we are but bound by the
Law of Man. And the Popes own Decrees say no less in these words: Quibus
authoritatibus, vel quibus rationum firmamentis utraque sententia
satisfactionis and confessionis nitatur, etc. ( vide de poe ^it. d. 1. cap.
quamvis) viz. upon what Authority or Reasons either Opinion is grounded, is
showed before. Now to which of them the Reader should adhere, I leave it to his
own discretion, for either Opinion (pray mark) has wise and Religious men,
that averr the same.

Observe (good Reader) that not only the Popes own Doctors, but his own Law,
and the Commentators thereon, acknowledge that Au icular Confession is grounded
only upon Humane Laws, and take notice their own Gloss tells you, that Wise and
Religious men hold, some for, and some against it. O the rare Unity of the
Church of Dome! if Discordancy and Repugnancy be Unity?

IV. Division.
NAvarrus and the Jesuits teach, that a man may both deny in word and upon his
Oath, that which the Judge demands of him; so he equivocate and make his own
sense to himself, ( Navar. in enchir. c. 18. n 61. and cap. 25. n. 43.) But Dr.
Sepulveda, is utterly against it: yea, the Jesuits will sometimes by
equivocation, and mental reservation deny themselves to be Christians, as their
own Brother John Mush confessed, in Queen Elizabeth's time: and if so, as no
doubt but it is: Then what heed can be given to the several Plea's and dying
speeches of Harcourt, Whit: bread, etc. when they took it upon their Salvation,
that they were as Innocent of all that was laid to their charge, as the Child
unborn: and though many foolish people ignorant of the depths, quaerks, quacks,
knacks, tricks, illusions and curious Arts of Jesuits and Jesuitism, possibly
may have been amused, startled and staggered at the serious, solemn and dying
asseverations, and deep protestations of the said Harcourt, Whitebread, and the
rest* yet for my own part, I do no more value their words, their dying words,
than I do the chattering of a Mag-Pye, or the tears of a Crocodile; for, if
people knew their Principles, their cantings, quaerks, and c. as well as I do,
they would abhor them for the verriest wretches, and mearest miscreants in
point of mental reservation, and equivocation, that ever the Earth bore: for I
have been acquainted with several of them in my time.

V. Division.
AQuinas, Bellarminus, etc. affirm Matrimony to be a Sacrament; but Durandus is
against them, denying (as they affirm) that it neither conferreth Grace, no: is
properly a Sacrament ( Durand. in 4. did. 26 qu. 3*) and with him held
Alphonsus a Castro, and Petrus a Sot^, (apud Bellar. l. 1. d^ matri. c. 6.)

And their Bishop Mel. Canus, perceiving such difference in Judgment concerning
this matter, that he counts him a mad man that believes any of them: His words
are these:

Lege Magistrum (Aquinum) Scotum, Richard. Bonaven. Durand. caterosque Schol^
Theologos, and nisi statim little pendentes at vacillantes animos deprehenderis,
tum vero me aut stultum, aut temerarium judicato, etc. can. de locis. l. 8.
cap. 5. p. 245.

Thus Englished.
Read the Master ( Aquinas) Bouadventure, Richardus Paludanus, Durandus, etc.
and if thou do not perceive their wavering and doubtful minds, then (says
he) judge me either a fool or a rash fellow: for when they enquire if Matrimony
conferr Grace; that which was especially to be Defined, that, Define they not
at all, but only tell us what others think thereof: also in determining the
matter and form of this Sacrament, they are so unconstant and various (mark) so
uncertain and ambiguous that he may be judged a fool, whom in such Dissension,
will establish any constant Doctrines. Here the Protestant Reader may see
Papists dissen^ing, even about their Sacraments, and most important matters.

VI. Division.
PAnormitanus, Almainus, Cusanus, Gersonus, Abulensis, with the whole Council
of Constans, affirm, every General Council to be above the Pope, (as I can
prove more largely, had I room enough) But all the Dominicans, Jesuits and
Seminaries do with open mouth thunder out the contrary, as their Writings, and
Experience teaches us.

VII. Division.
AVgustinus de ancona, and Sylvester Prieras (de Papa. number. 10. and 14.) hold,
that the Pope does more excel the Emperor in Dignity, than Gold does Lead. But
Bellarmine (l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 1.) and Fra. Victoria (rest. ecclesi^ page*
38.) sharply impugn their Opinion. -- Igitur summus Pontifex (says
Bellarmine) ut Christi Vicarius, atque adeo ut summus Pontifex est, inullum
habet temporale Dominium. i. e. Therefore the Pope as Christ's Vicar, and
consequently as Pope, has no Temporal Dominion. And says Victorian, in the
fore-quoted place. Potestas temporalis non dependet a summo Pontifice, s^out
aliae potestates spirituales inferiores, and paulo post, Licet assertores
alterius partis commuinter dicunt, quod papa instituit omnem potest atem
temporalem, etc. -- Sed totum hoc, est fictitium, and sine quecu^que
probabilitate, nec innit^tur velratione, vel testimonijs, vel Scriptura, vel
saltem alicujus ex puribus, vel vere Theologis, sed glossatores juris hoc
Dominum dederunt Papae, cum ipsi essent pauperes rebus and d^ctrina. Temporal
power ( says he) and he says true, does not depend upon the Pope, as inferior
Spiritual powers do: although others on the other part, commonly say, that the
Pope Ordained all Tempora power, and c. -- But all this is a mere Fable, and
void of all probability, neither has it any ground, either of reason or
Scripture, or Ancient Fathers, or good Divines; yet the Glossers of the Canons
( mark) gave the Pope this pre-eminence, because themselves were beggarly
fellows and unlearned.

Behold here the Original of Papacy, whereof Ignorance and Poverty were the
Advancers; and that by the Testimony of this most learned Pop^sh D^ctor* With
whom holds Bellarmin. Obrave Unity! if Disunion be it!

VIII. Division.
MAny great Papists, viz. Marsilius, Richardus, Paludanus, Aquinas, Pope
Gregory, with all his Canonists affirm, That a Priest by Virtue of the Popes
Dispensation, may lawfully and effectually minister their Sacrament of
confirmation. See Bellarmine and Jos. Angles. upon that Subject. And
Covarruvias Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 10. p. 24. de sacra confirmatione.

But these are hotly impugned by John Mayor, Bonavent. Alpho^sus, Scotus,
Durandus, and Pope Adrian, saying, that Pope Gregory was a Man, and therefore
subject to err.

See here, what greater dissension can be than this? for Confirmation is one of
their seven Sacraments.

IX. Division.
BOnaventura, Jo. Mayor, Aquinas, Albertus Magnus, Almainus, Richardus, etc.
firmly hold, that every of their Seven Orders is a Sacrament ( vide Bellarmine,
Jos. Angles,) But Durandus, Petrus Lombardus, Gajetanus, V^ctoris and Jos.
Angles, hold the contrary* vide Jo. Angles de sacr. ord. art. 2. distic. 3. and
victoria. de potest. eccles. relect. 2. p. 90. and de Sacramento, ord. p. 119.

X. Division.
THE Pope and his Jesuits affirm, that the Virgin Mary, was conceived without
Sin; but Aquinas and the Thomists stoutly defend the contrary Opinion. Aquin.
1. n. 3. part. 9. 27. ar^ 2. ad 3.

XI. Division.
THE Scotists avouch, that we can keep all the Commandments quoad substantiam
operis. The Thomists say, we can keep some, but not all; but Gregorius their
great Schoolman holds, That we can keep none. Short and Sweet.

XII. Division.
THE Papists are miserably divided concerning Venial Sins, which (say many of
them) are no breach of the Law, because they are not contra legem, but praeter
legem say they: but this Opinion is sharply reproved by other Papists. vid. M.
Baius. apud. Bellar. de. Purgat. l. 2. c. 4. etc.

In the year 1673. I was present at a dispute upon this subject, between a
Priest and a Papist Gentleman; the fir^^ held Venial Sins, but the second, not
only denied them, but utterly confuted the Priest, and all his partakers: but
at last they grew so hot on both sides, that they bent their Fists, and shook
their Canes at one another. (Of this point:) see Jos. Angles. in 4. sent. de
sacram. p. 219)

XIII. Division.
INcredible is the Dissension among Papists, touching the production of a
substance, out of the accidents, which Papists imagine to remain without
subjects in the Eucharist: concerning which, Richardus holds one Opinion,
Scotus another, Cajetanus another, Innocentius another, Aquinas two, the one
repugnant to the other. vid. Jo. Angl. in 4 art. ult de a^cid. euchar. Let not
the Papists henceforward boast of their Unity, nor charge the Protestants with
dissentions, for in truth, it is as much and more their own Badge, if all were
known.

XIV. Division.
THE Church of Rome teaches it as matter of Faith, to believe Christ's Body to
be in every part, when one of their Bread-Gods, or consecrated Hosts, is broken
in pieces, but John Mayor, their School Doctor, says, it is a Problem. J^s.
Angl. in 4. Senn. 91. de euchar. d^ffic. 7.

XV. Division.
Johannes Parisi^nsis affirms the substance of Bread to be united to the Body
of Christ, Hypostatically: Durandus holds that the substance of Bread is
destroyed, but the matter of Bread abides still with Christ's Body Caje^anus
says, (and he says true) that nothing in the Gospel enforces us to
understand these words, This is my Body, so grossly and carnally as the Papists
do. The Council of Trent teaches, that the Bread is neither annihilated,
neither abides in the Sacrament* Sirs, who cannot but smile at these
Absurdities! For, if it be neither in the Sacrament, or become nothing, I would
know what it is, and where it abides. Vide Aquinas, p. 3. q. 65. ar. 4. apud
Joseph* Angles. in 4 Sent. de convers. p. 166.

XVI. Division.
IT is a great Question, and breeds much Dissension among the Papists: What
that is which a Mouse eats, when she eats their reserved Host? Peter
Lombard, Bonaventure and others, affirm, That the Mouse eats not Christ's
Body: (and I am of their mind) But the Popes, Cardinals and Jesuices, hold the
contrary, as a grounded Article of their Faith* Lombard and Bonavent. in 4.
sect. d. 13. Behold what rare Unity here is!

XVII Division.
THE Popish Clergy and their Tridentine Council deny their Communicants the
Cup, and give them only the Bread; nay, the said Council curse such as affirm.
That the people should receive under both kinds. But their own Pope Gelasius is
against them, when he decreed as follows. Comperimus, quod quidam sumpta
tantum modo corporis sacriportione a ca^ice s^cr^^^ crueris a^stineant, etc.
(Vid. de cons did. 2. cap. comperimus.) We understand (says the Pope) that
certain receiving the portion of Christ's body, abstain from the Cup: which men,
(doubtless trained up in Superstition) let them be forced either to receive the
whole Sacrament, or be restrained from the whole; because this dividing of the
whole M^stery cannot be without great Sacri^^dge -- I pray n^w tell me, To
which of these in (...) great Dissension among themselves, in this great point,
should the people adh^re? for, if they follow the Council, the Pope condemns
them, if they obey the Pope, the Council curses them. Let th^r^fore Pap^sts*
case to twit Protestants with their Divisions, since th^mselves (...) divid^d
more than we.

The Papists are not only divided in their Exposition of Scripture, but also
very erroneous: especially in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they take the
Sign for the thing signified: the Earthy for the Heavenly: The substance of
bread, for the very body of Christ: the thing vi^^ble, for the invisible: the
Kings picture (as I may say) for the Kings person. So that where they should
use a Trope or Figure in expounding, they sti^k to the letter: and where they
should stick to the letter, there they fo^ce an Allegory. In these words of
Christ Mat. 26. 26. This is my Body: They perversely keep to the letter: which
being a figurative Speech, must be understood, This signifies my Body. But
these Idiots, hand over head, must and will take the resemblance,
representation, or figure of Christ in the Sacrament, for the real substance of
his body, flesh, blood and bones, in all its proportion as when he was nailed
to the Cross! O ye senseless bruits!

The ancient Orthodox Writers (and diverse Papists too) expound it
sacramentally, as we do. Tertullian, in his 2 and 4 Book against M^r^i^n (whom
Iraenaeus styles Os Diaboli) renders it, figura corporis mei. Again, he says,
Dominus, pane corpus suum representat, The Lord represents his Body by bread.
So says Augustine in his Preface to the 3 Psalm. And against Adanantius, you
may thus read him; Non dubitavit Deminus dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret
signum corporie fui, Christ doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he gave (
mark) only a sign of his Body. Again, Judam adhibuit ad convivium, in quo
corporis and sanguinis sui figuram commendavit discipulis, Christ admitted
Judas to his Supper, in which he commended to his Disciples only the figure of
his body, Aug. in Psam. 3. Judas only received the bread of the Lord, the
Apostles received the bread and the Lord. And the same Author upon Psam 50.
touching the words of Christ, in John 653. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man, ye have no life. This (says Augustine) is understood very grossly and
carnally by many: as though Christ would cut away lumps and pieces of his body
and give it them. -- But they said, v. 60. This is an hard saying; but they
were (as the Papists are) hard of belief, and not the saying: for had they had
true Faith th^^ would have understood him spiritually: for in these words, and
all other words of the same purpose, there lies hid a sacramental meaning and
mystery: which therefore must always be understood spiritually, mystically,
figuratively, tropically; and not popishly, grossly, carnally, or literally. And
Augustine expounds this Text, The Rock was Christ, thus, The Rock did signify
Christ: See lib. 38. de Civit. Dei, cap. 38. for Christ was not a natural
stone, tho he was the Stone figuratively. And so says L^r^nrus, Solet res quae
significat nomine rei, quam significat nominare, The thing which signifies
(says this learned Papist) is wont to be cal^ed by the name of the thing which
it does signify: and so is the stone signifying Christ, called Christ, when it
is not Christ indeed, but a figure of him: Ergo, the Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament is no more.

This Exposition is also confirmed by their own Bernard, in ass. mar* f^r* 5*
per significationem, non proprietatem, Christ is a stone by signification, not
that he is properly so.

The blind Popish Doctors, and all Papists (as well as the perverse Scribes and
Pharisees, and the stiffneck'd Jews,) are greatly mistaken in their exposition
concerning the Words of Christ. John 6. 54. Who so eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal Life. Now, these Words cannot be understood
Sacramentally (in this place) as the Papists Dream; because they were spoken
before the institution of the Sacrament: thus they Wrest the Scriptures to
their own Confusion.

Now, concerning the real Body of Christ in the Popish Sacrament, if they hold
(as many of them do) that Christ is there without Dimensions; their great
Evangelist Aquinas is against them. ( v. Aqu. p. 3. q. 76. art. 4.) but their
last shift is this (from which they will not stir in Life and Death) viz. God
can miraculously bring it so to pass. Neither will this shift help them, for
ultra posse, non est esse: for in the Judgment of Wise men, yea, even their own
School Doctors; there are some things which God cannot do, or rather which
cannot possibly be done: For instance, God cannot Sin, God cannot make time
past, not to be past; God cannot make that a Blind man remaining Blind, not
want his sight, though he can give sight to the Blind: God cannot make that a
Dead man remaining Dead, have Life, though he can restore Life to the Dead: in
short, God can do nothing that implies Contradiction: and all this Argues no
Impotency in God, who is Omnipotent; but defect in the things themselves, that
should be done. So then, this imaginary being of Christ's whole Body in a little
round Cake as big as a fix pence, is a flat contradiction, therefore cannot
possibly be done. For, what power can bring to pass, that a Body of six foot
long, and two foot broad, remaining still so long and so broad, shall be
contained in another Body of three foot long, and one foot broad? Why this is
the very Case of Christ's Body in the Popish Cake. I could never yet meet with
any Papists that could resolve this: for indeed it is impossible. Ergo, their
Doctrines, are most false, erroneus, blasphemous, absurd and ridiculous: For,
what is more absurd, than to hold, (as they do) That Christ's real and whole
Body is in a thousand places at once, and at the same time chewed and swallowed
down into the Stomach and Bellys of thousands, and afterward let fall into
their houses of Office! O, most execrable Doctrine! O, most abominable Papists,
and Papistry! Who but Fools, Madmen and Rebrobates would be of your Religion!

Give me leave once more (good Reader) to touch upon some pertinent passages
before inserted.

Signs or Sacraments in Scripture, are called by the names of the things
signified; or whereof they are Signs and Sacraments.

Christ (as aforesaid) is called a Stone, (Acts 4. 11.) A Vine, (John 15. 1.) A
door. (John 10. 7.) A Shepherd, (Heb 13. 20. and John 10. 11.) and his Father a
Husband man (John 15. 1.) is Christ therefore a Stone indeed? a natural Vine? a
material Door? a mere rustical Shepherd? and is his Father a Country Farmer,
Plough-man, or Husbandman? (for they are all one) must all these therefore be
understood ^itterally?

Again, Christ is called a Star. (Numb. 24. 17.) a Branch, (J^r* 33. 15.) can
any of these be expounded without a Trope or Figure? no more can the Body of
Christ in the Sacrament.

Again, Christ called John Baptist, Elias (Mat. 11. 14.) is John therefore the
very same Elias, in 1. Kings 18? Christ called John, the Son of Mary; and Mary,
John's Mother, (John 19. 26, 27*) Was John therefore the very natural Son of
the Virgin Mary? and she the true Mother of John? I think there is no Papists
so Mad as to affirm it: No more then, is the Sacramental Bread, Christ's natural
Body; though Christ called it his Body, that is, Figure of his Body.

Indeed the Papists grant, that diverse other Scriptures are to be understood
Figuratively, but th^s and some others must not: and why? because the Pope has
so decreed, therefore they must (jump with the Collier) Believe as the Pope
Believes; and obey his Commands before Christ and his Apostles: But those that
are true Worshipers of God, are not bound by the Law of God, to obey Popes,
Princes, nor any Magistrates whatsoever, in matters of Religion, if they
command contrary to the Scriptures. And, for this we have many presidents,
whereof I shall here insert some:

1. The Godly Midwives would not obey Pharaoh in killing innocent Children.
Exodus 1. 17.

2. The three young Israelites refused to obey the Command of Nebuchadnezar, to
worship the Golden Image. Dan. 3. 18.

3. The Prophet Daniel refused to ob^y the ungodly decree of Darius. Dan. 6.
10, 13.

4. The f^ithful Jews refused to obey the Law of Antiochus Epiphanes, when he
commanded them to Sacrifice to Idols. Vide Josephus, etc.

5 M^^cha, the Mother of King Asa, Worshipped Idols, as did many others, but
th^se that feared God abhorred her doings.

6. Jeroboam commanded Israel to Worship his Golden Calves: but the true
Servants of God would not obey him. 1 Kings 12. 28.

7. Queen Jezebel worshipped Baal, and commanded others to ^o so: but all that
feared the Lord utterly rejected her; whom she Persecute^, and Murdered the
Prophets of God: read Ahabs reign 1 Kings 16. 31. etc.

8. Athaliah, a great Queen, was an Idolatress, and enticed her Son Ahaziah,
and commanded others to the same Idolatry; but the faithful Servants of the
Lord, obeyed neither the King nor his Mother in that matter.

9. The Priests, Lawyers, Scribes, Pharisees, and Saduces, were great Rulers.
And they commanded the Apostles to Preach no more in the name of Jesus: but
they obeyed them not. But stoutly answered, Whether it be right in the sight of
God, to harken unto you, more than to God* judge ye* Acts 4. 19.

Now, What became of all these persecuting Kings and Queens? Pharaoh and his
Subjects were Plagued, and afterward perished in the red Sea. Nebuchadnezar
convinced; and after punished seven years for his Pride. Antiochus died
miserably. Maacha deposed, and scorned. Iezebel eaten up of Dogs. Ahab slain.
Iereboam punished in his posterity. 1 Kings 14. 10. Athaliah was slain, for all
her crying out, Treason, Treason! 2 Kings 11. 14. 16. Herod, a great
persecutor, was eaten up of Worms. Acts 12. The High Priests, Lawyers, Scribes,
Pharisees and Saduces, together with their chief City, and Temple, whole
Country and people, were utterly, totally, and finally destroyed by the Romans.

These I think, are sufficient warnings to all Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Princes and Magistrates of all degrees, that they impose nothing on their
Subjects in matters of Religion, contrary to the express Commands of God in his
Word.

To conclude, tell me, What has the King of Spain (to name no more) got by
setting up, and allowing the Bloody INQUISITION in his Dominions? Truly, he has
never thrive since: has he not lost seven of his seventeen Belgic Provinces,
and a great part of the rest to the French! Nay, has not the Pope himself lost
England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, Swedeland, a great part of Germany,
France, Poland, Switzerland, etc. For his Cruelties, and Idolatrous impositions
in matters of Religion? And particularly, that Saint-torturing, and Murdering
engine, viz. TRANSUBSTANTIATION, concerning the Words, This is my Body. I
cannot but grieve to find how ignorant many Protestants are, and those too, of
good rank and quality, grave and serious, of refined parts, old professors of
both Sexes: several of whom, I have often seen at a loss (to their shame be it
spoken) and woefully non-plus't in discourse with Papists, answering so weakly
and childishly! yea, most shamefully baffled, and silenc't, even by Popish
Children; to the great disadvantage ^f the Protestant Religion. (And all
through their slothfulness, wordliness, etc.) To prevent which mischief among
Papists, Priests, Friars, and many Parents, in what Family soever they find an
acute Boy or Girl, they teach them how to dispute of some special points of
Religion: the neglect whereof among Protestants is (in my Judgment) not only
shameful but sinful. And truly I could wish, that Ministers in their public
Assemblies, would preach oftener than they have done upon Mat. 26. 26. and 16.
18. and 18. 18. John 20 23. and such like. With which your crafty Papists make
a deal of stir in the company of ignorant Protestants. And I have often found,
that they had rather discourse upon one of those four Texts, and other such,
then any other Scriptures; which they will by many Tricks, shifts and excuses
labor to avoid. By which we may see, that Papists have more Zeal for
Antichrist, than Protestants have for Christ! Nay, They have, do, and will
with more cheerfulness, and willingness spend thousands for their Catholic
Cause, than thousands called Protestants, will hundreds for the Cause of God! O
COVETEOUSNESS! Thou art become the Master-Devil amongst us! Thou Wilt bury thy
Money, or keep it for the Papists, rather than employ part of it t^ preserve
thy Life and Religion; as the Constantinopolians did, when Mahomet and his
Turks besieged them; but after he took the City, and found their hidden
Treasure, he uttered this reproachful Taunt. viz. Behold! Here was Treasure
enough to have raised an Army, sufficient to defend their City and Country from
us! implying, That they loved their Money better than their Live^, Liberties and
Religion! So, that through their Covetousness, they lost all at once, To their
eternal shame and infamy, the great disgrace of Christian Religion, and
dishonor to Christ among Turks! So now, there are many wish well to the cause
of Christ: but they will do little enough for it, either in purse or person:
they are godly for their own private good, if they have but grace sufficient to
carry them to Heaven, they care for no more, let the Pr^^estant cause sink or
swim, and now it is in danger, they cry God help, God help, and that's all. O,
what narrow spirited, and frozen hearted E^^esian^, and Laodiceans are these!
Rev* 2. 4. 5. and 3. 15.

XVIII. DIVISION.
MOST vehement are the exclamations of Catharinus against Cajetanus, and of
Antonius Fontsecca, against Catharinus, concerning the formation of EVE, as
also Burgensis, against Lyranus, and M. Thoring against Burgensis, in many
other things, and all this will appear to such as will peruse their Glosses
upon the Old and New Testament.

XIX. Division.
POpe Hadrian, Richardus, and Panormitanus, affirm, That a Priest being
contrite: may say Mass before he be confessed. But the Council of Trent is
against it, as a damnable Sin. Ios. Angles. in 4. s. p. 117.

XX. Division.
THE Council of Lateran, (where a monstrous OWL, the Emblem of the evil Spirit
which guided them (as the Dove is of the good) appeared to the great amazement
of the Pope and his Achitophels, defined absolutely, that Angels were created
with the World. But Nazianzenus, Damascenus, Basi^ius, Hieronimus, Augustinus,
and Aquinas, deny it to be a matter of Faith. Council. Lat. Can. 1. de side
Cathol. and Canus. de locis. lib. 5 p. 169.

XXI. Division.
BEllarmin avoucheth, That the Major Voice in general Councils, must needs be
of most force. But Canus holds, That the m^nor part is the best, if the Pope
hold with it. And yet in their agreement in this point, rests the Foundation
of their Ropish Religion.

But to what end are Councils, if the Pope has a Negative Voice, and rule them
as he pleases: though absent, for indeed, Popes have been very seldom present
at General Councels; as Bellarmine records, Summus pontifex nunquam interfuit
concilijs orientalibus per se, etc. Bellarmine lib. 1. de concilijs cap. 19.

The Pope (says he) Was never present at the Councels in the East-Church in
his own person. And why? Because the Emperor Sat in highest place. Which the
humble Pope could by no means endure, because he would not sit in the second
place: yet he styles himself, Servus Serv^rum De^! when he never meant it.

Many more Dissentions, and Divisions amongst Papists might be brought to
light: as well as many rediculous absurdities, errors, heresies, and damnable
Doctrines, or Doctrines of Devils: for what else is burning the Bible, when
printed in the vulgar Tongue of any Nation, and not only that, but all that
read it, as Popes have Commanded: and to have all things done in strange
Tongues, contrary to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 14. 14, 15, 16, 17, 19 2 Timothy 4. 3,
4.

The Pope excommunicates all Lay persons, though never so well Learned, that
reasoned in matters of his Faith.

Again. What an absurd thing is it, to hear a Priest pronounce an Absolution,
which neither the penitent, nor himself, understands often times.

Vid. 6. decret. 1. 5. cap. quicunque. And all their Church Services, Homilies,
and Sermons too for the most part are in Latin! Which yet they term an
exposition of the Scripture. What a ridiculous thing is it, to see the ignorant
vulgar people (Commanded to) hear the Gospel read in Latin, and withal to
behold them earnestly listening with their Ears, least any one word should not
be beard, though impossible to be understood: for which, any man well in his
wits would suppose them all to be Mad.

There are no less than an hundred Sects, Sorts, Degrees and Orders of Friars,
Monks, Nuns, etc. in the Church of Rome, all which have been set up and
confirmed by diverse Popes successively. See Fox. Acts and Monuments p. 337.

Now, it is impossible that such a prodigious rabblement, or such a numerous
Heterogeneous Herd, divided and subdivided; not only into so many sorts and
degrees, but also into so many opinions (as you have heard, and many more
besides) should keep within bounds, if the Pope, his Cardinals, and the rest of
his Grand Clergy, and spiritual Bashaws, together with his Popish Kings,
Princ^s, States, Nobility, and Magistracy ^f all degrees, did not by their
great power and authority keep them in Aw, in preferring some; in threatening
and most severely punishing othe^s, both Laity a^ a Clergy, even with Death it
self; so that none of (...) dare so much as qua^ko^ stir in the least: No not
to ^sk, Why (...) is? Or, Wherefore is that? Such slaves are they: For they are
not to question any false Doctrines of the Popes: For his ^anon Law forbids
them in these Words. Non spectat ad subditos a^terminar^, aut examinare quia
possit papa, aut quid non possit, and (...) ten^a^^ur p^rere vel non, qui
Sacrilegium est desputare de potentia papae. It belongs not to the Popes
Vass^ls (viz. Catholics) to determine, or examen, what the Pope may do, or
what he may not do, for his Law (mark) has made it Sacrilege to dispute his
power. And those that dare do it, must look for no less punishment than Fire
and Faggot.

O then! What a Heavenly happiness, and blessed Liberty Protestants enjoy,
could they but see it, and knew how to use it. And what a miserable slavery it
is to be a Papist? Let any man of reason Judge.

Having thus given an Account of some of the grand Divisions and Differences
amongst the Papists, and their Clergy. Give me leave also to show you most of
the principal differences between Papists and Protestants. Which I recommend to
ignorant people, too many of them being very apt to be seduced and
consequently, destroyed in their Souls; for lack of true knowledge, whereof God
himself complains, Hos. 4 1. 6.

And I think it may be affirmed with Dr. Featly, That there is no possitive
Article of our faith, which the Papists or the most Learned amongst them, do
not hold and Believe for Truth and Catholic. So that we are upon sure ground,
even by their own Confession. Vid. Featly Cont. Roffen.

For instance.
1. WE believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God. So do the Papists. But
they add thereto the Apocrypha, etc.

2. We believe the Originals of the Old and New Testaments in Hebrew and Greek
to be Authentical, and of undoubted Authority: The Papists (I suppose) believe
the same. But they add, That the vulgar Latin Translation is Authentical also.

3. We believe the Written Word of God to be the ground of Faith, so say they,
but add thereto the unwritten Word, of men's Trad^tions. Mat. 15. 3. Colos. 2. 8.

4. We believe that Christ is the Head of his Church: So do they, but add to
him a visible Head, the Pope.

5. We believe there are two places for the departed, Heaven and Hell: They
believe so too, but add other places more, as Purgatory, Limbus patrum, and
Limbus Infantum, all three in Vtopia.

6. We believe that God is to be Worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: So say they
too; but add, That he may be Analogically, and relatively Worshipped by Images,
etc.

7. We believe that we ought to call upon God: They believe so too; but add,
That they may call upon Saints too.

8. We believe that Christ is our Mediator both of Redemption and Intercession:
They believe the same; but add to him Angels and Saints: upon whose
intercession and merits they in part rely; and so make to themselves fellow
saviors with Christ. Whereas the Scripture says* That he is able to save them
to the uttermost, that come to God by him, seeing He ever lives to make
intercession for them. Heb. 7. 25.

9. We believe that the Saints in Heaven bear most ardent affections to the
Saints on Earth: and pray in general, for the Church Militant: The Papists
believe so too; but add, That they have knowledge of our particular wants and
necessities, and pray to God in special for us, which we deny.

10. We believe that Christ has instituted two Sacraments in his Church, viz.
Baptism, and the Eucharist: they believe so too; but add to these five other of
their own inventions: viz. Matrimony, Penance, Ordination, Confirmation and
extreme Unction.

11. We believe that Grace is annexed to the Sacrament, in such sort, that all
those who worthily receive them, participate also of sanctifying Grace: they
say so too; but add, That the Sacraments confer this Grace, ex opere operato,
and that God is tied to them. So that, by this Doctrine, Children dying without
Baptism, are necessarily Damned.

12. We believe that the intention of the Minister is requisite to the right
administration of the Sacrament: they believe so too; but add, That the effect
of the Sacrament depends upon the intention of the Minister or Priest.

13. We believe that in the Eucharist, the worthy communicant really partaketh
of Christ's Body: they believe so too; but add, That Christ is Really and
Carnally received under certain accidents, the Elements being
Transubstantiated. Which is an Impossibility, therefore a mear Nullity.

14. We believe that we are Justified and Saved by the Merits and passion of
Christ; they say so too; but add, Their own Merits and Satisfaction.

15 We believe that we ought to pray for all the Members of Christ his Church
Militant on Earth: they believe the same; but add, That we may, and ought to
pray for the Dead also.

16. We believe, and receive the Three Creeds, viz. The Apostles Creed; The
Nicene; and that of Athanasius: They believe them also; but add A Fourth Creed,
The XII new Articles coined by the Pope, and annexed to the Council of Trent.

By these you may see, how that Human Additions, Traditions and Inventions, has
strangely Marred and Defaced the Worship of God, whom they must be teaching,
and still putting the Holy Ghost to School. However, Let the Reader observe and
see, How the Articles of our Belief are drawn out of their own Confession. That
which we, Protestants, hold for Matter of Faith necessary to Salvation, the
Papists hold as well as we: And therefore Ours is the true* Catholic Doctrine;
Whereas, Their Superstitious Additions to the Catholic Faith, were never
entertained or owned, neither by all Christians in any Age, nor by any
Christians in all Ages. Neither are all the Papists in the World able to prove
any one point of their Tridentine Faith (wherein they differ from us) to be
Catholic. See Featly against Fisher.

Now, as you have had a View of some of their Popish Delusions whereby they
delude and abuse the common People, rendering them more senseless than Bruites,
etc. And also a brief Account of some of the principal Divisions and
Differences amongst the Papists themselves; With those between Papists and
Protestants: So, let me inform the ignorant (for to them I chiefly direct my
Discourse) wherein the Protestants differ: For, '^is high time we understand
one another, and as one man oppose the Papists, those Common Enemy of God and
good men, if their infernal Impudence and Confidence should set them upon us.
Protestants, I say, For I understand there are some among us that reject and
disown that Term or Denomition, or at least, care not for it: Therefore I shall
here omit them; and only set down such as call or own themselves Protestants:
And, they are especially these Four, viz. The Episcopist. The Presbyterian. The
Independent, and The Baptists, one sort of them.

WELL then, Wherein differ the first, from the Three last?

Answer, In Rites and Ceremonies.

Wherein differ the Second and Third?

Ans. In Discipline only.

Wherein differ the Fourth from the Third?

Ans. In Time only: And from the Second, in Time and Discipline. So, their main
Dissentions consist in Circumstancials, not Substantials: which always may be
matter of great Comfort to Protestants.

Now, If any Protestant be not pleased with this short Account, let give a
better. For my own part, I understand not of any Difference amongst them, in
any Fundamental Points of Religion: as you see there is among the Papists, for
all their vain Boasting of so much Unity. And, who would fain, especially at
this day, Set us together by the Ears, and then laugh at us: And for this end,
have their Agents and Proselytes continually among us, or, at least to stir us
up to Preach, write, and rail against each other. And herein (with grief I
speak it) they have prevailed with too many, even lately: as, I fear they may
still, with hot spirited prejudicated persons (and perhaps some of them here
omitted) for that is it our Common Enemy, the Papists, would have, and whereat
they greatly rejoice and glory in: whilst in the mean time, they plot, and
really design the Destruction of us all: which, with them is not only Lawful,
but Meritorious.

SEEing the Papists cannot down Dispute
CHRIST'S Kingdom, nor the Protestants refute,
By all their Arguments, both old and new,
And those (though silly ones) are not a few:
Therefore, seek otherwise, them to annoy,
And (if they can) them with the Sword destroy.
Now, Justice Arnold they assaulted have,
As well as Godfrey: still more blood they Crave*
Note well, that Godfrey, God's Peace signifies
(Whom to their Lust they made a Sacrifice.)
And Arnold, Honest, as he is indeed,
Since for his Honesty they made him bleed.
These, cowardly and sneakingly did they
Assassinate, where no man could them spy.
They dare not fight till they are three to one,
Which unto me and many more is known.
Prodigious Projects, ominous and black
Are framing still to bring us all to wrack.
Preponderated PLOTS and Treacheries
Are now conspicuous unto our eyes*
Our Horizon they fain would culminate,
And with Narcotick fumes contaminate
Great Britain once again (now too secure)
Where, many Sparks they have brought to their Iure:
Rude Wretches (wherewith London does abound)
Will soon turn Papists, if the Pope get ground.
Atheists and Semi-Papists, young and old
Spring daily, yea, grow very high and bold,
While Protestants mind nothing but their pelf,
Not minding public, no, but private self.
These are too narrow spirited, also,
Too dasterdly into the field to go
And fight the Papists: Were we all like these,
The Pope might master England when he please.
But there are others of a nobler mind
That are resolved (as Jesuits ye shall find)
To sacrifice their, Lives and whole Estates,
(And many of them too are prime Magnates)
'Ere Popery shall have the upper hand,
Or once be tolerated in the Land.
But all our Trust is only in the Lord,
Thereto encouraged from his sacred Word.
What fearful Storms and Tempests of Sedition, etc.
Have Papists raised against the true Religion?
Who can the number of their Projects tell?
What Hurricanoes have rise out of Hell,
To blow the Gospel out of Britanny,
And in its room set up IDOLATRY?
The Jesuits their Pericranions crack
How to seduce by any crafty knack:
A sect impulsed by Infernal Hate,
Witty in Vengeance and things desperate:
Men may, but GOD outwitted cannot be,
It Is well for Saints there is such a GOD as He.
The Pope and Jesuits all, he can confound,
And beat their grand Partakers to the ground;
Yea, He can frown them all to HELL, and make
Great KINGS and PRINCES at his power quake:
What can ye do, O Papists, if our GOD
Forgive our SINS! or send another Rod,
Not You, to scourge us? We had rather be
Chastised by Turks than such fell Fiends as ye.
But if it be decreed, That we must fall
Into your hands; Cannot the Lord of all
The Earth remove from us so great a Pest,
And US restore to Liberty and Rest?
Rome, Rome! Our God is a Consuming Fire,
Look to thy self, Thou can not long respire,
For thou art Stubble, therefore thou must burn,
GOD, in due time will Thee to Ashes turn,
Out of which shall no Phoenix rise, as did
From London' s Ashes; no, it is forbid.
O, STRICTINELLA! thou art rotten hay,
And all thy Asses, now begin to bray:
There Is none but Fools and Desperadoes will
The cursed Commands of thy Pope
Nero fulfill:
Atheists and Papists go together go,
For ye are both alike: and such a Foe
I Would rather fight than any: for the Devil
Cannot exceed them both in any Evil.
They Have made themselves most hateful to the world,
Which they have often into Confusion hurld:
Their Works of Darkness shall be brought to Light,
More Colemans, in due time will come in sight:
More Foxes, and more Guido Fauxes too
With their dark Lanthorns (set on work by you)
Will be discovered 'ere long, we hope,
And to receive their just Reward -- A Rope.
Yet, if the Pope but saint them, all is well,
Though many of his Saintlings burn in hell.
Rogues, Traitors, Cutthroats, ruffians, strumpets have
Been sainted by his Holiness: O brave!
Saint Coleman, and Saint Whitebread (for so you
Blind Papists style them) nay then, Saint Judas too:
Saint Satan also, for, he is on your side,
And your chief Friend, it cannot be denied,
What profits such a glorious Appellation,
If Jesus Christ judge them to Condemnation?
Ore of your Saints, when dead three days he lay,
With ghastly looks, these fearful words did say:
1. Ad judicium vocatus sum! the first day.
2. Judicatus sum! the second day.
3. Condemnatus sum! the third day: and then they buried him.
I can take my Oath, that I have heard this verified by many Priests, and other
Papists, at several times.

All is not Gold that glistereth: no, no,
For none are Saints, but whom God makes so:
(Some Protestants are Saints of their own making,
So ruin themselves through their own mistaking:)
Phanaticism, high-Towr'ing Speculation
Or Jesuitism, some think, is true Salvation.
The Sea the Censures of the Sorbonists in a Treatise, called, A Truth known to
few, etc.
Sorbonne Censures of their Propositions;
Show they are Atheists; and mere Politicians.
The Jesuits, that Pharisaical Tribe,
No bounds to their blood-thirsty Wills prescribe:
They, they would rule the Roste in every place,
And meddle in every matter, thing and case:
They take upon them (and that more of late,)
To Tutor Princes in Affairs of State:
Imposing on the World their addle Theams,
Driving wild Fancy's into hot Extremes
Of dire Dissension, that they might thereby
Confound, amaze, astonish, stupify,
Distract, disturb, dissettle, and divide,
Exciting men to blood, on every side.
Unbounded in their Malice to all those
That cannot with their Machinations close:
Damned Wretches, what, will nothing serve your turn,
But Towns and Cities through mere Malice burn?
Will nothing satisfy your Pope
Hildebrand,
But the Destruction af a Christian Land?
What strange Catastrophe's? what woeful things
Have they brought upon Kingdoms, States and Kings.
Setting them all-together by the Ears,
Filling the world with Terrors, Frights, and Fears.
What Fools have been the Kings of France and Spain
To kiss their Gouty Toes, and hold their Train,
And stirrups too! walking by their Horse-side,
Whilst they did swell with Arrogance and Pride?
O, Generation of Vipers, when
Will ye cease to be Devils, and act like men?
When will ye cease to prey upon your kind?
Which Cruelty, in Wolves, ye cannot find:
Your Mines, and Countermines, are dug as deep
As Hell, with which, ye Correspondence keep:
Ye Mine for Blood, and undermine to bl^w
Up Parliaments for we have found it so:
Witness that noted fifth day of November. 1605.

Which, without horror, we cannot remember.
The Massacres in France, poor Switzerland,
Bohemia, Piedmond, Ireland, Pomerland,
Hungaria the Spanish Inquisition, etc.
Of Protestants, have made away a Million! Jesuits by Equivocation have denied
themselves to be Christians.

Yet do the Jesuits, and all the Rout
Of Papists, impudently face it out,
That there were no such things! No all are Lies,
Which you (say they) on purpose did devize!
The Powder Plot was forge^ too! (They Cry)
Though Faux, (etc.) confessed it, and therefore did die. As did Sir Edw. Digby,
R. Winter, T. Winter, A. Rookwood, R. Keys, J. Grant T. Bates, etc.

Nay! they deny the PLOT discovered, now,
By Otes and Bodloe! Yea, they swear and vow,
Such things were n'ere intended! Thus, you see,
What impudent, what canting KOGVES they be?
Hoping thereby to blear the eyes of some,
Least they should see the Villainies of ROME:
Yet, surely, none but Reprobates will heed
Such Cannibals as love on Saints to feed,
And suc^ the Blo^d of Innocents, because
They (...) subscribe to their Prodigious Laws.
Ye Jesuits, O, ye State-Mountebanks!
That with your Projects, and Hell-hatchd* pranks
Do so much M^schief, till ye are pulled down,
No Christian Prince can safely ware a Crown:
Sure, ye must needs be of the Race of Cain,
For that your ^reatest Care is how to Stain
The Earth with Brooks of Blood of such as are
True Abels, or watch how, them, to ensnare.
From JESUS, ye, your selves denominate,
Jesuits! and yet his Gospel Truths ye hate!
And all Quos timemus, odimus.
true Gospellers: Nay, do not ye
Make him the Spring of all your Villainy!
Lord God! Who can their Blasphemies express,
A Patron unto all your Wickedness!
Without Astonishment and Indignation!
Was e're such Devils on Earth since the Creation!
A JESVITE, (i. e.) a Jesu ite, Go
From Jesus: but he never owned them, no:
Yet, in his Name all evils they begin,
Hoping thereby more Proselytes to win.
Therefore it may be said of their blind BAALAM,
In nomine Domini, incipit omne Malum!
And they also, which, in a sense, is true;
But they, and all their Heterogeneous Crew
Will have the blasting Benediction
Of their Arch Flamin e're they fall upon
The Protestants, which having got, they then,
Believe themselves to be more than men,
As they are, indeed in a right sense, for why?
All others they exceed in Cruelty.
GOD bless, US, from the blessing of the POPE,
For in GOD's blessing is our Help and Hope.
We plainly see it is thy Drift and Aim,
Us to enthrall, O Cushan-rishathaim!
But art thou sure to carry't? Can thou tell
What God will do? Can bear away the Bell
By thine own Power, force and Policy?
Yes, thou think: yet who knows but the most HIGH
At last may smile on us, and Us succeed?
And all thy Colemans from amongst us weed,
And make us, yet, to see more Halcion days:
If so, thy Jesuits cannot wear the Bays.
Therefore consider, Look before you Leap,
Lest Wrath and Vengeance on thy self thou heap.
Reader, That thou may not have the least Thought of complying with these
Cursed Enemies of our dear LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the Simple Purity of his
Worship, No, though to save thy life: for having here observed how thou art to
be deluded and abused in thy Temporal Concerns, and much more in thy Eternal,
by ignorant, sottish Priests, etc. I shall add a dreadful Example of Gods
Judgment upon a parcel of Wretches who turned in a moment from being
Protestants to be Papists: being a Seasonable Warning to Apostatizing
Protestants; verifying in the very Letter those Words of our Savior, which
contain in them a Curse, and a Blessing, viz. Whosoever will save his Life
shall loose it: and whosoever will loose his Life for my sake, shall find it,
Mat. 16. 25. as, in the following Story is made out.

NOW are the Days, doubtless, whereof Christ and his Apostles forewarned us;
That there should be a departing or falling away from the Faith: (1 Timothy 4. 1.
2 Pet. 3. 3. Jude 18.) and that because of Iniquities abounding, the love of
many should wax cold, Matt. 24. 12. Cold for Christ and the true Christian
Religion; Nay, They shall even deny Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 12. And
these things, with many more are come to pass at this very day.

And this has proceeded from the cursed design of the JESUITS, and the rest
of the Romish Faction, who debauch many great Ones, and, they, by their wicked
Example (which almost carries the force of a Command with it) the whole
Comonaley, (by deluding them with pretenses of Venial sins, and Pardons, etc.)
For is not Whoring, Swaring, Drunkning, Lying, Aequivocating, etc. become as a
mighty Stream overflowing the whole Land, thereby fitting us for some worse
Judgment, if the Plague, the Fire, and other Punishments we have had, do no
good upon us. Therefore be steadfast: How dreadful is it to consider, and what
a sure Token of approaching Judgment is it, to see

I. Many quandam zealous Protestants, grown of late so cold, (colder since the
PLOT than before) so narrow spirited and basely timorous, (thinking it is a
great piece of discretion, and that they show an emphatical piece of Wisdom)
That when Discourse is raised in Company, concerning POPERY, they will either
shift it off with a Drool, force some other Discourse, or sneak away, in hopes
to save their Bakon, ( cujus contrarium verum est,) so that, really, they are
ashamed, or half afraid to own themselves Protestants: Showing not so mch zeal
for the true Worship of the true God, as a Turk does for Mahomets, or a Heathen
for his Idol: hereby declaring that they have sat under a dead Ministry, of
whom God has said, They shall not profit the People. Those that never felt the
Power of God, under an Ordinance, in turning them from all Sin, and showing
them the desperateness of their Condition without Christ, a holy Life, etc.
will turn to any, the worst of prevailing Religions, especially to that which
tolerlates Sin, as Popery does: nay, makes it meritorious, as murdering Kings,
burning Cities, etc!

II. Others are so pusillanimous, so dirty, and dastardly; That they dare not
own the Truth, when they hear it traduced and impugned by men popishly
affected: when e'n the Spirit of God and their own Consciences prompt them to
speak: as if they were ashamed of Christ, (See Mark 8. 38.) and with Spira,
desperately quench and resist the Motions of the Holy Ghost: and if any put
them to it by Interrogatories, they will answer with an Equivocation, or an
Italian shrug: Know, they that dare not Speak for Christ, will hardly either Do
or Suffer for him; These are light Wheat, that will soon be blown aside, if the
Wind rises a little: especially, if Euroclydon blow hard.

III. There is also another sort, who, tho they will talk pretty freely
concerning the PLOT, etc. yet their words are so cunningly and artificially
placed, as if they were coined on purpose: Yea their Expressions are many times
so ambiguous, and savoring of the JESUITS canting Querks, that the wisest Man
alive can hardly tell what to make of them: and all these three aim at the same
thing, viz. hoping, by Silence, Indifferency, and Neutrality, to find favor of
the Papists, if they should get uppermost; which is the greatest Folly
imaginable: as I could evince by many woeful Examples, in the Rebellion, in
Ireland* where they were most egregiously perfidious, promiting the Protestants
quarter, but in stead thereof murdered them in cold Blood: And this one
Relation, shall serve in stead of many, whereby you may see, if you will, what
you are to expect when they have the Sword, etc. Take it faithfully as I
received it from Captain Edward Leventhorp, and others.

DUring the late Wars in Ireland, A Castle well manned with English,
Protestants, being suddenly and straightly besieged by the Enemy, in so much,
that in few days, they were reduced to so great Extremity, that they must of
necessity either starve, or yield to the Mercy of the merciless and implacable
Papists (whose tender Mercies are Cruelty; as all along the Maryan Days, the
Troubles in Germany, and the Irish Rebellion has been proved.)

Hereupon, the Day and Hour being appointed whereon they should march out of
the Castle, without any thing, save only their wearing Clothes: These Noble
Souls (I call them so for their Magnanimity for the Cause of Jesus Christ) came
out of the Castle, and as soon as ever they came forth, so soon were they
surrounded by the Enemy; as you see in this Figure: who, with drawn swords in
their hands, waited only for the Word of Command to fall on, and cut them in
pieces: whilst, the other poor Souls were upon their Knees, one while calling
upon GOD for Mercy, and another while crying to their Enemies for Pity: but the
Papists had sworn the Ruin of them all, and had done it too, if GOD by a
strange and wonderful way had not prevented it. For, just as the Commander was
about to give the Word, to fall on, and spare none of the English Soldiers;
GOD, I say! put it into the Comanders mind, to ask them one Question first: and
it was this, He demanded if there were any Roman Catholics among them? if
there be (said he) Let them draw out, and separate from the rest, who were to
stand still: The Word was no sooner out of his Mouth, but out came three or
four, and confessed themselves Roman Catholics, and withal antedated their
Religion: after them, came half a dozen, and at the heels of them half a score
more, and diverse others after them; and all acknowleding themselves Catholics,
antedating, as the first did. Whereat the Popish Commander turned about and
smiled: and when no more would come, he asked the rest that stood Firm, If they
were resolved to dye PROTESTANTS? They, (like true Christians, Heaven born
Souls indeed) answered, That they would not change their Religion to save their
LIVES!

Say you so? Quoth the Popish Commander! But what, I pray, Do'nt you think the
others, that separated from you, good Catholics? No, (said the steadfast
Soldiers) because they never owned themselves as such till now, and they do it
for fear of Death.

I verily believe it (said the Commander) for I thought as much before. Then
turning to the rest of his Officers and S^uldiers, he said, Them yonder,
meaning those that separated, are but Counterfeit Catholics, and the Rogues do
it only to save their LIVES, and to abuse us, for they will run away the next
Opportunity: Therefore, by GOD, they shall die every man of them, and the other
for standing so bravely to their Principles shall live; and whom I would sooner
trust, upon any occasion, than the other, or any such Time-serving Rascals, as
they are!

In short, he put all the Revolters to the Sword, any saved the other for their
brave Resolution: and not only so, but sent them with a safe Conduct to the
next English Garrison, having as many of his own sent in Exchange* that had
been Prisoners. By this noble Act, the said Commander won great Applause
amongst the English.

Now, consider this, all ye that think to save your Lives and Estates by
temporising and basely antedating your Religion, or dirtily complying with, and
fawning upon every base pitiful (the most of them are no better) Papist before
hand, as if ye would fore-speak Friendship, as I am too sure many do. And
possibly, you that are next to, removed but one little step from them, may find
some favor, for a very little time, from them, till you and them, if they can
by any idle foolish pretense get you to assist them against such as are more
zealous against their Idolatries: But, when their work is so far done, then
they will more easily cut you off too, for the least step of Reformation since
Qu* Mary's days, their Soul bates, even as the purest worship. For I can liken
them to no better a Crew than Rogues and Thieves that live in an honest place;
who will carry it very fairly among the Neighborhood, to have some bodies good
word at a pinch: so they, make to some one party to shelter under them: and
then, only Polyphemus's Courtesy will be yours, that is, to die last, when you
have seen the Throats of others cut, your own turn comes next.

There are Seven sorts that above all others are most likely to turn Apostates,
viz. The Covetous, the Ambitious, the Self-lovers, the Over-nice, the
Forma^ists, the Ignorant and the Fearful. See Rev. 21. 8. Mat. 10. 33. Mark.
13. 13. Rev. 2. 10* 25. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Phil. 4. 1. 1. Cr. 10. 12.

These 7 include the first three abovenamed; and are wrapped up in the word
HYPOCRITE; and amongst them, there are diverse great Professors even of all
s^rts, who (as well as the loose, ignorant, debauched, profane Protestants)
for fear or favor, may join with the Papists against sincere Protestants; as
the Lutherans joined with Papists against the Calvenists, An. 1567. and about
the 10 year of Q. Eliz. especially when alluted thereto by the curious Arts of
Jesuits and their Proselytes, the Philtring Baits of Profit and Preferment:
Seconded by the lusty (tho seigned) Promises of some principal Papists and
their Agents. But God can (and perhaps will) bring it so to pass, That such
revolting Wrethes, may be served as they above mentioned: or, if not so, yet
they cannot escape Vengeance: for I am confident they will perish by one means
or other, perchance by the hands of true Protestants: And, for my own part, I
do profess, (if God will make use of the Arm of Flesh, in our defense) I would
sooner give quarter to French or any other outlandish-Papist, than any English
Apostate whatsoever (Laity or Clergy) that should join in Arms with them, or
our domestic or homeborn Papists against the Protestants Cause.

And I write this with an heart that never yet feared the greatest or the
proudest Papist in the World: who have been at the routing of such, almost an
hundred times, in my junior days: and therefore, I think, I should know the
better how to deal with them now; if they will needs force us to it, by falling
upon us first: for till then we will not stir one foot: Let them otherwise
provoke us never so much, as they have done very often, and do daily: besides
burning of London, Southwark, etc. But as crafty Fowlers as they are, they
shall not catch old Birds in the Chaff Be steadfast, 1 Cor. 15. 58. -- stand
fast, 1 Cor. 16. 13. For, In all Gods Armory, there is no defense for the Back,
the Runagade or Apostate must everlastingly perish. O Apostate, bethink thy
self betimes!

True Protestants will rather choose to die,
Than Christ, or their Religion deny:
And bravely persevere, come, what will come,
But Hypocrites will how the Knee to Rome,
Even these 7 Monsters, which I named before,
Would Popery, if it were up, adore.
Notwithstanding all this, Let us, and all that think they stand, beware lest
we fall, (1 Cor. 10. 12.) as they may, without Divine Assistance:
Self-Confidence being a most dangerous Rock on which many have split, even in
this present Age: Remember the Apostle Peter, and the Apostate Pendleton, in
the Book of Martyrs.

FINIS.
Errata. Page 6. l. 6. r. Delusions: p. 32. l. 16. after Pope, add forbad them.
p. 34. l. 16. r. Angles. p. 40. l. 15. r. Connivium. p. 50. l. 7. r. him give.
p. 53. r. the 14 and 15 lines before the 12 and 13. p. 55. read line 6 before
line 5.

BOoks and single sheets Printed and sold by Tho. Dawks, in Blackfryers, and by
La Curtiss in Goat Court on Ludgate Hill, where may always be had, 1. Godfreys
Murder made visible, and the Papists Cruelty therein. 2. A Chronology of
Popery, sh^wing When, and Who brought in their idle, foolish F^perys. 3. The
only Historical Plot Cards, with a Book, illustrating the PLOT, greatly
satisfying the Protestant Reader. 4. The Beggars Petition to H. S. showing
Reasons enough why he threw Popery off, and, we are not to be befoold into it.
5. The 3 Prime Discoverers, their Pictures, with Verses showing their Reasons
why they discovered this Hellish Popish Plot. 6. Romes Hunting-Match for 3
Kingdoms. 7. England's Calamity foreshown, from the growth of Popery, in
Germanys Misery. 8. A Seasonable Caution to Apostatizing Protestants; or Gods
eminent Judgment upon Protestants that turned Papists to save their Lives, but
perished. 8. The Resurrection proved in a Relation of what happened to Mris Ann
Atherton, who lay 7 days in a Trance, declared in an astonishing Speech when
she came to life.

9 A great Truth, The Jesuit a downright Complete Atheist, proved such, and
condemned for such, by the Famous Faculty of Sorbonne ( well known to be the
best Divines of all the Catholic Party; and by the French Bishops) and Pope
Alexander 7. Showing how they make a Mock at Sin, deny God, and overthrow all
Religion. Their Design being to Debauch Mankind, wherein they, as a Judgment
from God upon us, have succeeded pretty well, but speedy Judgment attends its
Promoters.

10 Famous Master Rich's Absence supplied by a KEY to his Sort-hand-TABLE,
entitled The PENS Dexterity, Allowed and Approved by both Universities. Fully
discovering the whole Art to the Meanest Capacity, in that Method he Taught his
Scholars, with the reserved Rules in their proper Places: by T. Dawks, a
quandam Scholar of his; the like never publicly discovered before; all Books
and sheets relating to this Hand has been Abuses to the Public, and the Buyers
of them much deceived, for the Table alone was never designed by Mr. Rich to
teach the whole ART, but to bring Scholars to him: And for the Truth of what I
say, as well in relation to this K^^, as to other spurious Books, I refer my
self to Mr. Rich's Scholars, as fittest Judges, knowing not where else to
appeal. Also I have added since it came to my hand (besides the Key, to
distinguish this from all falls Tables) Directions concerning the place of
Vowels, which he gave me in writing among the private Rules. Wherefore, all old
Tables without the Key are false ones, beware of them. These true ones are sold
by T. Basset, at the George by S. Dunstans, Church in Fleetstreet: by Fr. Smith
at the Elephant by the Exchange in Cornhil.

11. Magnalia Naturae. The Philosophers Stone, Exposed to public Sight and
Sale. Being an Account how Wenceslaus Seilerus, at the Emperors Court, in
Vienna, came by, and made ^way with great quantities thereof. Attested by the
Emperor himself, by Count Wa^lestein his late Resident here: and by Dr. Becher
a Commissioner for the Examen of this particular Affair.

12. Dr. Salmons Soul of Astrology.

13. His Synopsis Medicinae will speedily be published.


