A Congratulation TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY, UPON HIS Safe Arrival and happy
Restoration TO HIS Three Kingdoms, MAY 29th, being his Birthday, and our Year
of JUBILEE, 1660.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1661.

A CONGRATULATION TO His Sacred Majesty, UPON His safe Arrival, and happy
Restoration to his Three Kingdoms.
AMongst the Giant Wits of these ripe times,
My Pigmy Muse creeps in, to bring her Rimes;
An humble Present, to that Sacred King
Regards the Heart more then the Offering.
At our bright Northern Blazing Star's approach,
The Sea his Horse was, and a Ship his Coach:
To bear so rich a burden, Waves did dance,
And (swelled with humble pride) strove to advance
Their heads to kiss his Hand; the Fish did play,
And leap for joy, making it Holy Day,
Dancing Levoltoes to the whistling Wind,
Which then conspired them Music for to find:
And (which is wonderful indeed) they say,
A Regiment of Water Nymphs, that day,
Mere Maids, per se, came up in shoals, to sing
A Maiden Caroll to our Virgin King.
Thousands of Dolphins Crowned (but none from France)
With Streamers Honi soit qui mal y pense,
Rode waiters by; the Whales brought up the Rear,
And was resolved to have a Frolic there.
Neptune resigned his Trident, and did swear,
'Twas his by right who was three Kingdoms Heir.
No sooner landed, and Devotions past,
But Canons (to discharge their Duties) haste,
And give inteligence from Port to Port,
Speaking his Welcome in a loud Report:
The Bonefires gild each Hill, to whose bright shine,
The Moon grew pale, and did her beams resign.
Quakers grew Lunatic, to see such Fire,
And thought the World should now in flames expire.
The Bells did ring men by the Ears, and say,
It was Great Britain's general Holy Day.
See how his Loyal Peers, and Gentry, throng
To gild his way, as he does march along,
CHARLES in his Glory, with his sparkling Train,
Outfac'd the Sun, who went to bed again.
Vollies of Acclamations, peals of Joy,
(Which sent to Heaven on an Embassy)
Returned this Answer to their Loud Request,
Vive le Roy, be he for ever blessed.
To which his Subjects cried Amen so loud,
'Twas like a Clap of Thunder from a Cloud.
Blessed are his Kingdoms now, in this one Vote,
O may they n'ere divide, nor change their Note.
Women then lost their Tongues, Men's Arms were thrown
Quite out of joint for Joy, yet no harm done.
Some lost their Heads, which were next morning found,
And some had Legs could stand upon no ground.
The May-poles stood to it bravely, all the way,
Crowned all with Garlands of Good Will, that day.
Phanaticks said the World was drunk, I think
It was indeed with Joy, but not with Drink.
The Earth was dry as dust, with which some say
Gallants were powdered to some tune that day.
The Zealots often miscarry, there are some
Say, they were fowl ore'seen, to let him come.
Ride on, Great CHARLES, Triumphant, whose rare Arts,
By killing Foes with Kindness, gains their Hearts:
Sure there is Magic in thy Name, or Thee,
Pardon, (Great Sir) I Will no Familiar be,
From whence does flow such powerful Influence,
That all Rebellion is banished hence:
No Subject has the Evil, none diseased,
But with Your touch is Cured, and pain appeased:
All Hail to Englands Monarch, may I see
Thy self reflexed, and Posterity
Provided for by You; a Royal Race,
To Rule these Kingdoms, with a God-like grace.
Which is a debt You owe: Then World adieu,
But I despair of seeing one like You;
From whose bright presence Majesty does rise,
And like the Sun enlighten all our Eyes.
Let every Cobblers Wife a Diamond wear,
And Pearls be hanged in every common Ear:
We have the Indies now, brought home, in Thee
All Treasures, and all Sweets, there hyved Be:
The Worlds our Storehouse now, and we have all
That can be wished; our Life's a Festival.
Our days all Halcyon, the time is come,
To bid our Golden Fleece a Welcome home:
Thrice Welcome, Royal Sir, our Sovereign Cure;
What Heaven is Ease! to those long pains endure?
William Pestell.


