TO THE PRINCE OF VENICE AND All his NOBLES: Which was Delivered for Him in His
PALACE, and Received by Him in His COUNCIL CHAMGER.

Being A VISITATION and WARNING of that CITY.

Which also may serve unto ENGLAND, and all Nations, called Christian Nations.

Written by the Servant of the Lord, JOHN.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

TO THE PRINCE OF VENICE, etc.
FRIEND,
I Have many things to say unto the Rulers, Prophets, Priests and People of the
City VENICE, but yet you are not able to bear them: You being yet in the Nature
and Ground in which Amaziah the Priest of Bethel was, in the days of the
Prophet Amos; Read Amos 7.10. etc. And are not come to the Charity which Paul
wrote of, which bears all things, believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.
hops all things, and endures all things.

But whether you will hear, bear, or forbear, this is the Word of the LORD GOD
to you all.

The LORD of Hosts has a Controversy with the whole Earth, with whom he is
arisen to plead, even with all sinful Flesh, upon the face of the Earth, which
have corrupted their ways before the Lord.

Behold, the mighty Day of the Lord GOD is at hand, wherein the LORD will Plead
with all Flesh, and enter into Judgment with all Flesh, and execute Judgment
by Sword and Vengeance, with Plague; and fulfill his Wrath by Famine and Fire,
until he sweeps the Land, as with a Beesom of Destruction; and that it be
cleansed of evildoers.

Behold, Overturn comes, and Overturn follows until the Last Overture be
fulfilled, and He Come whose right it is to Reign, and the LORD Christ set up
his Everlasting Kingdom, whose Dominion shall never have end: With whom no
hypocrite, lip-worshipper, nor sinner, shall have an inheritance of Life, but
shall be cut off for ever from the presence of the Lord, and separated unto
perpetual Woe and Misery, to be held in the lake of fire and sulphur, with the
blackness of the chains of darkness, under the fiery Indignation and wra^^ the
Lord God; and therein to be swallowed up alive, and to remain beyond the
measure of all times.

Think of this you Whoremongers, Whores and Harlots, you Drunkards, Gluttons,
Proud, Covetous, cursed Swearers and Liars, Cheaters and Defrauders, Revellers,
Sporters, Gamsters; you that spend your precious time in Vanity, wherein yet
GOD has spared you to Repent. In your abominable unclean Lusts, Vanity and
Wantonness; you Envious-hearts, that cannot speak out of Crookedness and
Frowardness; GOD has a treasure of Vengeance, seven Vials full of Wrath, the
Wrath of the Lamb whose Life in your Sodom, is day by day, throughout the
number of your days slaughtered in your streets.

Think of Sodom, and call to mind the end of Gomorrah, for now at this time the
Lord warnes you, even as he visited them Cities; Prepare, prepare therefore to
meet the LORD by true and unfeigned Repentance, if happily the Lord may spare
you, and turn away the fierceness of his Wrath, which looks toward you.
Leave off your flattering-speeches, and Titles one to another, and let every
one speak the plainness of his heart and truth to his Neighbor: Amend all your
ways and flatter not your selves, nor deceive your souls, with saying that you
are of the Church of Rome: For many shall say Lord, but not enter; and the Jews
called Abraham their Father, yet wanted his Faith; But forsake your cursed
speeches and Oaths, and Adulteries, and Whordoms, and Drunkenness, and all
Idolatries and Enchantments, and Sorceries; cast from you the cords of vanity,
and so turn to the Lord, and then the Lord will turn to you: Or else GOD has
spoken in his holiness that he will visit you with his Vengeance, because of
your unrighteousness and ungodliness; and although you may now, shut your ears
against your burden, and laugh and mock at God's Messengers, and afflict and
punish them which cry against your loathsome abominations, which stink in the
nostrils of God, and his Saints, and is an abhorring unto modesty; yea though
you may but gainsay our voice; It is because we cry against your sins, and for
none other cause, but because we cry against all sin, and reprove Iniquity in
the gap: Yet be it known unto you, that GOD sent unto Babylon her burden, Isa.
13.1. and unto Moab his burden, Isa. 15.1. And unto Damascus her burden, Isa.
17.1. And unto Egypt, Isa. 19.1. And unto the Desert, Isa. 21.1. And unto Tire,
Isa. 23.1. And unto the South, Isa. 30.6. And unto Niniveh her burden. Nahum
1.1.
And unto Dumah, Isa. 21.11. And unto Arabia, Isa. 21.13. And unto the Valley
of Vision, her burden, Isa. 22.1. And it came to pass that those things which
were once the Prophet's burden for them, God laid every one's burden upon their
own back, and made them all to bear their own burden; even as also from the
Lord God, I say unto you, GOD will make you bear your own burden, even for your
own sin, which is grievous, whose burden also will be grievous in the day
whereof you shall say each one to his neighbor, and to his acquaintance, even
as Cain said, Genesis 4.13.
Our burden and punishment is greater than we can bear. Remember you are warned
in the day of the Lord's pity; Repent and turn from your sins, for the Lord
God laughs at your Confessors and Confessions, whilst you and they are still
following on in sin, heaping sin upon sin, drawing Iniquity with cords of
vanity, and sin as it were with cart-ropes: Else in God's day of Vengeance,
Isa. 5.18.
you shall remember that I did not run before I was sent, that God might visit
you with warning, even as Niniveh was by Jonah, which then repented. Prize your
time, for this is the word of the Lord to you all, therefore whilst you have
time Repent.

And thou the PRINCE of Venice, and the rest of the Nobles; Arise from your
Throne, put on mourning in the inward parts, and proclaim this in the City,
Jonah 3.5, 6.
for my MESSAGE is unto you, and I clear my self unto you; Let the KING of
Niniveh be your Example, and clear your selves to the People of all their blood.

I am come to make blind those which say they see, and to turn from the
darkness, those which are blind to the LIGHT, that they may see. I am not come
with the inticing-words of man's Wisdom, neither in the excellency of Speech to
man's Wisdom, nor in the deceivableness of vain Philosophy, but in the
plainness of the demonstration of the Truth, in the Power of GOD unto that of
God in all, but hid and sealed out of sight from the unclean and vulterous in
all the World; I am the Light of the World (says Christ) which lights every
man that comes into the World Says John, John 8.12. John 1.9.
who was a witness of him that was, and I do tell you of the same that is, and
is to come. The little Stone cut out of the Mountains without a hand, which
smites at the feet of the great Image of the Earth, whose head is gold, the
body and members, part silver, part brass, part iron, and part iron mixed with
clay; Dan. 2.32, 33.
Until all the Images and Image-makers of the Earth be confounded before the
LORD, and the great Image of the whole Earth, become like the chafe of the
summer-threshing-floors, and the wind carry them away, that no place be found
for them, and the little Stone which smites the Image become a great Mountain,
and fill the whole Earth.

For now is the Lord God of Heaven, and Earth about to set up his own Kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other
People, but it shall break in pieces and consume all other Kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever.

I am the Light of the World [saith the Lord of the Kingdom] he that believes
in me shall not abide in darkness, but have the Light of Life. The Trumpet of
the Lord has sounded and is sounding, and many that are dead in Christ have
heard the voice, and are already risen out of the grave, and have appeared at
the Judgment of the Lord of the whole Earth, who comes quickly to Judge all
the Inhabitants thereof, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.
both quick and dead. And now are the words of Paul fulfilled: We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the last trump, for the trump shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible. John 8.51.
And furthermore, He that now shall keep the words of Him who is the Light of
the World, shall never see Death. All this comes and is come according to the
Everlasting purpose of the glory of the LORD, and that men may no more make a
talk of the Scriptures, but that they may be all fulfilled.

Awake, awake therefore you that slumber in your confessions, and yet are
asleep in your sins; awake to the turning from your sins, that ye also may hear
the voice of the trump of GOD, and the joyful voice of the shout from Heaven
with Him, who comes in the glory of his brightness, clothed in white, whom no
flesh can see and live. Awake, awake to the Judgment, whilst the day springs
from on high, and visits you. For of a Truth whether you will hear or
forbear, the LORD GOD comes who has shown signs in the Heaven, in the
Firmament above the Earth, and darkened the Sun at his Word, and turned the
Moon into blood, even whilst the Nations were asleep, and showed it to the
thousands which he has gathered from Sea to Sea, and from the Islands in the
Sea; and showed his Wonders unto them fire and pillars of smoke, and blood, and
vapors, whereof I am a witness, for the LORD GOD of Heaven and Earth; who am
of him sent, to declare his mighty day which is at hand, to the Inhabitants of
the Earth. A warning therefore to the World whilst you have time, Repent, lest
he who comes as a thief in the night, find you in the cursed nature of
iniquity, and you be judged with the condemned for ever unto wrath: and think
you of the perverseness of that faithless generation, in the days of Noah, who
continued eating and drinking, in the strength of their lusts, and would not
take warning, until the Flood came and made an utter destruction of them all;
for as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be:
Matthew. 24.37.
So if You perish in your sins, and the People for their sins, the blood be
upon Your own heads henceforth and for ever. Remember you were warned to Repent.

Now the LORD is coming to blind the World, which do say that they see, and to
bring to nothing their wisdom, and to confound all the Will-worships of all the
sons of men upon the face of the Earth; who can Sing, and Preach, and Speak,
and Pray in their own time, and in their own wills, that is to say, when they
will, even in the same will wherewith they Swear, Col. 3.5 1 John 3.15. Psalm.
109.7. John 4.23. Romans 8.4.
and Lie, or are Proud, or Covetous, which is Idolatry; or Envious, which is
Murder. All these things in the Will and Time of Man, both in Priest and People
being but one, as says the Scripture, Let his prayer become sin; and again,
says Christ, God hears not sinners, for the Worship of God is in Truth and
in Spirit; such Worshippers the Father seeks to Worship him, such as walk not
after the Flesh; in whom the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled, who walk
after the Spirit, in the Spirit. Now who are in the Spirit, and led by the
Spirit, into all Truth, in the true knowledge and understanding of the
mysteries of Truth, which is hid from those which walk after the flesh in sin,
and are sinners, walking against the Life of the Spirit, which leads the true
Worshippers of GOD in the Spirit out of all sin into all truth. John 16.13.
By which Spirit of Truth, the Scriptures were spoken forth, and the Prophecies
of the Prophets were spoken forth as Parables, as says the Prophet. The Vision
of all is become unto you, Isa. 29.11, 12.
as a book that is sealed; which men deliver to one that is learned; saying,
Read this I pray thee; and he says, I cannot, for it is sealed. And again the
book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this I pray thee;
and he says, I am not learned. So that it is hid from both the learned, and
the unlearned, being not in the life of the Spirit by which it was written and
given forth: and Christ spoke not any thing to the World, but what he spoke in
Parables. Matthew. 13.34. 2 Cor. 4.3. 1 Pet. 3.19.
And if our Gospel be hid, it is hid from them that are lost, (says Paul) who
live in their sins, against the life of the Spirit, by which the Gospel came,
and was preached to the Spirits in Prison, to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.

And now if the World knows not how to try their own Spirits, let me show them
a little by asking a few Questions according to the Scriptures, which by the
Spirit of Truth and Understanding were given forth; which if you have the
Spirit, and do walk according to the Truth of the Scriptures, by the Spirit of
Truth, of Wisdom, and right Understanding, then with the Life of the Spirit you
will be able rightly to answer them all; else you will know of what Spirit you
are, as it is more necessary, that the World should know of what Spirit they
are, then to imagine that they worship in the Spirit, whilst yet they are in
their sins, and as men in the flesh, walking and living in the lust and liberty
of the flesh.

Query.
1. What is that Line which God stretches over the Earth to measure the Earth
withal?

2. What is that Behemoth which God made with Job? and how does he eat grass
as an Ox? and although God made him with Job, whether did Job know him until
God discovered him to Job? And whether has God made him with you, yea or nay?

3. What are those Chains, wherewith CHRIST shall bind the KINGS of the Earth?
and what are those Fetters of Iron in which also their NOBLES shall be bound?

4. What is that Iron Rod, with which He shall rule the Nations, and dash the
wicked in pieces as a Potters vessel?

5. What is that Seal, with which He seals the mouth of the Pit of darkness?

6. What is the Seal and Inscription thereof, wherewith the number of the
Lord's People are sealed?

7. What is the Seal and Mark of the Beast, and his Number?

8. What is that Eye of Discerning which gives the sight of reading the
Inscription of every Seal in the foreheads of all, to the understanding of what
number they are? and have you that Eye yea or nay?

9. When came in the Apostasy? and when was the discovery and Revelation of the
man of sin, and spirit of Antichrist which wrought in a mystery? and how is he
destroyed by the brightness of the coming of Christ? Read 2 These. 2.7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12. and tell me, Whether any man in particular, or any professing
People in general, are yet redeemed from under the power of the working of the
spirit of Antichrist, who remain in the first nature, bringing forth the fruits
of Transgression, yea or nay?

10. Whether is there a Spot in Christ's Church? and Answer me plainly,
Whether is there any one sinner, a member of Christ's Church upon Earth, yea
or nay?

11. What is the Law of Life and Liberty of the Saints, which keep themselves
in the Liberty, free from sin and transgression, which gendreth to Bondage, a
measure of which is given to all; and to as many also which have not the
Letter, by which also they shall be judged, as they shall who have the Letter,
and yet walk contrary to the Letter of the Scriptures?

12. What is the Plummet unto which God seteth Judgment, that he may fill the
Earth with Judgment, and the wicked with Condemnation?

13. What were those Battering Rams which God caused Ezekiel to place against
the Walls of Jerusalem round about? and whether do they now Smite against
Jerusalem, or Batter against the Walls of Mystery Babylon, yea or nay?

14. What are those Thorns and Briars which the wicked Princes of the Earth
shall set in the gap, and set in Battle against the Lord, which the fire of the
Lord God shall consume, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled?

15. What is the Battle of the Lamb, and who are His Followers? and whether
any are his true Followers, but such as are able to hear all things, and bear
all things in the true season? and whether are any now of the true Church,
which was in Rome in Paul's days, but such as are ready to try all things, and
hold fast that which is good, yea or nay?

16. Whether are You of that Church which are Proud, Envious, or Persecutors,
which are Murderers in their hearts, yea or nay?

17. Whether is not all Sin of the Devil, and he that commits Sin of the
Devil? and is there any other spirit which Persecutes or envies the Just now,
but that spirit which was Envious in the beginning, and slew Abel the Just
then, because God accepted him, and which also killed the holy Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles, yea or nay?

18. Whether is there more than One Intercessor and Mediator between GOD and
Man, and who is it?

19. By what Means shall a Young Man cleanse his VVayes?

20. Is there one among all the Lip-professors of GOD in all the World, which
walks in the clean way, either Prophet, Priest, or other, in which no sinner
can walk, yea or nay?

21. Shall not I know the Tree by his Fruits, and all Professors by their
Works, yea or nay?

22. Whether are not Christians, so called, and Heathens, Turks and Jews,
notwithstanding the diversities of their Confessions and Professions of Words,
being all in sin and sinners, and transgressors, one in the Substance, and so
in Unity, in one Ground and Nature, under the Curse and Wrath of GOD, yea or
nay?

23. Who are the People Prophesied of, should come, of a Deeper Speech than
you can perceive, of a Stammering Tongue than you can Understand? Isa. 33.19.

24. Let me ask the Prophets, Priests and wise Men of the City of VENICE, and
let a Search run through the Land of ITTALY, to find out him which can show the
Princes thereof the true Interpretation of my Vision, which is not a Dream, as
the Voice of a Dreamer, but the Vision of the Lord, concerning the Times at
hand; and prove you if their Wisdom can satisfy your hearts touching this
matter?

In my Vision I saw Seven Trees planted in Seven places, and the ground of Six
of them where they grew was of one Nature, and each Tree had his fence about
him, and I saw many Workmen laboring to raise the Defense higher, they began
to Labor when it was a little Light, and the Night shortly overtook them all,
that they could not Work any longer, so that they saw not the good of the Work
of their hands, and therefore they sat down, and slept in sorrow.

And it came to pass that there arose a Star, which while the Workmen slumbred,
it showed me, that the first Tree was full of Moss, and withered without
shooting a Leaf, and so waxed rotren: And I heard one say, Yet
notwithstanding, let it stand for a season, until a fire be kindled.

The Second sprouted out some certain Leaves, and it grew into Two Bodies, from
One Root, the one was more green and fresh in color than the other: And it
came to pass, that a Wind blew, and they dashed each other; but the green part
stood longest, although her leaves fell therewith, and her Body waxed dry at
the Root.

The Third prospered for a little season, but much heat parched the Branches
thereof, and that also decayed.

The Fourth had a time of Prosperity, but the Winter-season blew cold Winds
over her Boughs, insomuch that the Rind pilled away, so that the Body was left
naked, and it withered standing.

The Fifth grew by a pleasant Brook, and the Waters thereof refreshed her Root,
but the Ground being not good to retain the moisture, although that she budded
and blossomed, yet it came to pass that a Wind from the North gently blew over
it, and many of the blossoms were blasted, and the rest that remained,
although they came toward the goodness of Fruit, yet afterward, there came a
rushing Wind from the rising of the Sun, and they all fell in an untimely
season.

The Sixth grew mightily, more tall and lofty than all the other five, and was
the most of all beautified with the largest Leaves, and delightful-coloured
blossoms, which covered her large quick-sprouting-boughs, but immediately her
Root became a nurse of Rottenness.

And I saw an Ax blade in the hand of a certain Shepherd, and lo, He looked
over all the Six, and said, This is because of their unfruitfulness; and yet a
sorer thing must come to pass. And he turned to the Seventh Tree, which was
planted in a low Valley unploughed, and behold her Body bowed, and she stooped
unto Him that had the Ax blade in his right hand; and He took a member of that
Tree, without hurt to the Body, and he made thereof a Helve for the Ax, and
fastened it thereto; and he turned again toward the Sixth Tree, and smote it,
that it fell to the ground; and so He passed to the Fences of all the other
Five first, and made breaches upon them, that they may all become utterly a
Desolation for ever.

And he again said, Even so must it be unto many Oaks, and Cedars, and wild
Apple Trees in the Woods and Wilderness of the Forests of the Regions of the
Earth.

And again he returned to the Seventh Tree, and dug about it, and pruned it,
and it bare Fruit to his pleasure.

And he again uttered his Word and said, This is to spread, and I will dig a
Well by her, and make her Field pleasant, and a refreshing River shall compass
her Banks; that my Flocks which I have in secret places may openly feed as one
Herd within the compass of this Fence which I have framed, and will build it
round about, that no Thief may reach to taste of her Fruit. And I saw it and
blessed the LORD, and magnified the NAME of the most High GOD.

All that have received the key of Knowledge of the Oracles of GOD they can
Read me, and Understand me, and Receive me, and know that I am of GOD; who
being of GOD do know that the whole World lies in wickedness.

Now a wise Prince and wise Rulers, and wise Judges, and wise Priests, and wise
People, such as minister to the glory of the LORD, they will not judge of any
thing before the true time. But Fools are rash and perverse, and froward, and
heady, and furious; such cannot judge aright for GOD: [being not in the measure
of GOD, which is meek, humble and patient, which is the true eye to see all
things justly weighed, in the balance of Equitie] and therefore cannot measure
a cause aright, and so not judge with the right Judgment; for it wants to be
set up within to destroy the heady and the rash, and fierce, and proud, and
envious within; and so the measure without is scant, and wants of the truth,
because it is first scant within and judges not evil within. So it was with
Christ; sinners judged Him who was without sin, that was and is the unjust
Judgment, then a Nation is full of sin, and it haleth blood upon it wilfully:
but yet the LORD GOD will judge for all, and the Nations shall know that he is
Judge of Heaven and Earth.

Therefore to the Light, which is God's measure in you all, turn your minds;
which Light in all your Consciences, shows you and will show you all the evil,
that ever you have done in the body; which if you love it, and follow it, will
judge you all; and so as you love the judgment thereof, you will come to judge
for GOD: The evil eye will be cast out, and the measure will be single within,
to judge all in truth and equity without; therefore let all your Laws be
according to that of GOD in the Conscience: and this is the Word of the LORD,
in the Nations of the Earth.

Oh VENICE! Why were thy Princes against the Execution of GOD'S Judgments upon
the heads of thine Inhabitants: If plagues be their due, because of their
iniquities, think thou that that thing is equal in GOD'S sight, which is
made as a fence against GOD? Or, think thou in righteousness that it is
better to keep plague out of thy City, which can in a moment break over thy
Walls, than to cleanse the City of Whordoms, Adulteries, Oaths, cursed
Speeches, Drunkenness, Pride, Idolatry, Envy and Murders, by the just Execution
of true Judgment in thy City: But what now if GOD willing to show his wrath
upon the unclean vessels of Wrath, visits thee with Plague within thy City, and
make thy bulwark, which thou made against GOD, which is a fence binding unto
Idleness, wherein mischief is hatched without thy City, to be put in Practice
in thy City. I say what if GOD make them Walls, which thou have built against
GOD, the works of thine own hand, the burden of thine own back, Bulwarks and a
fence to fight against thee within thy Walls? Will not Judgment be Just then
in thine own sight?

Look upon thy Lazzarette and remember thou were told that if thou pullest down
Product, and repentest and amendest thy ways, GOD will preserve in thee the
longer a People, and in Judgment thou shall remember this.

Concerning Iniquity in the heart, and the Fruits of the Cursed Tongue.
GOD is coming to judge all Iniquity in the heart, and will rip open every
heart, and show every man the deceitfulness of his heart: No Iniquity is hid
from GOD, nor deceitful word or action, so as that He sees it not; GOD, who is
the searcher of all hearts, sees the foolishness and deceitfulness, and the
Iniquity in the hearts of men, which flatter one another with vain Titles,
which neither profits Body nor Soul, saying one to another, I am your servant,
Sir, Your humble servant, Sir; Your servants servant, Sir; You are my Lord and
Master, I am your Slave, Sir. GOD sees the Iniquity, and comes to judge the
Iniquity which is in the heart, the heart not thinking what the tongue
speaks; Jude 16
but, speaks words of praise, and flattering words and titles to men's faces,
and have men's Persons in admiration before their faces, because of advantage,
that is the Iniquity in the heart; and when they have turned their backs, and
have not the end which the Iniquity in the heart reached after, then they will
say concerning the persons whom they did flatter to their faces with titles of
vain praise, and vain honor, saying, that Devil did this, and that Devil did
that, and that Accursed did the other thing. Now if the Accursed One in them,
which works the Iniquity in them, did not blind their hearts, then they would
see and know, that wherein they did flatter, they did but flatter with the
Devil, which they did confess was the Devil: And when they said, I am your
servant, Sir, and I am your slave Sir, You are my Lord, Sir; they did but give
testimony that they are servants of the Devil, and the slaves of the Devil,
Luke, 19.22.
and the Devil is their Lord. And thus said Christ unto the unprofitable
servant, even as these are unprofitable servants, Out of thine own mouth thou
art judged; and so, Out of your Own mouths you are judged: Romans 2.2.
And this is the Judgment which is of GOD, which is according to Truth, which
that of GOD in all your Consciences sets to seal, and shall set to seal the
Truth of GOD's Judgments. Now such men which by their own Confessions, who out
of their own mouths are judged, which the Light in their Consciences witness,
that they are the servants of the Devil, and the slaves of the Devil, and the
Devil is their Lord: they will go to a Priest, which Priest says he is the
servant of God, and they will confess to him some of their wickedness, and the
Priest will judge of it.

Now I will tell you what Paul says to such a Priest, Romans 14.4.
What have thou to do to judge another man's servant? to his own master he
stands or falls. So this I find the People in the Iniquity, and the Priest
in the Iniquity, each one partaking of each others Iniquity.

Again, There are those which do say, they are Gentlemen, and say, such a one
is a Gentleman, and such a one is a Gentleman, and such a one is a gallant
Gentlewoman, which are well bred; he is a very understanding man, he can
complement well, he is a man that can sing well, and among such as are his
Equals he is very Noble, and will keep company and drink and be merry, and
knows very well how to behave himself amongst Gentlemen in all manner of good
behavior and courteous salutation: And as for that Lady, she can sing well,
and play well upon Music, and she knows how to behave her self well toward
Gentlemen, in bowing the body, and speaking pleasant words. But now, if I were
to ask a wise man, Of what Kingdom is all this? Is it of the Kingdom of GOD
which is come down, and is coming down among men? or is it the Devil's kingdom,
which is the ground of deceit in the hearts of men? Christ said, Be not you
called of men Masters; Matthew. 23.7, 8, 10
nor be not you called of men, Lord; for one is your Master, and one is your
Lord, which is in Heaven. Christ did never teach Lying, nor Pride, nor Vanity,
nor Lust, nor no such evil thing, but his Life bore witness against them; for
he said, My Kingdom is not of this World; if it were, Joh. 18.36.
then would my Disciples have fought. Now hereby I know that all these who are
in the forementioned Lust, Vanity, Lies, Flattering and Deceit, in their
words, works, carriages and behaviors, that they are not of Christ's Kingdom,
for being vain in their minds, and proud in their hearts, after that they have
flattered, and complemented one with another, when a matter or cause comes in
competition between them to have the Superiority, and Mastery, and the most of
the goods, riches and glory of the kingdom of this World, they fall into
contention, strifes, debates, quarrellings and fighting one with another,
sometimes to the slaying and murdering one of another. Now these are they which
the World call Gentlemen. Oh! utter shame to all the World! If they came but to
see their own Ignorance in this matter; Christ said, Learn of me, for I am Meek
and Lowly: Matthew. 11.29.
And He forbad His Disciples, which learned Meekness of Him, and Lowliness of
Him, to be one with the World, in that which they feigned as their lowliness,
and which the World do now say is their lowliness and humbleness, Matthew. 23.5,
6, 7, 14. Luke 6.26.
in salutation. Be not you as the hypocrites are, that love greetings, and
salutations in the Marketplaces, and love the uppermost Rooms at feasts, and
that love to pray to be seen of men, or to have the praise of men, or to be
well spoken of in the worlds ways. Woe be unto you, when all men shall speak
well of you, says Christ, For those which were in the customs of the World
then, which were vainglorious, and proud, loving the praise of men, and the
flattering-words of men, and to flatter men with words of praise, they were at
enmity with Christ and his Disciples then: Of which disciple-ship Paul bears
his Testimony, exhorting the Brethren, saying, Be not conformable to the things
of this world, Romans 12.2.
but be ye transformed, by the renewing of your minds. And now such as are
called, and do call themselves the Gentlemen in these days, they have done,
and in all places are ready to do, the same things, which the former evil
generation did unto Christ, and the Disciples, and the Brethren, which were
transformed, by the renewing of their minds, to as many which also are now led
out of the vanities of the World, to bear witness against the deceits of the
World, and the Iniquity in the hearts of the sons of men.

Furthermore, those which say they are Gentlemen; Some are Scoffers, that is
Ishmael's brood, and have Envy in their hearts, which are Cain's Brethren; They
will pull off their Hatts to a man's face, and envy him in their hearts, and
mock him behind his back, and will smite, and fight, and quarrel, and yet such
are called Gentlemen, and are said to have good breeding, and good manners,
whilst they have but the breeding of the wicked, and the manners of the
scornful; and this is rottenness, and dirt, and chafe, the dross and
offscouring of the Earth: and when any of them come to know GOD, they shall
know this to be Truth, according to the mind and will of GOD, answering that of
GOD, the Light in all Consciences.

And again, some of your Gentlemen will Lie, and swear to a Lie, in whose
mouths Lying and Swearing is as common talking; and some know how to
complement, to go a whoring, and to be drunk with Whores, and to make
themselves merry upon the beds of Whores, and they dress up themselves in gay
apparel, and perfume their apparel, to come with pleasant smells in the
nostrils of Whores to be accepted in the house and eye of the Whores: And
Whores doing the same, to be accepted of Whore-mongers, to smell sweet in the
nostrils of Whore-mongers; and they paint their faces, and put black spots in
their faces, the Devil's Mark in their faces, that they may be well accepted in
the sight of their Lovers, and that their beauty may be pleasant to the eye,
and their smell sweet in the nostrils of their Lovers. Many of these are your
well-bred Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen; but they are a stink in God's nostrils,
and an abhorring in the eye of the Lord; whom the LORD GOD in his mighty Day,
which is at hand, will make an everlasting abhorring unto all flesh; Your
well-bred Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, which are said to be of great Parentage,
and of great Births, Noblemens Children, their Fathers men of great Estates,
they must be honored, and they must be respected, for they are gallant-bred
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, and are full of good manners; whilst the least part
is not equal in all their members, the heart is not upright before the LORD,
but their bones are full of Rottenness.

And would not this very Generation make a mock of Christ, if Christ should
come to ask of them, What was your Father Adam? Did my Father say, that he was
a Gentleman when he was made in his uprightness? ^or your Mother Eve a
Gentlewoman, as the proud deceitful flesh among you, are titled Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen? What was Abel, Seth and Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Job, Micha, Zechary, and the rest of the
Prophets, were they such Gentlemen as you? Or if Christ should say, was I
reckoned such a Gentleman as you, who was (by such transgressors as you are)
numbered among transgressors? Was Peter, Paul, Matthew, Mark, Luke or John,
Gentlemen, such as you are? If Christ should ask you these things, would not
you laugh at him and mock at him, as the Jews laughed and mocked him upon the
Cross? And now I ask you, which of you is better than they were?

And further, Where did any of the Apostles, or Disciples, or Brethren say one
to another, You are my Lord, Sir, I am your slave Sir; with pulling off of Hats
one to another, and making great bowings one to another? Where do you find that
that was the manner of their salutation and greeting one another, which you
hold in deceit one toward another.

Yet these Gentlemen of your nature, besides that Name, in their cursed nature
will say, We are Christians, and Christ is our Lord and Savior; Mat. 7.21, 22.
But I will tell you what Christ will say to such, yea unto many such as will
say Lord, Lord, In thy Name we have done many miracles, in thy Name we have
cast out Devils, (your Gentlemen are far from that of casting out Devils, and
if the Lord Christ will say to them) Depart you cursed workers of Iniquity, I
know you not, think you, will he say less to your Gentlemen?

Again, you that call Christ, Lord, hear you what the Lord Christ said unto
such as you are, Luke 6.46.
Why call ye me LORD, and do not the things which I say? Now this Christ said,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy mind, and
with all thy soul, and thy neighbor as thy self. Paul witnessed to it, Romans
8.4. John 14.15. John 2.4.
That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. And again says Christ, He that loves me
keeps my Commandments. Unto which John bears Testimony, saying, Whosoever
says he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar. So you are here
brought to proof and trial, whether GOD is your LORD, or the Prince of the
power of darkness (he that was a Liar from the beginning) your principal Head
and Ruler, let that of GOD, the Light in all your Consciences Answer.

Psa. 50.16, 17.
How dare you take my Name in your mouths, says GOD, whilst you hate to be
reformed? This is to you also that take God's Name in vain, when your hearts
are vain and exercised in vanity, and telling vain stories, and speaking about
vain things, GOD will not hold you guiltless that take his Name in vain, and
the Name of Jesus in vain; Exodus 20.7.
yet you would have the Name of Christians because you confess Christ to have
been slain at Jerusalem, but that will not serve you, though also you call him
Lord, whilst you keep not the Commandments of the Lord. For I enquire among you
all, concerning the Lord of Life, whether you know him to be daily crucified in
your streets, which spiritually are called Sodom and Egypt? Revel. 11.8.
Here Christ is but called Lord with that Iniquity which for the love of the
unrighteous Mammon call men Masters, and Lords, and says, I am your Servant
Sir, I am your Slave Sir, whilst that is but a flattering Lie; And here they
flatter others with Lies, and flatter themselves with Lies and in Lies, and are
so vain in their Imaginations, that they would flatter GOD with Lies: But GOD
will make you all to know, that he will not be mocked. Gal. 6.7.
Wherefore I say unto you, that in vain hopes you expect Salvation, whose
pleasure is to persevere in Iniquity, who are bound in the Womb of
Witch-crafts, in the loathsomness of all manner of unrighteousness. If Noah,
Daniel and Job were among you, Ezekiel. 14.14.
their righteousness should but save themselves, and but only Jesus the
Righteousness of GOD intercede for them; or if Paul, Peter and Mary were among
this Generation of loathsome sinners, their righteousness should but only save
themselves, and Jesus the only Intercessor, and Mediator but only Intercede for
them: So wherein you hope to die the death of the Just, and so to receive the
Inheritance of the Just, and live not the life of the Just, I tell you nay; The
Inheritance of the Just will not be yours, who live not the Life of the Just.
Your hope in the end (Remember in vengeance, when you are under wrath, that I
told you before [mark the end] their hope) is the hope of the Hypocrite, and
their trust is as a Spider's-web: Job 8.13, 14. Luke, 16.20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25. Isa. 3.18. to 24.
you that are called Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, who live in your lusts and
pleasures. Read you your Figure as in a Glass; the Scripture concerning the
Rich man and Lazarus; Read the Torment of Dives and mark his portion, and
consider your latter end.

Judah and Jerusalem had a day of warning, whose Inhabitants were adorned with
all manner of bravery and tinkling Ornaments, with chains and bracelets and
ornaments of the legs, and earrings, and rings, and changable suits of
apparel, wimples, and crisping-pins, and glasses, and fine linen, and hoods,
and vails; but the LORD GOD changed the glory of their Liberty, and brought
them down into Captivity. Let their Sufferings be your Example; and remember
when Suffering comes upon you, that you were warned to Repent. And now you that
would know the true adorning, let me tell you what Peter witnesses to be the
true adorning; he says, Let it not be the outward adorning, of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel, but let it be the
hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of
a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.

Now what will you all say for your selves, who in your life are enemies to the
Life, walking contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle Peter?

Deceive not your Souls, if you would choose to dye the death of the Just, to
have the Inheritance of the Just, You must all choose first, to come to the
Light in all your Consciences, which reproves you for all your sins and
wickedness, and following the Light which comes from Christ, and none other
Guide, it will lead you to the Life of the Just, where none other Guide can
lead you, unto Christ the true Light of the World, who is the Shepherd and
Leader of his little Flock unto pleasant Pastures, who are despised and hated
of the wicked sinful World, even as our Lord and Shepherd was before us. But
now is the LORD GOD coming to judge for his own, whose we are, and not our own.

The Ground of Idolatry in the Heart.
NOw I would show you the Ground in which an Idol is made, and in which
Idolatry is brought forth.

Exodus 32.1, 4.
Whilst Moses was in the Mount, and out of the Camp, the Children of Israel
consulted together, and with Aaron the Priest, and made a Calf, and Worshipped
it.

Ezekiel. 40.14.
As for the Heathen in these days, they have the Images of things visibly
before them, and do bow their heads unto them; but as for the house of Israel
they have set up their Idols in their hearts.

Now come you and examine all your hearts, and let that of God in you answer
me: Paul the Apostle said, Col. 3.5
Covetousness is Idolatry: In that heart which is covetous, the Image of
Caesar, the Image of the Prince of the Nation, his Superscription, Mark and
Stamp, in the Gold, Silver and Brass, that is the god which he serves, that is
the Idol in his heart, the love of the Mammon is planted in his heart. Now that
heart Christ says cannot serve GOD, because the unrighteous Mammon is master
in the heart, (Matthew. 6.24.) master of the mind, master of the affection, and
master of the secret thoughts, and there is no spirit to serve GOD; for the
mind is in the Mammon, and it cannot serve GOD.

Again, Such as are proud, having great Possessions in the Earth and go
vain-gloriously in gay Apparel, which seek for the honor which comes from
man, and which love to be called Master and Lord, and to be said unto, I am
your servant Sir, and, I am your slave Sir; such are Unbelievers says Christ,
Joh. 5.44.
which seek honor one from another; they have not Faith, for they are not
faithful in their life, in obedience to Christ's Words, who says, Be not you
called of men Masters; for one is your Lord, Matthew. 23.8, 10.
which is in Heaven. Now their glory in the flesh, is the Idol set up in their
hearts; here GOD is dishonored by that cursed Image in the heart, and Idol of
vainglory in the heart: for the Scriptures say, All Glory belongs to GOD. So
when the heart lusts after any Glory, and sets up Glory in his mind, that is
a strange god, and that strange god has the glory, and not the True GOD; that
is one of the gods of the Earth, which will not save, but shall be destroyed,
with the worshipper of the false god.

Again, Some are Drunkards, others Gluttons, Whoremongers, Whores and Thieves;
I would have all these also to know the Image and Idol which is set up in their
hearts, and the fallen god which they worship with their affections, and all
their hearts, which the true Eternal GOD will destroy: Phil. 5.19.
Lust and pleasure is their god, as the Apostle says, Whose belly is their
god, who mind earthly things. But whilst their hearts and affections take
pleasure in the things of the flesh, and so worship the Idol and false god in
their hearts with the love of their hearts, (which part [that is to say, the
whole heart] the True GOD requires) they are but fatting themselves to be fit
for destruction, which shall surely overtake them, with the sore displeasure of
the True GOD.

Again, Others love to see the Pictures of their Friends and Kindred and
Children, and the Pictures of the Patriarchs and Apostles, and Christ and Mary;
and the Pictures of Wild-Beasts of the Field, and the Tame Beasts of the Field,
and the Fowls of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea, and the Creeping-things of
the Earth; and so that eye which takes pleasure in the sight of these Pictures,
lets in the love of them into the heart, and so unto many (mine eye has seen
in the Counsel of GOD,) these things have been a double Image, and a double
Idol; as the Image and Idol of the Heathen, and the Image and Idol of Israel,
an Image and an Idol without, which they have bowed unto, and kissed upon a
piece of Board, or against a Wall, and upon a piece of Paper, or cut out of an
entire body of Wood: GOD's Vengeance and Plagues and Indignation will smite the
hearts of all such Idol-worshippers, which worship Images and Pictures without,
and let in the love of these things into their hearts, then it becomes the god
of the heart also, here GOD is not known among such to be all in all; for where
an Image or an Idol, a false god within or without stands, the True GOD is
nothing at all to them, or in them, until He shall be known to them all, in
Vengeance and Fury against them all.

Now I would show you further, that those things may be made an Idol and an
Image in the heart, which GOD once commanded; To which end Jeremiah spoke unto
the House of Judah, saying, Jer. 7.4
Trust you not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of
the Lord, The Temple of the Lord are these, when he was sent to cry against the
Temple, which GOD once commanded to be built, that His Name might be sanctified
therein. Then the Temple was all glorious within, as I am speaking after the
manner of men without: as it was also glorious within in the Substance, whilst
the Jews were kept to within where the Substance was known; but when an Eye was
open in them, to let in the glory of the Temple without, then they were turned
from the glory of the Temple in the Substance, and so GOD forsook their Temple.

2 Cor. 6 16, 19.
Now says Paul, Your Body is the Temple of the living GOD; and he that now
shall set up Love and not the Light which lights every man that comes into
the World, which is CHRIST the Love, which comes from GOD: GOD is Love, 1 John
4.16. 1 John 1.5.
and GOD is Light; So he that sets up another Love than the Light, and has in
his heart another Love than the Light, he sets up a false god, and worships an
Image, and is an Idolater in the substance, though his love be to make long
Prayers, or to read the Scriptures, or to hear Sermons, or to sing Psalms, or
to give Alms, and all his Goods to the Poor, and his Body to be burnt, being
out of the Light which reproves all sin in the Conscience, and reproves all
false love in the Conscience, Matthew. 6.5.
the love of that which would be seen of men, or have praise of men; that which
leads to be spoken well of men, for his words or for his works, or for his
Religion, that is the false love, in the hearts of the Heathen and professing
Christians; That is their false god, even the love which is not of the True
GOD, who is Love, and who is Light; for the Light in all your Consciences upon
a due search of all your hearts, will reprove it.

And again, Genesis 6.5
Where the Imagination of the heart of man rules, which is only evil
continually; I say, where the Imagination works in Jew or Gentile, to walk
according to the Law, or the Gospel, being not in that by which the Law was
given forth, and the Gospel preached, they worship a false god, (that which
their own hearts do imagine to be God,) whilst the True GOD is hid from
Imaginers, the worshippers of strange gods, which their Imaginations do make in
their minds. Now that is the ground of an Idol, and the ground of Idolatry, The
Imagination which blinds the eye, and blinds the heart, Romans 1.28.
and blinds the understanding, altogether concerning the true Knowledge of the
True GOD. For they like not to retain GOD in their knowledge, who like to
retain Imaginations in their minds. Many have heard it said, that GOD is a
Spirit, Joh. 4.24.
and he will be worshipped in Spirit, and do think from that report they have
enough of the knowledge of GOD, and of the True Worship, and yet the World that
thus confess, are diverse in their Worships, being not yet in the Spirit in
which GOD is truly known, and witnessed to be a Spirit, they worship they know
not what, Joh. 4.22.
who are in the flesh, in the lust, nature and deeds of the flesh, which is at
enmity with God, who is a Spirit. Here I find all the World, Jew and Gentile,
Professor and Profane of all Nations in sin, in the flesh, at enmity with GOD
and the Spirit, and with all that walk with GOD, and Worship GOD in Spirit, and
do hate and persecute them; Gal. 4.29.
according to that which Paul said, As then, he that was born after the Flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit; even so it is now [mark] even so
it is now because they know not GOD, which has begotten us into the Spirit,
and therefore they hate the Father, and them whom the Father sends. And this
to all the Idol Worshippers within, and the Idol-worshippers without, in the
World, is the Word of the LORD GOD.

Concerning the strait Way to Life.
IT is not the will of the LORD that always the simple, should be held in a
by-way. Therefore let me declare unto the simple, Isa. 35.8
the strait-way of the Lord, which the way-faring-men, though fools, shall not
err therein. All the World is yet ignorant of that way, being in diverse paths
in the going forth of their Feet, but in the substance and body, their
footsteps lead them, Matthew. 7.13.
to meet all in the one broad wide way of sin and transgression, which leads to
the Pit of Perdition.

This is glad-tidings to the Seed of the captivity which I sound among the sons
of men, The LORD is come and coming, to fulfill the Promise of his Covenant,
which he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophet Jeremiah, (whom GOD sent as a
Child among the Nations with his Word, and to confound the counsels of the
wise, by the Revelation of his Wisdom in Childhood) Behold the days come, Jer.
3.31, 33.
(says the LORD) that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and
with the house of Judah; I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it
in their hearts, and will be their GOD, and they shall be my People. 1 Cor.
10.1, 2, 3, 4.
That was the Law which God gave unto Moses, (who was a Follower of Christ)
which was not written in tables of stone, but engraven upon the table of the
heart.

For this commandment which I give thee this day is not hidden from thee,
neither is it a far off; it is not in heaven, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12; 13, 14.
that thou should say, who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it to us,
that we may hear it and do it? neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou
should say, who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we
may hear it and do it? But the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy Mouth, and
in thy Heart, that thou may do it. Romans 10.8. 2 Pet. 1.19.
And this was the Word of Faith which Paul preached, and the same Word of Faith
which Peter also bore witness to, saying, We have a more sure Word of
Prophecy, whereunto ye do well, if ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines
in a dark Place, until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. Now
all that are not come to this Word of Faith, which is a Light that shines in a
dark Place, they are out of the true Faith of Christ, whose Name is called the
Word of GOD; Who says, Rev. 19.13. John 8.12. Joh. 12.46.
I am the Light of the World, which lights every man, that comes into the
World, says John, 1.9. And Christ the Light of the World; who said, I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man comes unto the Father, but by by me, John
14. v. 6.

This is the Way which for Ages has been hid from the simple, [the Light]
which leads to the Father, who gives Life everlasting to all that love the
Light, and follow, and walk in the Light, wherewith they are lightened, which
tells you in you^ own minds and consciences, that you must not Swear, nor Lie,
nor Steal, nor Covet, nor be Proud, nor Scornful, nor vain in your Words and
Hearts, nor wanton in your Minds, unto uncleanness and lust of the Flesh, nor
Envy any man, which is murder, nor be Drunk, nor Gluttenous, nor to do any
Wickedness.

This is the strait-way, Matthew. 7.14.
and the little narrow way which Christ the Light (who is the Way) spoke of
leads to Life; it is strait and narrow to that Nature, in all flesh living,
which walks in sin, enemies to the strait way of Life: John 16.8.
The Light which convinces the World of sin, if you love it, and follow it,
will lead out of all sin; this is the way which the Prophets prophesied of
should be to the wayfaring-men, though fools, wherein they should not err.

This is trial to all the Worlds ways, of Jew and Gentile upon the face of the
earth: Are they entered in that way in which a Sinner cannot walk?

1 Jo. 3.8. Joh. 3.19.
No Sinner does walk in the Light; for all Sin is of the Devil; And he that
commits Sin is of the Devil; And this is the condemnation of the world; that
Light is come into the world, and men love Darkness rather than Light, because
their deeds are evil.

The Lord God is come to put all Professions in the Balance, and will weigh
them in the Balance of Equity, and that which is found in the vanity of many
large words, and Shows, and likenesses, yet not being in the substance, in the
Righteousness of God, which is Christ the Light; By the substance [which is
the Light] the Lord God, [who is Light] will overturne them all, and by the
breath of his mouth, will blow over all confessions and professions, and those
which make them, and like as untimely leaves they shall fall, Jer. 48.11.
and perish, and rot on the Earth. For behold the Lord God has looked and has
seen, and sees all the World asleep, and like unto Moab settled upon their
lees, which have not been emptyed from vessel to vessel, and the old scent of
their traditions (in whom iniquity is increased by their traditions) remains
in them, and the taste is not changed at all; And now is the Lord of Hosts,
which brought Israel out of Egypt, stretching out his Arm, for the sake of the
Captivate, to break the bonds and loose the captivity; for he has said in his
righteousness, they which have lead into captivity, shall go into captivity,
Rev. 13.10.
and the captivate shall go free.

Oh all ye Sons of men, who are endued with sobriety and moderation, ponder
your ways and consider your doings, for behold the Lord lifts up his hand
against all the ungodly; and now the voice behind you says, Isa. 30.31.
this is the way walk in it; who therefore sent his Son into the world a Light,
who has lightened you with his true Light, that you should walk in the Light,
which convinces you in your consciences of all sin, when you are in secret,
and none eye sees your hearts; and the Light tells you in your minds your
wicked and evil intents, and when the thoughts of sin arises in your minds,
the Light shows it to you, which if you love and join your minds to the Light
it will save you from your sins, and then you will know the end of Christ's
coming in the flesh, which was to save his people from their sins, Math. 1.21.
1 Jo. 3.8.
and that he might destroy the works of the Devil, the works of him which does
evil, that is the wicked one in man, which was a liar from the beginning.

Wherefore all people prove your ways, and prove your hearts; for the Mighty
God is coming to search the Earth, and to make a narrow search through it; And
this is the Inquisition which the Lord of Hosts will make through the whole
Earth, for the Souls which have been slautered and starved, and all the wrongs
which the Innocent have suffered by the Inquisitions of the Sons of men, who
have as it were hunted after mischief and blood in all their ways.

Woe to the Shepherds, to the Prophets and Pastors of the Flocks, which feed
their flocks upon the mountains, and nourish their increase with wind; the
wind of the Lord God will disperce them and make their heritage a howling.

Look to this thou populous Noe, Nahu. 3.8.
that art situate among the Rivers, that have the waters round about thee,
whose ramparte is the Sea, and thy Wall is from Sea to Sea, when the Lord God
dries up Euphrates, then shall his army have a passage unto thee; And then his
Priests shall sound about thy Walls with Rams-hornes, Rev. 16 12.
and in a day thou shall fall as Jerico except thou repentest; and this unto
thee is the word of the Lord God, whether thou will hear or forbear.

Therefore to the way which will lead thee from the woe, which will redeem thee
and lead thee from the cause, which is the multitude of thy sins. The Light
will lead thee unto Fear and Dread, and trembling, and palenesse, and
feebleness before the Lord of Truth and Righteousness, whose vials are filled
and prepared; and behold God's long patience is exercised to try thee, and to
prove thee, and now a warning is come, and comes to thee, and the whole World.
Enter therefore into the straitness of the way, the Light, which God sets
as a mark, either for thy rise and salvation, or miserable downfall into
Judgment and Destruction; which if thou repentest not, as sure as the Lord
lives, he will make thee to know that thou shall become as Babylon, which he
shall be called blessed that dashe^h the Brats of thy uncleanness and Whordoms
against the Stones; and this upon thee shall stand as the Word of the Lord to
be fulfilled in Judgment, except thou repentest.

And now I tell thee there is no salvation under Heaven for thee, but the way
which is set for the simple, the Light which lights every man that comes
into the World, in which the wayfaring men, though fools, cannot slide nor err
therein; and this is the Declaration of the Lords Truth, to be witnessed by the
seed in all, even by that of God in every man's conscience.

Now if any man or Woman upon the face of the Earth, King or Queen, Prince or
Princess, Priest or People, from the highest to the lowest, in all Nations of
the Earth do say, That the Light which lights every man that comes into the
World, is not the true way to God's Kingdom; or if they say, that there is
another way under Heaven which leads to Life, besides the Light which lights
every man that comes into the World; I say, their way is darkness: or if any
manner of persons do hate the Light, and mock the Light, they are witnesses to
themselves, that they are yet in darkness.

And they who have another Rule or Guide to lead them, than the Word of God,
which is nigh you (says Paul) in your mouth, Romans 10 8.
and in your heart; or if they say, they have another guide than the Light which
shines in their consciences, it is a false Guide and leads into Darkness.

Again if any Priest or People, from the highest to the lowest, do Scoff and
Mock the Messengers of the Light, let that stand before all grave sober-minded
men, as a sign of the last times and of the Spirit of Antichrist in those,
which are the Mockers and the Scoffers, whether Priest or People, from the
highest to the lowest; 2 Pet. 3 3.
and so here Peter's words are fulfilled, In the last days shall come scoffers
walking after their own lusts. But God will make them all to know, concerning
all Mockers, and Scoffers of his Light, and the Messengers of his Light, that
he sits in Heaven and sees them, and laughes them to scorn; for they are the
despisers, and wonder and perish, Act. 13 41.
for whom this was written, Behold I work a work in your days, says the Lord,
a work which you shall in no wise believe though a man declare it unto you; and
so those who despise the Light, they are in Darkness, and so great is their
Darkness, that they cannot see their darkness; but I feel their Darkness, to
be thick and like a cloud, which the Light has covered them with, because they
despise the Light, and Mock the Light wherewith they are lightened, which has
shined in all their consciences; and this to that of God is Truth, and shall
stand to be witnessed by that of God in all consciences, which the World hate,
who make a Mock of the Light; for the Truth is but one, and the Way is but one,
and that one is Christ the Light, which lightneth every man that comes into
the World, which Baal's Priests and Prophets did always despise and mock, and
this stands over all decitfull hearts and Tongues.

Concerning Righteous Judgment.
GIve ear, give ear ye Judges, and hear ye Rulers and Justices of the whole
Earth.

The Lord God is come and coming to look for the fruit of Righteousness and
Truth from you all; Livit. 19.15.
God looks for true Judgment from all without respect of Persons in judgment;
that justice and true judgment may give the Widow her right, and let the
oppressed of the Land go free; and God looks that you should incline your
ear to the Cry of the poor, and answer the lamentation of the needy and the
fatherless, in his time of need; God hears their cry, even the cry of the
poor and needy, the fatherless, Widow and oppressed, who cry for judgment,
which cries for mercy: Behold the Lord comes to look for the fruits of
Righteousness among you, mercy and true judgment to be found in you.

Oh all you high exalted in the strength of the conceits of your Wisdom, you
must come down from the top of Mount Carmel, come down to the true measure of
equity, come down to the just weight and balance of true judgment, in which
all the Kings, Princes, Judges and Justices of the whole Earth shall be weighed
and measured by the true measuring line of Judgment; such as have judged for
gifts and rewards, and have not turned their hands from Bribes, but have loved
the liberal hand of I will give you Sir, This is a present for my Lord; which
has blinded the eye of Righteousness, and so Equity and true Judgment has
been turned backward; and here corruption Reigns, and the fruits of
Righteousness not brought forth; for the true judgment is wanting, and the
balance is not used to weigh a trive and a present; the Life of the needy is
not set in the Scale against it, which in the balance of true Judgment is the
greatest weight, here the Innocent is undone, the Widow poures out her Tears,
and the groans and cries of the poor, the fatherless and oppressed, go up to
God; and God weighs that in the balance of his Sanctuary, Amos 2.6. Mich. 3
against the lightness and wickedness and corruption of the unjust Judges
vanity, who turn the poor and stranger from his right, and sell the needy for a
pair of shoes; and here Zion is built up with blood, and Jerusalem with
Iniquity, when the heads thereof judge for rewards.

Wherefore all ye Rulers, Justices and Judges, come and learn to rule and judge
aright in your own house, that you way become Ministers in the house of the
Lord; for he which judges in Truth, and executes Judgment in Righteousness,
he is a Minister in the Lord's house, he bears not the sword in vain; but with
the Sword he is a terror to all evil doers, and a praise to them that do well;
here the wicked come to be cut off, and the murderers slain with the edge of
the Sword, and this cleanses the Land of Evil doers, and from shedding all
Innocent blood; here the Just rejoiceth, and the Upright and Innocent is made
glad when the Harlot is cut off, and the Whoremonger destroyed, and the sword
in Judgment held over the head of the wicked; then there is no more
filthiness in the Land, there is no more uncleanness in the City; for Truth
runs down like a stream, and Righteousness covers the Earth, and the Knowledge
of God the Land, as waters cover the Seas.

A man's enemy (says Christ) is that of his own house; Come, learn Judgment,
true Judgment, ye Nations of the Earth, that the fruit of Righteousness may be
brought forth amongst you, and in you. Draw the Sword, and set up the Sword
first in your own house, and learn to know the Murderer there, and the Harlot
there, and the Wicked there, and the Liar in your own house; which David said
he would not keep in his house; he loved Judgment, and therefore from a
Shepherd God exalted him upon the Throne, Ps. 101 7, 8.
and with him the Sword of Judgment was set up in his house, and in the Land
to root the wicked out of his house, and out of the Land, and to cut off the
seed of the evil-doer.

Now the false lover in you, which loves Rewards, Gifts, and Presents, or any
Love, which is not the Love of the Light, the Love of Christ in you; that is the
Harlot which betraies you, and the murderer which murders the Innocence of the
Just, and perverts his cause, and strangles the Innocence of his cause, which
the Sword ought to right; and that which swears and tells a Lie in you, that is
the wicked one, who was a liar from the beginning, who was a murderer; and that
which lusts unto Envy in you, because you have not your wills in the flesh,
that is Cain's seed, his own nature and life, which slew Innocent Abel, which
is for Judgment and for the Sword; for God has set a mark upon it to that
end: Now Abel's blood, [mark Abel's blood] which is the Life, that little grain
of Innocence, which is oppressed in your hearts and minds; that little poor
seed which never did consent unto evil in you, but was pressed down with
heaviness to heart, and laden and burdened in you, even to the Soul, which the
Soul felt in time of sinning, and when you had committed sin; the Light in you
which cries for Justice, the Blood which cries from the Earth for Judgment,
Amos 2.13.
which God hears, that is the oppression of God's Soul, which the wicked in you
have laden and pressed down, as a Cart is laden and pressed down with sheaves;
over which wicked one in you, the Sword is to be set, in your own house, the
two- edged Sword of the Lord; his Word the Light, which will slay the enmity in
righteous Judgment, and the life of the wicked-cut off: And so measuring and
ruling your own house with the Judgment of Truth, here you become equal Rulers
for God, of all the world without you; for the Just has his right within, the
balance of equity is set up within, and here the true eye is open, which looks
into the Justness of a cause, and sees the Justness thereof, and loves it; and
for the sake of truth deals Justice to the Innocent, and Judgment to the
Oppressor; then the eye discerns aright, and gives unto every one his right;
and cannot look upon any with prejudice, because he is thus or thus, or because
he was thus or thus; here no man is respected because of his place, or because
of his person; where that of God in the conscience rules, which respects no
man's person; 1 Kin. 3 24.
here the Sword divides aright, It gives a whole living Child to the true
mother, and the harlot set to be stoned without the Camp: this makes the heart
of the Righteous glad, and so the whole Land becomes as God's Israel, in which
the showers of blessing and mercy flow for ever; whose dwellers plagues come
not to touch.

And this is the offering which God requires among you, true Judgment and
Justice, to be executed upon the head of the transgressor, without mercy: But
mercy to the Poor, the Widow, the Fatherless, and Oppressed; and not to
pervert the way of the stranger, to turn him out of his way; and all to be
done, and executed by the measuring line of true Judgment, that of God in your
consciences, to order all your Laws, Acts, and Ordinances; that when God
comes, Innocent blood may not be found in your Land, for which God is coming to
visit: and where the measure is scant, and the balances falsified, God will
find out the Iniquity, and overturn it, and make all as a plain before him, and
plant such in the Nations for his service, as shall not bear the Sword in vain.

Concerning the Law, says Paul, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10
The Law is not made for a Righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient;
for the ungodly, and for sinners; for unholy, and profane, for murderers; and
man-flayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind,
for Stealers, for Liars, and for Perjured persons.

Where the measure of the Lord Rules, there the Law is fulfilled; but where the
Will rules, concerning the Law, or concerning the Customs, or concerning
Professions, and Religions, then the Heart is blind, and cannot Judge; then the
unrighteous rules, and it judges the just; and by this the Just always
suffered, the Prophets were killed, and Christ crucified, and the Apostles
stoned and put to Death: read Ps. 94.20, 21.
Sinners and ungodly, for whom the Law was made, judged them for whom the Law
was not made, in their perverse Wills by a Law; and this was always the
blindness and Ignorance of the World, who did not judge according to that of
God in the conscience; for which cause the Jews and Greeks are under a curse
to this day, whose sin is not repented of.

Therefore a warning to the whole World, how they being sinners, and in their
sins, Judge and condemn the Innocent, and such in whose mouth is no guile, nor
in their heart Iniquity, for the mighty day of God is at hand, and the Lord is
coming to enter into Judgment for his own.

Therefore let all your Laws be according to that of God in the conscience,
that you wrong not the Innocent, nor hale Innocent blood upon your heads; for
such a Nation God will establish for ever, and give their enemies as a prey to
their net.

And this is your Visitation from the Lord, whether you will hear or forbear.

I. P.

Postscript.
GO ye and learn what that means, I will have MERCY and not SACRIFICE, Mat.
9.13.
says Christ; Learn to offer unto the Lord of his own, that which is
acceptable in his sight; offer Truth and offer Righteousness, the fruits of an
upright heart. God requires substance and not shadows; Psa. 50.9, 10, 11, 12.
substance without all shadows. I will take no Bullock out of thy house says
the Lord, nor He-Goats out of thy folds; for every beast of the Forest is
mine, and the cattle upon a thousand Hills. I know all the Fowls of the
Mountains, and the Wild-beasts of the Field are mine; all the Bees of the
Woods, and the Waters of the Fountains are the Lord's, who sanctifies Israel.
If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; for the World is mine, and the fullness
thereof. The Lord has no pleasure with thousands of Rams, or with the offering
of ten thousand Rivers of Oil; for he has showed thee, O Man, what is good,
Mic. 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13.
and what the Lord does require of thee; But to DO JUSTLY, and to LOVE MERCY,
and to WALK HUMBLY with thy GOD?

The Lord's voice cries unto the City, The rich men thereof are full of
Violence, and the Inhabitants thereof have spoken Lies, and their Tongue is
deceitful in their Mouth.

Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, Hose 5.4.
in making thee desolate, because of thy sins.

They frame not their doings to turn unto God, for the spirit of Whoredoms is
in the midst of them; And they have not known the Lord; Hos. 4.2, 3, 4, 6, 9.
for with Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and committing
Adultery, they break out, and Blood touches Blood: Therefore shall the Land
mourn, and the Inhabitants shall fall in the day, and the Prophet also shall
fall with thee in the night; and I will destroy thy Mother. My people are
destroyed for lack of knowledge. For it is come to pass, that there is like
People, like Priest; wherefore I will punish them for their ways, and reward
them for their doings.

The Lord God is working a Work of glory and praise unto his own Name, and
utter confusion to the whole Earth; Confusion of their Words, Confusion of
their Works, Confusion of their Ways, and will show the Confusion of their
Doings, and confound the Imaginations of their Hearts, and will make the Earth
to know, Rev. 21 23. chapter 22.5.
that in his holy Temple, in the City of the Living God, there needs not the
Light of a Candle, nor the Light of the Moon, nor the Light of the Sun, for the
Lamb is the Light thereof. And if the Lord had need of any of those Lights, who
created them, he would not say unto vain man, that he needed them. For he
shows thee O man, that thou should walk by the Light which shines in thy
Conscience, which shows and convinces thee of thy sins and transgressions;
he requires not the Songs of the cruel, nor the Prayers of sinners, Io. 9.31
Psa. 34.18. Ps. 51.17.
but in a broken heart the soul of the Lord takes pleasure. Wherefore strip
you, make you naked and bare, put away the Lies and Oaths and Curses of your
Lips, and the Iniquity and Lusts of your Hearts. Come now and cloth you with
Righteousness, and adorn your Breasts with the Chain of the Glory of Truth, and
be bound to the Lord therein. Then in stead of Vengeance the dew of Mercy; in
stead of the overflowing wrath, showers of Compassion; in stead of a cup of
trembling, the wine of everlasting consolation: Else behold the Indignation of
the Lord, as a Flood from his holy Mountain, shall sweep the Channels, and the
stream of the fury of the Lord, shall accomplish his end upon all the
possessors of corruption.

And this is the Word of the Lord God to all the Inhabitants of Sodom.

Written by his Servant, in obedience to his Commandment, who is made a man of
sorrows because of your sins. Oh! that you all heard the voice of my cry over
your City, then would you cloth with sackcloth, and join in mourning, and
repent, and know that your warning is from the Lord God, which has measured
thy streets, whose channels flow with blood and uncleanness.

I am a Lover of all your Souls, JOHN PERROTT.

THE END.

